Sims' Symptoms in the Mind Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

This page intentionally left blank

     

7th Edition

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology Femi
Oyebode, MBBS, MD, PhD, FRCPsych, FRCPsych (Honorary)

Honorary Professor of Psychiatry University of Birmingham Birmingham, UK

For additional online content visit ExpertConsult.com

©2023, Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved. First edition 1988 Second
edition 1995 Third edition 2005 Fourth edition 2008 Fifth edition 2015
Sixth edition 2018 The right of Femi Oyebode to be identified as author
of this work has been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988. No part of this publication may be
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information
storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about
the Publisher's permissions policies and our arrangements with
organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright
Licensing Agency, can be found at our website:
www.elsevier.com/permissions. This book and the individual contributions
contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher (other
than as may be noted herein).

Notices Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own
experience and knowledge in evaluating and using any information,
methods, compounds or experiments described herein. Because of rapid
advances in the medical sciences, in particular, independent
verification of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made. To the
fullest extent of the law, no responsibility is assumed by Elsevier,
authors, editors or contributors for any injury and/or damage to persons
or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise,
or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or
ideas contained in the material herein.

ISBN: 978-­0-­7020-­8525-­3 Printed in Scotland Last digit is the print
number: 9

8

7 6

Content Strategist: Trinity Hutton Content Project Manager: Arindam
Banerjee Design: Bridget Hoette Marketing Manager: Belinda Tudin

5

4

3

2 1

Contents Preface to the Seventh Edition, vi

13 D  epersonalization, 197

Additional Materials Within Accompanying Electronic Version, vii

14 Disorder of the Awareness of the Body, 207

Section I CONCEPTS AND METHOD, 1 1 Fundamental Concepts of Descriptive
Psychopathology, 3

15 The Psychopathology of Pain, 231 Section V EMOTIONS AND ACTION, 241
16 Affect and Emotional Disorders, 243

2 Eliciting the Symptoms of Mental Illness, 19

17 Anxiety, Panic, Irritability, Phobia and

Section II CONSCIOUSNESS AND COGNITION, 29

18 Disorders of Volition and Execution, 279

3 Consciousness and Disturbed Consciousness, 31

Obsession, 265

19 Disorder of Aesthetic Perception and Praxis, 301

4 Attention, Concentration, Orientation and

Section VI VARIATIONS OF HUMAN NATURE, 313

5 Disturbance of Memory, 57

20 T he Expression of Disordered Personality, 315

Section III AWARENESS OF REALITY: TIME, PERCEPTION AND JUDGEMENT, 71

Section VII DIAGNOSIS, 327

Sleep, 43

6 D  isorder of Time, 73 7 Pathology of Perception, 85 8 Delusions and
Other Erroneous Ideas, 111 9 Disorder of the Thinking Process, 137 10
Disorder of Speech and Language, 157 11 I nsight, 169

21 Psychopathology and Diagnosis, 329 Self-­Assessment 1, 339
Self-­Assessment 2, 345 Self-­Assessment 1: Answers, 349 Self-­Assessment
2: Answers, 357 Index,

363

Section IV SELF AND BODY, 179 12 The Disordered Self, 181

v

Preface to the Seventh Edition In this new seventh edition, as in the
previous editions, I have retained the original structure of the book
but made some changes and many additions. I have added a new chapter on
abnormalities of aesthetic perception and praxis. This new chapter deals
with a little discussed but nonetheless important aspect of human
existence, namely, our sense of the beautiful, which is fundamental to
social life and that is very definitely affected by psychopathology.
Other notable additions include an expanded description of Ganser State,
Charles Bonnet syndrome, autoscopy, jealousy, erotomania and thought
disorder. I have also included a section on musical hallucinations and
on the nature of gestures and gestural abnormalities. These additions,
like the additions in earlier editions, are prompted by my desire to
ensure that readers fully appreciate that psychopathology is not a dead
subject but one that is alive and is constantly in need of revision in
response to conceptual changes or new empirical findings. It is my
belief that descriptive psychopathology, as a method, is the pre-­eminent
foundation for the practice of clinical psychiatry. This method allows
us to observe and describe abnormal subjective phenomena and behaviours,
and to categorize these in order to communicate more precisely about the
world that patients inhabit. The clinician trained in the
phenomenological approach is all the more aware of the need for empathic
understanding, for assuming an atheoretical stance and finally of the
provisional status of

vi

our understanding and explanations regarding psychopathology.
Descriptive psychopathology is today even more relevant to the
endeavours of clinicians and researchers. The standard psychiatric
nomenclature is under strain. This means that the fundamental abnormal
phenomena, the infrastructure of nosology, must of necessity assume
greater importance in clinical practice. Otherwise the ability to
communicate meaningfully across the profession will markedly
deteriorate. I am indebted to many more people than I can list. The
Birmingham Philosophy Group has been meeting regularly since 1992. Its
members (Theo Arvantis, Lenia Constantine, Simon O'Loughlin, Kate
Robertson, Sandy Robertson and Persephone Sextou) continue to influence
my thinking about psychiatric phenomena as do the members of the
European Psychiatric Association Section of Psychopathology including
Guenda Bernegger, Paolo Colavero, John Cutting, Maria Luisa Figueira,
Mircea Lazarescu, Luis Madeira, Michael Musalek, Gilberto di Petta and
Pedro Varandas. Finally, without the patients who experience and endure
these abnormal phenomena, and the students and psychiatric trainees who
ask awkward questions and out of curiosity enquire into the nature of
these phenomena, this book would definitely be the poorer. Femi Oyebode

Additional Materials Within Accompanying Electronic Version The
searchable full text for Sims' Symptoms in the Mind, seventh edition, is
available at www.expertconsult.com, accessible via the enclosed pin
code. Please follow the instructions on the inside front cover of this
book. Additional materials integrated within this enhanced electronic
version include the following: • Four patient scenarios (videos with
transcripts), exploring: 1. auditory verbal hallucinations, 2.
persecutory delusion, 3. low mood and 4. obsessive compulsive
phenomenon. Look out for alongside the related sections within this
book.

• Nine author podcasts on the following topics: 1. What is
psychopathology? 2. Consciousness 3. What are hallucinations? 4.
Critique of the nature of delusions 5. Embodiment 6. The self in
psychopathology 7. Affect, mood and emotions 8. Shame and Guilt 9. The
nature of obsessions Look out for alongside the related sections within
this book. • Interactive question-­and-­answer sections for each chapter
to test your understanding of key topics.

vii

For my father, Jonathan Akinyemi Oyebode (1918--71) FEMI OYEBODE

Section I

CONCEPTS AND METHOD

1

This page intentionally left blank

     

Chapter 1

Fundamental Concepts of Descriptive Psychopathology Chapter Outline
Summary What Is Psychopathology? Phenomenology and Psychopathology
Concepts Disease and Illness Norms, Normal and Abnormal Understanding
and Un-­Understandable Empathy Form and Content Primary and Secondary
Phenomena Subjectivity and Objectivity in Psychopathology Unconscious
Experience and Phenomenology Organic and Neural Substrates and
Psychopathology Mind--Brain Duality and Psychopathology

KEYWORDS Descriptive psychopathology Phenomenology Norms Subjectivity

Summary Descriptive psychopathology is the precise description,
categorization and definition of abnormal experiences as recounted by
the patient and observed in their behaviour. It relies on the method of
phenomenology by focusing on experienced phenomena to establish their
universal character. The aim is to listen attentively, to accurately
observe and to understand the psychological event or phenomenon by
empathy so that the clinician can, as far as possible, know what the
patient's experience must feel like: How the mind should be conceived
for the purposes of psychopathology, what its faculties, functions or
elements are (if there are any), how these can be distinguished, and how
mental disorders can be comprehended by an application of these concepts
are philosophic questions. Manfred Spitzer (1990)

Psychiatry is that branch of medicine that deals with morbid
psychological experiences. By definition, in the medical conditions that
are central to psychiatric practice, psychological phenomena are
important as causes, symptoms and observable clinical signs and also as
therapeutic agents. The scope of psychiatry can be said to include minor
emotional disturbances that are meaningful reactions to environmental or
psychosocial stress; profound psychological change that is unheralded by
significant or meaningful stress; disturbances of personality that have
a pervasive influence on behaviour such that the person or others
suffer; 3

4

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Psychodynamic Explanatory Behavioural etc.

Psychopathology

Observation Descriptive Phenomenology Fig. 1.1 The psychopathologies.

psychological changes that are directly the consequences of demonstrable
organic brain change; and psychological and behavioural consequences of
the use of substances such as alcohol, cannabis, cocaine or heroin. To
describe, delineate and differentiate these conditions, the morbid
psychological phenomena that constitute the subjective experience of
patients need to be carefully assessed, elicited and recorded. This is
the territory of descriptive psychopathology. In other words,
descriptive psychopathology is concerned with the selection,
delimitation, differentiation and description of particular phenomena of
experience, which, through the use of accepted terminology, become both
defined and capable of repeated identification. It can be said that
descriptive psychopathology is the fundamental professional skill of the
psychiatrist; it is, possibly, the only diagnostic skill unique to the
psychiatrist. It is considerably more than just carrying out a clinical
interview of a patient or even listening to the patient, although it
necessarily involves both of these. Its accurate application involves
the deployment of empathy and understanding (we shall return to these
later). Of course, for the rational practice of psychiatry there is a
need for knowledge of the basic neurosciences; appropriate factual
knowledge of psychology, sociology and social anthropology is also
required. With these, there is a need for a comprehensive working
knowledge of general medicine, especially neurology and endocrinology.
This could be considered to be the minimum knowledge base that is
essential for practising psychiatry. However, it is descriptive
psychopathology that provides the foundation of clinical psychiatric
practice. The subjective phenomena that

are revealed during the clinical assessment, coupled with observable
behaviours, ultimately determine the clinical judgements that influence
treatment and management decisions.

What Is Psychopathology? Psychopathology is the systematic study of
abnormal experience, cognition and behaviour---the study of the products
of a disordered mind. It includes the explanatory psychopathologies in
which there are assumed explanations according to theoretical constructs
(for example, on a cognitive, behavioural, psychodynamic or existential
basis and so on) and descriptive psychopathology, which is the precise
description, categorization and definition of abnormal experiences as
recounted by the patient and observed in their behaviour (Fig. 1.1).
Descriptive psychopathology, as distinct from other forms of
psychopathology, eschews explanation of the phenomena that it describes.
It simply describes, thereby avoiding arguments about causation. Hence,
descriptive psychopathology guards against and avoids theory,
presupposition or prejudice. This constraint of descriptive
psychopathology acts to secure the conceptual framework of
phenomenology, restricting it to the actual experience of the patient.
It is important to distinguish psychopathology from nosography, which is
the description of single illnesses with provisional and characteristic
features that lay the foundation for diagnosis (Stanghellini and Fuchs,
2013). Neither is it merely symptomatology nor pathology of the psyche
(Stanghellini and Fuchs, 2013; Stanghellini

1 Fundamental Concepts of Descriptive Psychopathology

and Aragona, 2016). It is, as elaborated later, a highly formalized and
methodical system designed to inquire into and describe abnormal mental
phenomena. Explanatory psychopathologies, in contrast, often assume that
mental phenomena are meaningful. In psychoanalysis, for example, at
least one of several basic mechanisms are assumed to be taking place,
and the mental state becomes understandable within this framework.
Explanations of what occurs in thought or behaviour are based on these
underlying theoretical processes, such as transference or ego defence
mechanisms. For example, with a delusion, descriptive psychopathology
tries to describe what it is that the person believes, how they describe
their experience of believing, what evidence they give for its veracity
and what the significance of this belief or notion is to their life
situation. An attempt is made to assess whether this belief has the
exact characteristics of a delusion and, if so, of what type of
delusion. Having made this phenomenological evaluation, the information
gained can be used diagnostically, prognostically and hence
therapeutically. Some of the contrasts between descriptive and
psychoanalytic psychopathology are summarized in Table 1.1. Analytical
or dynamic psychopathology, however, would be more likely to attempt to
explain the delusion in terms of early conflicts repressed into the
unconscious and now able to gain expression only in psychotic form,
perhaps on a basis of projection. The content of the delusion would be
considered an important key to the nature of the underlying conflict,

which has its roots in early development. Descriptive psychopathology
makes no attempt to say why a delusion is present; it solely observes,
describes and classifies. Dynamic psychopathology aims to describe how
the delusion arose, its psychological origins and why it should be that
particular delusion, on the evidence of that person's experience in
early life. There are other radically different models of psychology
that regard mental experience, including thoughts, moods and drives, as
epiphenomena, that is, as no more than froth on top of the beer. In
these models (radical materialism or eliminative materialism), mental
life is illusory; it is only the material, organic processes that are
real. The significance the thinker attaches to subjective experience is
regarded as purely illusory. Such a position poses difficulties for
psychological enquiry and treatment and in any case is outside of the
scope of this book. Berrios (1996) has described two formulations of
descriptive psychopathology in the 19th century. Psychologists and brain
scientists predominantly tended to regard morbid phenomena as
quantitative variations on normal mental functions---the continuity
view. Psychiatrists working directly with the mentally ill (alienists)
considered that some symptoms were too bizarre to have a counterpart in
normal behaviour---the discontinuity view. Both formulations have
contributed to the current state of descriptive psychopathology.
Undoubtedly, the quality of empathy shown by the doctor contributes to
the extent of understanding of the patient that is achieved. However,
there is a theoretical

TABLE 1.1 Psychopathology: Descriptive Versus Psychoanalytic Descriptive

Psychoanalytic

Summary

Empathic evaluation of patient's subjective experience

Terminology Methods

Description of phenomena Understanding the patient's subjective state
through empathic interview Makes distinction between understanding and
explanation: understanding through observation and empathy Form and
content clearly separated: form of importance for diagnosis Process and
development distinguished: process interferes with development basis

Study of the roots of current behaviour and conscious experience through
unconscious conflicts Theoretical processes demonstrated Free
association, dreams, transference Understanding in terms of notional,
theoretical processes No distinction made; concerned with content No
distinction made; symptoms seen as having unconscious psychological
basis

Differences in practical application

5

6

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

limit to the psychological understanding that an interviewer can reach
for some abnormal phenomena. It is often true that certain psychotic
phenomena are such that the patient's notions and behaviour may no
longer be psychologically comprehensible through the use of empathy. In
these situations, the patient and doctor may have difficulty
establishing a mutual understanding that, usually, readily underpins
reciprocity and shared understanding. One of the consequences is that
patients may find that their experiences are not fully comprehended by
the clinician involved in their case. This fact underlines how
alienating psychotic experiences can be. These two formulations, the
continuity and discontinuity views, continue to influence how abnormal
phenomena are conceptualized even today. There are two distinct parts to
descriptive psychopathology---the empathic assessment of the patient's
subjective experience and the observation of the patient's behaviour.
Empathy is an important psychiatric term that literally means 'feeling
oneself into' and in psychiatric practice emphasizes the imaginative
experiencing of another person's inner, subjective world. It can be
distinguished from sympathy, which is 'feeling with'. A way to
appreciate the distinction between 'empathy' and 'sympathy' is to
recognize the role of an objective stance towards the patient coupled
with an active attempt to fully understand how certain thoughts rise
from particular moods, wishes or fears and the nexus of connections
between different aspects of the patient's experiences that is integral
to empathy. In descriptive psychopathology, the concept of empathy is
like a clinical instrument, conceptual in mode but no less incisive for
that matter, that needs to be used with skill to explore, measure and
represent to oneself another person's internal subjective state. The
observer's own capacity for imaginatively representing another person's
emotional and cognitive experience to themselves acts as the necessary
instrument in this clinical task. Empathy is achieved by precise,
insightful, persistent and knowledgeable questioning until the doctor is
able to give an account of the patient's subjective experience that the
patient recognizes as their own. If the doctor's account of the
patient's internal experience is not recognized by the patient as their
own, then the questioning must

continue until the internal experience is recognizably described.
Throughout the process, success depends on the capacity of the doctor as
a human being to experience something like the internal experience of
the other person, the patient; it is not an assessment that could be
carried out by a microphone and computer. It depends absolutely on the
shared capacity of both doctor and patient for human experience and
feeling. It is empathy that allows the doctor to come to understand the
patient's experiences. In this sense, it is empathy that makes it
possible for us to know what it is like for another person, another
subject of experience, to be in a particular mental state. When empathy
fails to render a patient's subjective experience understandable, we can
then talk about that experience as being un-­understandable. In other
words, the farthest reaches of our intuitive comprehension of a
phenomenon have been exceeded. This conclusion only ought to be reached
after careful and exhaustive exploration and in-­depth analysis. Accurate
observation of behaviour is the other component of descriptive
psychopathology. Subjective human experience becomes available to us for
examination and exploration not only through verbal communication but
also through meaningful gestures, bodily stance, behaviour and actions.
Observation of the objective expression of subjective experience, that
is, of behaviour is extremely important and is a much more useful
exercise than simply counting symptoms; the slavish use of a symptom
checklist for their presence or absence is often an obstacle to genuine
clinical observation, if not to the quality of doctor--patient
communication. The objectivity that is facilitated by checklists is
crucial, but there is a need also for the skilled observation of
behaviour and for attentive and focused listening. Observation of
behaviour includes observation of physical appearance, expressive
gestures, facial emotional expressions, interpersonal stance and
attitude, clothing, makeup and so on. It is a complex skill requiring an
understanding of human conduct in context and the degree to which
behaviour is influenced, accented and mediated by culture.

Phenomenology and Psychopathology Psychopathology is concerned with
abnormal experience, cognition and behaviour. Descriptive
psychopathology

1 Fundamental Concepts of Descriptive Psychopathology

avoids theoretical explanations for psychological events. It describes
and categorizes the abnormal experience as recounted by the patient and
observed in their behaviour. In its historical context, Berrios (1984)
defines it as a cognitive system constituted by terms, assumptions and
rules for its application, 'the identification of classes of abnormal
mental acts'. Phenomenology is a term that is closely allied to
descriptive psychopathology. It has a long tradition in philosophy and
is associated with the name of Edmund Husserl (1859--1938). It is
usually used to denote enquiry into one's conscious and intellectual
processes, eschewing any preconceptions about external causes and
preconceptions. The method of phenomenology aims to focus on experienced
phenomena to establish their universal character. As used in psychiatry,
phenomenology involves the elicitation and description of abnormal
psychological events, the internal experiences of the patient and their
consequent behaviour. An attempt is made to listen attentively,
accurately observe and understand the psychological event or phenomenon
so that the observer can, as far as is possible, know for oneself what
the patient's experience must feel like. How can one use the word
observer about someone else's internal experience? This is where the
process of empathy becomes relevant. Descriptive psychopathology
therefore includes subjective aspects (phenomenology) and objective
aspects (description of behaviour). It is concerned with the rich
variety of human experience, but it is deliberately limited in its scope
to what is clinically relevant; for example, it can say nothing about
the religious validity of what James (1902) has called saintliness. How
does this work in practice? Mrs Jenkins complains that she is unhappy.
It is the business of descriptive psychopathology both to elicit her
thoughts and actions without trying to explain them and to observe and
describe her behaviour---the listless sagging of her shoulders, the
tense gripping and wringing of her hands or the strangely quiet and
unrestrained sobbing. Phenomenology demands a very precise description
of exactly how she feels inside herself: 'that horrible feeling of not
really existing' and 'not being able to feel any emotion'. Some
psychiatrists have held the method of phenomenology in derision as
archaic, hair-­splitting or hare-­chasing pedantry, but the diagnostic
evaluation

7

of symptoms is a task that psychiatrists omit at their own, and their
patient's, peril. Studying phenomena whets diagnostic tools, sharpens
clinical acumen and improves communication with the patient. Patients
and their complaints deserve our scrupulous attention. If 'the proper
study of mankind is man', the proper study of mental illness starts with
the description of how the patient thinks and feels inside---'chaos of
thought and passion, all confused' (Pope, 1688--1744). A cavalier
neglect of abnormal phenomena can have serious repercussions for care of
the patient. Eight mentally well researchers were sent separately to 12
admission units in American mental hospitals on the pretence of
complaining of hearing these words said aloud: empty, hollow and thud
(Rosenhan, 1973). In all cases save one, they were diagnosed as
suffering from schizophrenia. They produced no further psychiatric
symptoms after admission to hospital but acted as normally as they
could, answering questions truthfully except to conceal their name and
occupation. The ethics and good sense of the experiment can certainly be
questioned, but what comes out clearly is not that psychiatrists should
refrain from making a diagnosis, but that their diagnosis should be made
on a sound psychopathological basis. Rosenhan, his colleagues and the
admitting psychiatrists gave no information as to what symptoms could
reasonably be required for making a diagnosis of schizophrenia; this
requires a method based on psychopathology. With adequate use of
phenomenological psychopathology, this failure of diagnosis would not
have occurred. Jaspers (1997) wrote, 'Phenomenology, though one of the
foundation stones of psychopathology, is still very crude'. One of the
great problems in using this method is the muddled nature of
terminology. Almost identical ideas may be assigned different names by
people from different theoretical backgrounds, for example, the plethora
of descriptions of how a person may conceptualize themself: self-­image,
cathexis, body awareness and so on. There is considerable confusion over
the meaning of the term phenomenology. Berrios has described four
meanings in psychiatry: P1 refers to its commonest clinical usage as a
mere synonym for 'signs and symptoms' (as in 'phenomenological
psychopathology'); this is

8

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

a bastardized usage, and hence conceptually uninteresting. P2 refers to
a pseudo-­technical sense often used in dictionaries and which achieves
spurious unity of meaning by simply cataloguing successive usages in
chronological order; this approach is misleading in that it suggests
false evolutionary lines and begs important questions relating to
history of phenomenology. P3 refers to the idiosyncratic usage started
by Karl Jaspers who dedicated his early clinical writings to the
description of mental states in a manner which (according to him) was
empathic and theoretically neutral. Finally, P4 refers to a complex
philosophical system started by Edmund Husserl and continued by writers
collectively named the 'Phenomenological Movement'.

the patient's experience understandable (this is a technical word in
phenomenology and is described in more detail in the Understanding and
Un-­Understandable section; however, it incorporates the capacity for
putting oneself in the patient's place) so that classification and
rational therapy may proceed. It is not the assimilation of abstruse
facts or the accumulation of foreign eponyms that is most difficult in
phenomenology, although either of these may be hard: it is the
comprehension of a method of investigation, a rigorous approach and the
ability to use new concepts. In an attempt to avoid the obscure and
obvious, some of these concepts are discussed in the rest of this
chapter.

Berrios (1992, p. 304)

Of these meanings, this chapter, and indeed this book, concentrates
entirely on the Jaspersian meaning of phenomenology, P3 of Berrios.
Jaspers defines phenomenology perhaps 30 to 40 times in his writings in
subtly different ways but always implying the study of subjective
experience. Walker (1988, 1993a, 1993b, 1994) has argued, very
elegantly, that even though Jaspers himself thought that he had been
influenced by Husserl and his system of phenomenology, this was not in
fact so, and his psychopathology owed more to Kantian concepts such as
form and content. Walker (1995a, 1995b) considers that Jaspers radically
misconstrued Husserl's phenomenology. This view has been rebutted by
others (Wiggins et al., 1992). The implication for what follows in this
chapter, and in the rest of the book, is that the concept of
phenomenology used here comes directly from Jaspers and was probably
influenced by both Kant and Husserl. Phenomenology, the empathic method
for the eliciting of symptoms, cannot be learned from a book. Patients
are the best teachers, but it is necessary to know what one is looking
for---the practical, clinical aspects in which the patient describes
themself, their feelings and their world. The doctor tries to unravel
the nature of the sufferer's experience, to understand it well enough
and to feel it so poignantly that the account of their findings evokes
recognition from the patient. The method of phenomenology in psychiatry
is entirely subjugated to its single purpose of rendering

Concepts DISEASE AND ILLNESS Psychopathology concerns itself with
disease of the mind, but what is disease? And, how does it differ from
disorder and illness? This is a vast subject that has received
discussion from philosophers, theologians, administrators and lawyers as
well as from physicians. Doctors who spend most of their working time
dealing with disease rarely ask this question and even less frequently
attempt to answer it. Talk of disease by definition raises questions
about the nature of health. But an even more pressing issue is whether
it is possible for the mind to be diseased in the same way or manner
that the liver or the kidneys can be diseased. These questions are
outside of the scope of this book, but it is important to be aware of
the varied approaches that different authorities take to this matter. I
outline the basic arguments in the following text. The most compelling
model of a disease is that which grounds a medical condition such as
pulmonary tuberculosis on the basis of a distinctive morbid anatomy
demonstrable on examination of the lungs, is independent of any
particular observer and is assumed to be value free. It is even better
if there is an understanding of the detailed pathophysiology---how the
causative agent, in tuberculosis for instance, results in the
recognized, typical morbid anatomy of the lungs. It is obvious from the
foregoing that, in most psychiatric diseases, no such typical morbid
anatomy or pathophysiology has been described.

1 Fundamental Concepts of Descriptive Psychopathology

On the basis of the absence of demonstrable physical lesions, Szasz
(1960) argued that psychiatric or mental diseases did not exist and that
only behavioural deviance and moral or social judgements were at play in
psychiatry. He also argued that mental is an abstract concept and not an
objective, physical thing, and hence it could not be diseased. Brain
diseases, in his view, are real, but mental diseases are a logical
impossibility; thus Szasz uses the term myth to characterize mental
diseases. Other writers including Scadding (1967), Sedgwick (1973),
Kendell (1975) and Boorse (1976) have put forward arguments that stand
in opposition to Szasz. Scadding and Kendell use the combination of
statistical deviance and biological disadvantage defined as reduced
fertility to determine what a disease is. Boorse adds that a disease is
any condition that interferes with any function of an organism (and in
this view, mental functioning counts) that is necessary for its survival
and reproduction. Additionally, a disease becomes an illness when it is
deemed undesirable, a title for special treatment and a valid excuse for
particular behaviours. Finally, Sedgwick makes the claim that all
diseases start off as illnesses because the symptoms are negatively
valued and hence become a focus of social and moral interest and that in
this way the symptoms later attain disease status. In this account both
the so-­called physical illnesses and mental illnesses start off as
negatively valued states afflicting human beings and there is no sharp
distinction to be drawn between them. See Fulford et al. (2006) for
further elaboration of these issues. It is clear that there is no widely
accepted view about the status of the conditions that fall under the
interest of psychiatrists. A simple dictum is to regard disease as what
doctors treat and illness as what persons suffer from. Although this
distinction between normality and disease, health and illness is by no
means trivial: A large part of medical ethics and much of the whole
underpinning of current medical policy, private and public, are squarely
based on the notion of disease and normality. Left to himself the
physician (whether he realizes it or not) can do very well without a
formal definition of disease ... Unfortunately, the physician is not
left alone to work his common sense. He is attacked from two angles: the
predatory consumers and the pretentious advisers. Murphy (1979)

9

NORMS, NORMAL AND ABNORMAL The subject of psychiatry is the person, not
an organ such as the liver, kidney or even the brain. Psychiatric
diseases are distinct from mere neurologic diseases in the sense that in
neurology the disease process leaves the self, the personhood of an
individual, intact. This means that we can speak of a person who suffers
from multiple sclerosis or motor neuron disease. In psychiatry, the
diseases afflict the self (i.e., affect the person in a deep and not
superficial sense). Mood disorders and schizophrenia have a pervasive
influence on aspects of the self in a way that strikes at what it means
to be human. The ability to experience and represent the world; the
capacity to inhabit a social world including recognizing the rules and
conventions that operate therein; the ability to form relationships and
to imagine the world of the Other; the ability to communicate, to use
language and to understand symbols, that is, to inhabit a world of
meanings; the wherewithal to be an agent, the author of one's own
projects and the drive and will to act; the capacity to operate in a
world of moral and aesthetic values; and, the possibility of having an
attitude to time, an orientation to the future---these manifold aspects
of the person and many more yet to be fully described are influenced, if
not impaired, by psychiatric diseases. Our understanding of these higher
human functions is trivial. Abnormalities and pathology in these domains
are manifest in social behaviour and are without independent or
objective markers. So, talk of norms, normality and abnormality are
integral to any discussion of psychiatric phenomena because to recognize
impairments in these areas of function, we need an understanding of what
normal function entails, but more fundamentally what it means to talk
about norms, normality and abnormality. The word normal is used
correctly in at least four senses in the English language according to
Mowbray et al. (1979). These are the value norm, the statistical norm,
the individual norm and the typological norm. The value norm takes the
ideal as its concept of normality. Thus the statement 'It is normal to
have perfect teeth' is using normal in a value sense; in practice, most
people have something wrong with their teeth. The statistical norm is,
of course, the preferred use; the abnormal is considered to be that
which falls outside the average range. If a normal Englishman is 5 feet
8 inches tall, to be either 6 feet 2 inches or 5 feet 2 inches tall is
equally abnormal statistically.

10

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

The individual norm is the consistent level of functioning that an
individual maintains over time. After brain damage, a person may
experience a decline in intelligence that is certainly a deterioration
from their previous individual level but may not represent any
statistical abnormality from that of the general population (e.g., a
decline in intelligence quotient from 125 to 105). Typological
abnormality is a necessary term to describe the situation in which a
condition is regarded as normal in all the three meanings and yet
represents abnormality, perhaps even disease. The example given by
Mowbray et al. is the infective condition of pinta. The mottling of the
skin of this condition is highly prized by the South American Indians
who 'suffer' from it to the extent that 'nonsufferers' are excluded from
the tribe. Thus having the condition is normal in a value, statistical
and individual sense, and yet it is pathologic in the sense that it is
the result of a spirochaetal skin infection. The pursuit of thinness by
models and dancers in our society would be an everyday example. In
addition, one can talk about social norms by which we mean the rules,
conventions and practices that determine in specific cultures what
behaviours are acceptable and approved of. These include the etiquette,
mores and ethics underpinning behaviour. In fact, for some people,
psychiatric diseases are no more than behaviours classed as deviant by
social rules, and psychiatrists are no more than social police officers.
There are other concepts implicit in discussions of norms, normality and
abnormality. These are whether the discrete phenomena of interest to
psychopathologists are categorically different from normal experience or
whether the distinction between normal and abnormal phenomena is
dimensional in nature. The distinction being drawn here is over and
beyond whether psychopathological phenomena are statistically deviant.
The question is whether the anxiety experienced by a psychiatric
patient, for example, is only an exaggeration of that experienced by a
'normal' person or whether there is something
categorically/qualitatively different about it. UNDERSTANDING AND
UN-­UNDERSTANDABLE It seems self-­evident that understanding the patient's
story, grasping the inner logic of the narrative and representing to
oneself the patient's subjective experiences

is fundamental to clinical practice. Understanding, in both an everyday
and a phenomenological sense cannot be complete unless the doctor has a
detailed knowledge of the patient's background culture and specific
information about their family and immediate environment. Neither can
phenomenology concentrate solely on the individual isolated in a moment
of time. It must be concerned with the person in a social setting; after
all, a person's experience is largely determined by their interactions
with others. It must also be concerned with the mental state and
environment of the individual before the event of immediate interest and
with what occurs afterwards. The method of phenomenology facilitates
communication: its use makes it easier for the doctor to understand
their patient. The patient is also helped to have confidence in the
doctor, because they realize that their symptoms are understood and
therefore accepted as 'real'. The precise description and evaluation of
symptoms also helps communication between doctors. Wilhelm Dilthey
(1833--1911) argued that the natural sciences treat nature as objects
and forces that can be explained through causal laws. In other words,
the goal of such science is the formulation of general, universal laws,
whereas the humanities, for example, history and psychology, have the
human subject as their focus and causal laws do not apply in these
circumstances. For Dilthey, science 'explains' natural phenomena by
causal explanation. The humanities 'understand' human psychic phenomena
through the interpretation of the meaning structures revealed in texts
or through dialogue with another person. This distinction between
'explanation' and 'understanding' continues to be influential in our
thinking even today (Phillips, 2004). In science, we come to know the
object from outside, but in the humanities, we are able to 'know' the
subject from inside. We are able to represent to ourselves, if not to
'know', the inner life of another person because we too have an inner
life. We are able to understand the other person through the network of
meanings associated with their behaviour. We start with the premise that
behaviour means something; that is, it arises with internal consistency
from psychological events. Wittgenstein (1953) stated, 'We explain human
behaviour by giving reasons not causes'.

1 Fundamental Concepts of Descriptive Psychopathology

TABLE 1.2 Diagram of Understanding and Explanation Understanding

Explanation

Static

Phenomenological description

Genetic

Empathy established from what emerges

Observation through external sense perception Cause and effect of
scientific method

Jaspers drew on Dilthey's formulation and contrasted understanding
(verstehen) with explaining (erklären). He has shown how these terms may
be used in both a static and a genetic sense. Static implies
understanding or explaining the present situation from information that
is available now, whereas the genetic (an unfortunate term given
contemporary use) sense considers how the situation reached its present
state by examining antecedents, the evolving process and emerging
situation. This is represented in Table 1.2. Understanding and
explanation are both necessary parts of the psychiatric investigation.
Explanation is concerned with accounting for events from a point of
observation outside them, understanding from inside them. One
understands another person's anger and its consequences; one explains
the occurrence of snow in winter. Explanations also can be described as
static or genetic (Boxes 1.1 and 1.2). Jaspers makes an important
distinction between that which is meaningful and allows empathy and that
which is ultimately un-­understandable, the essence of the psychotic
experience. There is thus a limit to understanding psychopathological
phenomena. Although one can empathize with the content of a patient's
delusion and thereby understand how that content of the belief
originated, the occurrence of the delusion itself is, in this model,
more recalcitrant to our empathy and understanding. It can be said that
our understanding reaches its limit when it confronts the fact of the
delusion itself. For that, we need to appeal to cognitive mechanisms or
other natural science processes. We are in need of scientific
explanation, not psychological understanding. We can understand from a
knowledge of the patient's background why, if their thinking is going to
be disordered in form, the topic or content of that

11

BOX 1.1 STATIC AND GENETIC UNDERSTANDING Understanding is the perception
of personal meaning of the patient's subjective experience. • If we want
to find meaning at a particular moment in time, the method of
phenomenology is appropriate. The patient's subjective experience is
dissected out, and a static picture is formed of what that thought or
event meant to them at that particular time. No comment is made on how
the event arose, and no prediction is made as to what will happen next.
The meaning is simply extracted as a description of what the patient is
experiencing and what this signifies to them now. A person feels angry:
static understanding uses empathy to describe in detail exactly what it
is like for them to feel angry. Have I, the examiner, experienced
phenomena like these? Are they known to me through the experiences I
have had in my lifetime? • Genetic understanding, as opposed to static
understanding, is concerned with a process. It is understood that when
this person is insulted, they react with violence; when that person
hears voices commenting on their actions, they draw the curtains. For
understanding the way that psychic events emerge one from another in the
patient's experience, the therapist uses empathy as a method or a tool.
He feels himself into the patient's situation. If that first event were
to have occurred to him personally in the patient's total circumstances,
the second event, which was the patient's reaction to it, might
reasonably be expected to have followed. He understands the feelings he
ascribed to the patient by the action that results from these feelings.
So if I were the patient with the same history, do I feel that I would
have the same experiences and behave in the same way? An example would
help to demonstrate the humanity of this approach and the universality
of human experience: I must put myself into the shoes of another young
woman, aged 19, also raised in an isolated fishing community, the eldest
of eight siblings who becomes stuporose during her second pregnancy. She
is married to an alcoholic man aged 35, and her father is also
alcoholic. I must understand how she dealt with her father's alcoholic
behaviour as a child, what her pregnancy meant to her, how she regarded
her mother's behaviour during her own pregnancies and so on.

thinking should be concerned with persecution by the Nazis---perhaps
because their parents escaped from Germany in 1937. But we can have no
understanding of why they should believe something that is demonstrably
false (e.g., that their persecutors are putting a tasteless fluid into
the drinking water that makes them feel ill). The delusion itself, as
psychopathological

12

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

BOX 1.2 STATIC AND GENETIC EXPLANATION • Static explanation is concerned
with external sense perception, observing an event, for example, 'I
witnessed the 1999 eclipse in Plymouth'. • Genetic explanation consists
of unravelling causal connections; it describes a chain of events and
why they follow that sequence ('visual perception of the eclipse is the
result of physiologic changes in my retina, which in turn produce
changes in my occipital cortex that ultimately cause me to see the
eclipse').

form, is un-­understandable. Meaningful connections, then, show the
linkage between different psychological events by understanding how
these events emerge one from another by a process of empathy. This is a
controversial concept in that it implies that there are aspects of
another person's mental life that are beyond our grasp and empathic
understanding. It contradicts another axiom in psychiatric practice,
namely that our purpose is to understand another person, and when
understanding fails, it calls into question how conscientious and
rigorous the psychiatrist has been in the pursuit of grasping the inner
life of the patient. EMPATHY The classic method in medicine of gaining
information about the patient is from the history and by physical
examination. The use of phenomenology in psychiatry is an extension of
the history in that it amplifies the description of the present
complaint to give more detailed information. It is also examination in
that it reveals the mental state. It is not possible for me, the doctor,
to observe my patient's hallucination or in any direct way to measure
it. However, what I can do to comprehend them is to use those human
characteristics I hold in common with them: the fact that we inhabit the
same world of meanings, that we communicate in language and that, like
them, I have a rich inner life. It is also important to be
intellectually curious and genuinely interested in the inner life of
another person. The inquiries that arise from this stance should aim to
re-create for oneself or represent to oneself the subjective experiences
of another person with the aim of understanding and making sense of
them. The aim is thus to explore and test, through dialogue, the
patient's subjective experience. I endeavour

to create in my own mind what their experience must be like. I then test
to see whether I am correct in my reconstruction of their experience by
asking them to affirm or deny my description. I also use my observation
of their behaviour---the sad expression of their face or their thumping
the desk with their fist---to reconstruct their experiences. Listening
and observing are crucial for understanding. Great care must be taken
with asking questions. Doctors, not infrequently, identify symptoms
incorrectly and come to the wrong diagnosis because they have asked
leading questions with which the patient, through their submissiveness
to the doctor's status and anxiety to cooperate, are only too willing to
concur. The method of empathy implies using the ability to feel oneself
into the situation of the other person by proceeding through an
organized series of questions, rephrasing and reiterating when necessary
until one is quite sure of what is being described by the patient. The
sequence might proceed as follows. Question: 'You describe your thoughts
changing; what happens to them?' Answer: The patient gives a description
of how they have a recurring thought of killing people, and this results
from a pain in the stomach. Question (trying to isolate the elements of
the patient's experience): 'What is your thought of killing people
like?' (obsession, delusion, fantasy, is likely to be acted on, etc.).
'Do you believe that your stomach affects your thinking?' 'Is this
different from people who know that they become irritable when hungry?'
'In what way is it different from that?' 'What causes your pain in the
stomach?' Answer: The patient describes the details, which include,
among irrelevant material, the sort of information required for
determining what symptoms are present. Question (the invitation for
empathy): 'Am I right in thinking that you are describing an experience
in which rays are causing pain in your stomach and that your stomach, in
some way quite independent of yourself, causes this thought, which
frightens you so that you must kill somebody with a knife?' This is an
account of the relevant symptoms that they have described in language
they should be able to recognize as their own.

1 Fundamental Concepts of Descriptive Psychopathology

Answer: 'Yes' (we have then achieved our goal); 'No' (therefore I must
try again to elicit the symptoms, experience them for myself and
describe them back to the patient again). To give examples of what this
implies in practice, how do I, a clinician, decide whether an individual
patient is depressed or not? This is not done by imitating a machine
that might record units of vocal tone or of facial expression, adding up
to a diagnosis of depression. For the clinical assessment, I go through
the following process: • I am capable of feeling unhappy, miserable and
depressed and know what this feeling is like inside myself. • If I were
feeling as I observe the patient to be looking, speaking, acting and so
on, I would be feeling miserable, depressed and unhappy. • Therefore I
assess the mood of the patient to be that of depression. Of course, this
mental process of diagnosis is not usually verbalized. In another
example, a patient says, 'The Martians are making me say swear words; it
is not me doing it'. Empathic questioning reveals the false belief held
by the patient that when swear words come from their mouth, they believe
that the cause is actually outside themself, 'Martians', rather than
from inside themself. Questioning would include 'Do you actually hear
the Martians? How do you know that it is Martians and no one else?' and
so on. A further, nonpsychotic example would be a 20-­year-­old young
woman who has fainting attacks when she is criticized at work. The
clinician has to place oneself, even if he is a 55-­year-­old man from a
different cultural background, into her position with knowledge not only
of her social history but also of the way that she, in the present,
perceives that history; only then may the development of her symptoms
become understandable. For instance, when the clinician knows about her
alcohol-­abusing father; the rows her father had with her mother who
suffered from epilepsy; the very restricted cultural background that
they experienced in an isolated fishing village and how her mother would
have a fit when rows became intolerable, then he may begin to understand
something of the development of the patient's own symptom. This is not
achieved solely by explanation as an outside observer

13

but by empathic understanding and the capacity for subjective experience
by the doctor who puts himself into and therefore becomes the
20-­year-­old woman for the process of the psychiatric interview. It is
the purpose of the phenomenological method therefore to (1) describe
inner experiences, (2) order and classify them and (3) create a reliable
terminology. Empathy is also invaluable therapeutically in establishing
a relationship with the patient. Knowing that the doctor understands and
is even to some extent able to share her feelings gives the patient
confidence and a sense of relief. This method of empathy is also useful
as a way of extending knowledge more generally in the field of
psychiatry because it allows a diagnostic terminology to be developed.
Empathy is nonetheless a problematic concept. It is unclear what Jaspers
himself meant by it, and hence various potentially contradictory
interpretations are possible including transferring oneself into another
person's mind, sharing the patient's experience or actualizing the
patient's experience for oneself (Fulford et al., 2006). The approach
taken in this book is to emphasize the use of extended dialogue to
discover and re-­create a patient's subjective experience in oneself.
Stanghellini and Aragona (2016) make the important point that empathic
understanding is neither emotional fusion with the patient nor cold
distance but always an attempt to modulate distance by continuous
oscillation between the extreme of fusion and cold detachment. FORM AND
CONTENT Form and content are distinct in phenomenology. For Jaspers:
Form must be kept distinct from content which may change from time to
time, e.g., the fact of a hallucination is to be distinguished from its
content, whether this is a man or a tree, threatening figures or
peaceful landscapes. Perceptions, ideas, judgements, feelings, drives,
self-­ awareness, are all forms of psychic phenomenon; they denote the
particular mode of existence in which content is presented to us.
Jaspers (1997)

Thus, like warp and woof, form and content are essentially different but
inextricably woven together.

14

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

One way to think of form is to regard it as the sense modality in which
a perception is presented to us or the cognitive domain in which a
particular aspect of psychic life is experienced or enacted. The form of
a psychic experience is the description of its structure in
phenomenological terms, for example, a delusion or, as Berrios (1996)
says, 'Form refers to those impersonal aspects of the mental symptoms
that guarantee its stability in time and space; that is, its "constancy"
elements'. Viewed in this way, content is the subjective colouring of
the experience. The patient is concerned because they believe that
people are stealing their money. Their concern is that 'people are
taking my money', not that 'I hold on unacceptable grounds a false
belief that people are taking my money'. They are concerned about the
content. Clearly, form and content are both important but in different
contexts. The patient is concerned only with the content, 'that I am
pursued by ten thousand hockey sticks'. The doctor is concerned with
both form and content, but as a phenomenologist only with form, in this
case a false belief of being pursued. As far as form is concerned, the
hockey sticks are irrelevant. The patient finds the doctor's interest in
form unintelligible and a distraction from what they regard as
important, and often demonstrate their irritation. In Chapter 7, a
patient is described who said, 'When I turn the tap on, I hear a voice
whispering in the water pipe, "She's on her way to the moon. Let's hope
she has a soft landing."' The form of this experience is what demands
the attention of the phenomenologist and is useful diagnostically. She
is describing a perception; it is an auditory perception and a false or
disordered auditory perception. It has the characteristics of a
hallucination and specifically of a functional hallucination. This is
the form. While the psychiatrist is busy clarifying the form, the
patient might be getting irritated because 'he is not taking any notice
of what I am saying'. She is worried that she is being sent to the moon.
What will happen when she gets there? How will she get back? So, the
content is all-­important to her, and the doctor's absorption with form
is incomprehensible and frustrating in the extreme. The form is
dependent on, and is therefore a diagnostic key to, the particular
mental illness from which the patient suffers. For example, delusional
percepts occur in schizophrenia, and when demonstrated as

the form of the experience, they indicate this condition. The finding of
a visual hallucination suggests the likelihood of an organic brain
disease (Chapter 7). The nature of the content of these two examples is
irrelevant in coming to a diagnosis. The content can be understood by
the patient's life situation with regard to culture, peer group, status,
sophistication, age, sex, life events and geographic location. For
example, another patient described himself as having been sent to the
moon and back during the night within a fortnight of the first landing
by man on the moon. Describing one's thoughts as being controlled by
television is necessarily confined to those people who have seen that
invention. Hypochondriacal content can occur in more than one form. It
could take the form of an auditory hallucination in which the patient
hears a voice saying, 'You have cancer'. It could be a delusion in that
they hold, with conviction, the false belief that they have cancer. It
could be an overvalued idea in that the patient has a conviction arising
from prior experience of a mistaken diagnosis of cancer, and this
results in them spending a major part of everyday checking on their
health. It could be an abnormality of affect that manifests itself in
extreme hypochondriacal anxiety or in depressive hypochondriacal
despondency. The significance of culture and individual variation in
ascertaining the detailed complaint of the patient should be stressed.
Because the psychiatrist needs to assess whether this notion of the
patient demonstrates the specific psychopathological form of delusion,
it does not diminish the parallel need to understand the patient's
philosophic, religious, political and social beliefs and know how they
fit, or fail to fit, into the patient's larger, national and more
intimate, subcultural social contexts (Fabrega, 2000). Alongside the
need of the psychiatrist to acquire skills in psychopathology and the
elucidating of mental symptoms is the parallel requirement for cultural
education and sensitivity. Both aspects are necessary for every
patient--doctor interaction. If anything, the painstaking and detailed
study of phenomenology increases the awareness of the cultural context
and how it influences cognition and behaviour. PRIMARY AND SECONDARY
PHENOMENA Jaspers discusses the different meanings that can be given to
the terms primary and secondary when

1 Fundamental Concepts of Descriptive Psychopathology

applied to symptoms. The distinction may be in terms of understanding;
what is primary is immediate and ultimate and therefore cannot be
further reduced by understanding, for example, hallucinations. What is
secondary is what emerges from the primary in a way that can be
understood, for example, delusional elaboration arising from the healthy
part of the psyche in response to hallucinations from the unhealthy part
of the psyche. Again, the conceptual distinction of what is primary or
secondary may be determined by the causal chain in that what is primary
is the proximate cause, whereas what is secondary is the discernible
distal effect. A cerebrovascular accident causes sensory aphasia and is
therefore primary; the aphasia is the distal effect and is therefore
secondary to the cerebrovascular accident. These two distinct meanings
of the term primary overlie the crucial distinction between meaningful
connections and causal connections. For the avoidance of doubt in
physics and chemistry, we make observations by experiment and then
formulate causal connections and causal laws, whereas in psychopathology
we experience another sort of connection in which psychic events emerge
out of one another in a way that can be understood---so-­called
meaningful connections. SUBJECTIVITY AND OBJECTIVITY IN PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
Objectivity in science has come to be revered as the ideal so that only
what is external to the mind is considered to be real, measurable and
valuable. This is a mistake, because objective assessments are
necessarily subjectively value-­laden in what the observer chooses to
measure, and this subjective aspect can be made more precise and
reliable. There are always value judgements associated with both
subjective and objective assessments. The process of making a scientific
evaluation consists of various stages: receiving a sensory stimulus,
perceiving, observing (making the percepts meaningful), noting, coding
and formulating hypotheses. This is a progressive process of discarding
information, and it is the subjective judgement of what information is
valuable that determines the small amount from each stage that is
retained for transmission to the next part of the process. 'There is no
such thing as an unprejudiced observation' (Popper, 1974).

15

Objective assessments in psychiatry have covered many aspects of life. A
few examples are, in addition to many physiologic measures, the
measurement of body movements, facial expression, patients' writings,
learning capacity, responses to an operant conditioning programme,
memory span, work efficiency and evaluation of logical content of the
patients' statements. All these can be quantified and analysed
objectively. Subjective analysis can be made, for example, from facial
expression or from the patient's description of themself, of their own
writing or of their inner events. When a doctor says about a patient
'They look sad', they are not measuring the patient's facial expression
in 'units of sadness' by some objective yardstick. They are going
through this process: 'I associate their facial expression with the
affect that I recognize in myself as feeling sad; seeing their
expression makes me feel sad'. Rapport is the emotional quality of the
relationship that the patient establishes with the doctor during the
clinical encounter. For it to happen, the doctor has to be receptive to
this communication. They have to be able to communicate in a genuine
way, to be able to express an atmosphere of acceptance and to have a
capacity for warmth and human understanding. This is necessarily a
subjective experience for the doctor, but that is not to say that it is
unreal or even that it cannot be measured. The method of phenomenology
tries to increase our knowledge of subjective events so that they can be
classified and ultimately quantified. Aggernaes (1972) has defined
subjectivity and objectivity for immediate everyday experiences. When an
experienced something has a quality of 'sensation', it is also said to
have a quality of 'objectivity' if the experiencer feels that, under
favourable circumstances, they would be able to experience the same
something with another modality of sensation than the one giving the
quality of sensation. When an experienced something has a quality of
'ideation', that is, it is not being directly sensed at the moment, it
is also said to have a quality of 'objectivity' if the experiencer feels
that under favourable circumstances, they would nevertheless be able to
experience the same something with at least two modalities of sensation.
An experienced something has a quality of 'subjectivity' if the
experiencer feels that under no circumstances they would be able to
experience this something with two or more modalities of sensation.

16

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Thus I can look at the table in front of me as a visual perception, or I
can turn my head and still fantasize it as a visual image. As I 'see'
it, in either way, the fact that I can imagine both hearing a sound if I
were to hit it with a spoon and bruising my knuckles if I were to punch
it confirms its quality of objectivity. If I use my imagination to
create in my mind a visual image of a Chippendale chair that I have
never actually seen but is a composite of objects and pictures I have
seen, I know that I will never be able to feel or hear this actual
chair; it is a subjective image without external, objective reality.
UNCONSCIOUS EXPERIENCE AND PHENOMENOLOGY Phenomenology cannot be
concerned with the unconscious because the patient cannot describe it,
and so the doctor cannot empathize. Descriptive psychopathology has no
theory of the unconscious, nor does it deny its existence. Strictly
speaking, the unconscious is simply outside its terms of reference, and
psychic events are described without recourse to explanations involving
the unconscious. Dreams, the contents of hypnotic trance and slips of
the tongue are described according to how the patient experienced them,
that is, according to how they manifest in consciousness. ORGANIC AND
NEURAL SUBSTRATES AND PSYCHOPATHOLOGY Psychopathology is the study of
abnormal mental processes so that even when the organic causes of a
condition are known, psychopathology remains involved in describing,
defining and ordering the symptomatic phenomena and the experience of
the patient rather than being preoccupied with its neural origin or
pathophysiology. This is not to imply that underlying neural mechanisms
are unimportant. To the contrary, they are undeniably important.
However, the actual subjective experience of the patient is also
important, and psychopathology concentrates on this. There are
established links between different abnormal phenomena and identifiable
organic pathologies. However, it is not with these links that
psychopathology is concerned, and its usefulness is not dependent on
ultimately finding the localization in the brain of a delusion or any
other psychic event. Early, organically oriented psychiatrists, such as
Griesinger and Wernicke, were not concerned with

the psychopathological in psychiatry but much more with charting the
diseased brain. This paid a rich dividend, for example, in elucidating
the nature and treatment of cerebral syphilis. Similarly, some modern
behaviourists have been uninterested in phenomenology. Phenomenology is
not ultimately concerned with organic pathology or with behaviour per se
but with the patient's subjective experience of their world. For a long
time, symptomatic psychiatry and descriptive psychopathology seemed to
have lost contact with organic psychiatry in which evidence of mental
illness is sought in disease of the brain. There has now developed what
Mundt (2000) describes as a 'fresh wind from the experimental field of
psychopathology, neuropsychology and biological neurosciences'. This
linkage is still at an early stage, but it has potential for the future
study of symptoms and brain pathology. But for these investigations to
succeed and to come to fruition, a thorough appreciation of
psychopathology is essential. MIND--BRAIN DUALITY AND PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
Cartesian dualism is the view that mind and body are separate
substances; the mind happens to be associated with a particular body but
is ultimately self-­ sufficient and capable of independent existence.
This view---expounded by René Descartes (1596--1650) in which he made a
distinction between the material and physical world and the thinking
human mind--- continues to exert extraordinary influence. Husserl's
philosophy, phenomenology, arose out of Husserl's rejection of many of
Descartes' conclusions. There are a number of significant problems with
Cartesian dualism, not least how an immaterial substance like the mind
can influence a material substance like the body. There are varied
philosophic attempts to deal with the problem of dualism, and an account
of these is beyond the scope of this book. What is important is that
psychiatry is bedevilled by this problem: how to reconcile the phenomena
that patients report with the materiality of the brain. Is it possible
or plausible to reduce mental events to physical events in the brain?
And how far can the changes observable during functional magnetic
resonance imaging scanning be interpreted as products of certain mental
phenomena? Phenomenology, as an approach, avoids this debate by leaving
it to one side (bracketing it as Husserl would

1 Fundamental Concepts of Descriptive Psychopathology

have said) while continuing to explore, investigate, describe, define
and catalogue the mental events, the phenomena, reported by patients.
Descriptive psychopathology is not concerned with causes but with
descriptions of experience. The philosophy of mind is a thriving area of
research, in particular the elucidation of the nature of mind. The
specific theories are outside the scope of this book (see The Character
of Mind: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Mind; McGinn, 1997). That
is not to say that those theories such as Spinoza's token identity
theory, the type identity theory (also known as reductive materialism)
or eliminative materialism or functionalism are not relevant to
psychiatry or to experimental psychopathology, but merely to emphasize
that psychopathology can develop in the absence of a full and final
theory of the nature of mind. REFERENCES Aggernaes, A., 1972. The
experienced reality of hallucinations and other psychological phenomena.
Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 48, 220--238. Berrios, G.E., 1984. Descriptive
psychopathology: conceptual and historical aspects. Psychol. Med. 14,
303--313. Berrios, G.E., 1992. Phenomenology, psychopathology and
Jaspers: a conceptual history. Hist. Psychiat. 3, 303--327. Berrios,
G.E., 1996. The History of Mental Symptoms: Descriptive Psychopathology
since the Nineteenth Century. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Boorse, C., 1976. What a theory of mental health should be. J. Theory
Soc. Behav. 6, 61--84. Fabrega, H., 2000. Culture, spirituality and
psychiatry. Curr. Opin. Psychiatry. 13, 525--530. Fulford, K.W.M.,
Thornton, T., Graham, G., 2006. Oxford Textbook of Philosophy of
Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford. James, W., 1902. The
Varieties of Religious Experience. Penguin, London. Jaspers, K., 1997.
General Psychopathology (J. Hoenig, M.W. Hamilton, Trans). The Johns
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. Kendell, R.E., 1975. The concept of
disease and its implications for psychiatry. Br. J. Psychiatry 127,
305--315. McGinn, C., 1997. The Character of Mind: An Introduction to
the Philosophy of Mind, second ed. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

17

Mowbray, R.M., Ferguson, R.T., Mellor, C.S., 1979. Psychology in
Relation to Medicine, fifth ed. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh. Mundt,
C., 2000. Editorial. Psychopathology. 33, 2--4. Murphy, E.A., 1979. The
epistemology of normality. Psychol. Med. 9, 409--415. Phillips, J.,
2004. Understanding/explanation. In: Radden, J. (Ed.), The Philosophy of
Psychiatry: A Companion. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 180--190.
Popper, K., 1974. Unended Quest. Penguin, Harmondsworth. Rosenhan, D.L.,
1973. On being sane in insane places. Science 179, 250--258. Scadding,
J.G., 1967. Diagnosis: the clinician and the computer. Lancet 2,
877--882. Sedgwick, P., 1973. Illness---mental and otherwise. Stud.
Hastings Cent. 1, 19--40. Spitzer, M., 1990. Why philosophy? In:
Spitzer, M., Maher, B.A. (Eds.), Philosophy and Psychopathology.
Springer-Verlag, New York. Stanghellini, G., Aragona, M., 2016.
Phenomenological psychopathology: toward a person-centred hermeutic
approach in the clinical encounter. In: Stanghellini, G., Aragona, M.
(Eds.), An Experiential Approach to Psychopathology -- what Is it like
to Suffer from Mental Disorders? Springer, Basel, pp. 1--43.
Stanghellini, G., Fuchs, T., 2013. Editors' introduction. In:
Stanghellini, G., Fuchs, T. (Eds.), One Century of Karl Jaspers' General
Psychopathology. Oxford University Press, Oxford. xiii--xxiii. Szasz,
T.S., 1960. The myth of mental illness. Am. Psychol. 15, 113--118.
Walker, C., 1988. Philosophical concepts and practice: the legacy of
Karl Jasper's psychopathology. Curr. Opin. Psychiatry 1, 624-- 629.
Walker, C., 1993a. Karl Jaspers as a Kantian psychopathologist. I. The
philosophical origins of the concept of form and context. Hist.
Psychiat. 4, 209--238. Walker, C., 1993b. Karl Jaspers as a Kantian
psychopathologist. II. The concept of form and context in Jaspers'
psychopathology. Hist. Psychiat. 4, 321--348. Walker, C., 1994. Karl
Jaspers and Edmund Husserl: I: the perceived convergence. Philos.
Psychiatr. Psychol. 1, 117--134. Walker, C., 1995a. Karl Jaspers and
Edmund Husserl: II: the divergence. Philos. Psychiatr. Psychol. 2,
245--265. Walker, C., 1995b. Karl Jaspers and Edmund Husserl: III:
Jaspers as a Kantian phenomenologist. Philos. Psychiatr. Psychol. 2,
65--82. Wiggins, O.P., Schwartz, M.A., Spitzer, M., 1992. Phenomenology/
descriptive psychiatry: the method of Edmund Husserl and Karl Jaspers.
In: Spitzer, M., Uehlein, F., Schawartz, M.A., Mundt, C. (Eds.),
Phenomenology, Language and Schizophrenia. SpringerVerlag, New York,
pp. 46--69. Wittgenstein, L., 1953. Philosophical Investigation (G.E.M.
Anscombe, Trans). Blackwell, Oxford.

This page intentionally left blank

     

Chapter 2

Eliciting the Symptoms of Mental Illness Chapter Outline Summary
Diagnosis and Labelling The Psychiatric History Premorbid, Previous or
Usual Personality Differentiation of Personality Disorder The Mental
State Examination Systematic Enquiry

KEYWORDS Diagnosis History Mental state examination

Summary The clinical assessment of patients, which includes history
taking, mental state examination, physical examination and the synthesis
of the findings into a diagnosis that takes account of the patient's
biological, psychological and social environment, is the basis of
psychiatric practice. Without it, no adequate treatment and further
clinical management is possible. At the heart of this task is the
importance of focusing on the patient as the centre of clinical
attention, recognizing the value of respect for the dignity of the
patient and regarding the patient's narrative account as valuable, rich
and privileged. The ascendancy of a tick-­box approach to clinical
assessment is to be deplored. It fails to grasp that, despite the fact
that assessments have a structure to them and that they are systematic
inquiries, assessments must be conducted in a conversational style and
in a humane manner. Human beings are like parts of a body, Created from
the same essence. When one part is hurt and in pain, The others cannot
remain in peace and be quiet. If the misery of others leaves you
indifferent And with no feelings of sorrow, You cannot be called a human
being. Sa'adi, Persian (13th century)

Eliciting the symptoms and signs of emotional distress involves actively
listening to a narrative account of the person's complaints and his
internal state and observing the whole repertoire of behaviour and then

19

20

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

reducing these to a few summarizing phrases. It is a difficult task,
requiring an ability to listen and communicate, a sensitivity to the
needs and feelings of a person who is bewildered and distressed and a
knowledge of the possible conditions giving rise to the complaint. A
genuine interest in the human condition and its manifold expressions, as
well as a curiosity about intrapsychic experiences, is essential. This
cannot be learned from a book alone, but a structure for case taking
that suggests likely areas for exploration is invaluable. There are many
comprehensive schemes, and they can often be traced to earlier textbooks
with only slight modification. A summary of the scheme on which this
chapter is based is shown in Box 2.1. A practical guide to history
taking and evaluation of the mental state, diagnosis, formulation and
management is found in the Handbook for Trainee Psychiatrists (Rix,
1987), The Psychiatric Interview (Carlat, 2005)

and Kaplan and Saddock's Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry (9th
edition; Saddock et al., 2009). A useful approach to making the patient
information available for diagnosis and planning treatment is Making
Sense of Psychiatric Cases (Greenberg et al., 1986), and there are more
in-­depth texts on the psychiatric interview, such as The Psychiatric
Interview in Clinical Practice (Mac­ Kinnon et al., 2006) and The First
Interview (Morrison, 2008). A further account of the areas to be
considered and the modifications of the history and examination required
in particular circumstances is to be found in Sims and Curran (2001).
There is a significant conflict of interest between the patient and the
interviewer. The patient describes untoward and distressing experiences.
They want to be rid of these experiences. One patient may, for example,
say that they are depressed and miserable, and another may complain that
their thoughts

BOX 2.1 OUTLINE FOR PSYCHIATRIC EXAMINATION Patient's name:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Age:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Occupation:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Marital status:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Address:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Source of referral:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ •
Reason for referral • Present illness: symptoms and their chronology •
Previous medical history i. Physical ii. Psychiatric • Family history:
father, mother, siblings, other relations, atmosphere at home • Personal
history i. Pregnancy ii. Infancy iii. Childhood and adolescence iv.
Education at school v. Further education vi. Occupation (and military
service) vii. Sexual history: puberty, menstruation viii. Marital
history ix. Children • Social data i. Life situation: currently working,
housing situation, financial problems, relationships

ii. Crime, delinquency
iii. Alcohol, drugs, tobacco
iv. Social and religious affiliations and beliefs • P remorbid
    personality • Mental state
v.  Appearance and behaviour
vi. Talk and thought
vii. Mood: subjective, objective, rapport
viii. Thoughts and beliefs: phobias, obsessions, compulsions, suicidal
      thoughts, delusions, misinterpretations
ix. Experience and perception:

<!-- -->

a.  of the environment (hallucinations, illusions, derealization)
b.  of the body (hypochondriasis, somatic hallucinations)
c.  of the self (depersonalization, thought passivity)
d.  cognitive state: orientation, attention, concentration and memory
e.  insight • Diagnosis and assessment
f.  Diagnosis and differential diagnosis

<!-- -->

ii. Evidence for diagnosis
iii. Aetiologic factors
iv. Management
v.  Prognosis

2

are being sucked out of their head by the Martians. In both instances,
the patient wants the symptom to be relieved and feels that describing
it to the doctor in the way that it is affecting them is the first stage
in achieving this. The doctor needs to learn a lot of things from the
patient that the latter may consider irrelevant. They need to have a
precise description of the symptoms and of the patient's state of mind.
They need to know about the context of the patient's symptoms, including
the patient's developmental history and about their adjustment to their
social environment in general and to their symptoms in particular. To
return to our examples, the doctor not only needs to know that the
patient feels depressed, but also must enquire about the precise nature
of the 'depression', what the word implies to the patient, how the
affect disturbs the routine of their life and whether there are any
other associated symptoms. The person suffering at the hands of the
Martians will be only too ready to talk about Martians. However, they
are largely irrelevant to the interviewer, who is interested in exactly
what the experience of 'thoughts being extracted' entails. What is the
patient's evidence that this happens? What other abnormal mental
phenomena are experienced? The reader can perhaps understand the
patient's irritation if they can imagine that, after they had paid their
gas bill, a final demand notice with an intimation that their gas supply
was to be cut off came through the letterbox. On explaining to the
authorities that the bill was already paid, they did not apologize or
say that they would correct their computer, but they started
interrogating the harassed consumer as to why they should be so upset
about it, and what was their evidence that they had been especially
picked on by the authorities. Understandably, there is a potential
conflict of interest between the patient's wish for relief of symptoms
and the doctor's need to start by making a diagnosis. This differing of
perspectives, of priorities, is often at the root of the dissatisfaction
that many patients experience about the clinical encounter. A solution
to this dilemma, or indeed, a compromise is necessary. The patient will
quite quickly tire of the effort required to answer questions that are
aimed at establishing the phenomenological status of subjective
experiences. Several short interviews are preferable to

Eliciting the Symptoms of Mental Illness

21

a marathon session: 'never ask today what you can ask tomorrow'. This
method should encourage the examiner to 'bracket out' all preconceptions
and the patient to reflect on their experiences under guidance from the
examiner, who should not be digging for phenomena like a dog at a rabbit
hole. It is important for the examiner to distinguish clearly between
observations and inferences.

Diagnosis and Labelling Why make a diagnosis? The medical classification
of diseases allows a cluster of symptoms to be brought under a single
term that embodies the essence of a given condition. The diagnostic term
carries information in an efficient manner. But there are disadvantages,
including the unreliability of diagnostic terms as well as the risk of
undue labelling and the associated stigma of a psychiatric diagnosis. It
is central to the work of a professional that their first task is to
carefully collect information so that they know exactly what clinical
problem confronts them within their professional competence and
therefore what action would be appropriate; this is what diagnosis
implies. It is true that for many common medical diseases such as
diabetes, the diagnostic term refers to underlying demonstrable
pathophysiology for which independent markers exist, such as blood sugar
levels. In psychiatry, practically all the major disorders are still
recognized at a syndromal level, that is, by the cluster of signs and
symptoms that are thought to be typical of the given disease. The
assumption is that patterns of symptoms refer to discrete underlying
anomalies yet to be systematically established. Sadly, diagnostic terms
do not, as yet, refer to any well-­ described pathophysiology or indeed
to any independent or reliable marker. This is a significant problem for
the status of psychiatric diseases as bona fide medical diseases. In
psychiatry, a multifactorial approach to the understanding of a disorder
is the rule rather than the exception. This is the basis of the
biopsychosocial approach to psychiatric disorders. This means that a
narrow diagnosis, in purely organic or purely behavioural terms, is
inadequate. The diagnosis needs to be made in the context of an
understanding of

22

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

the biological, psychological and social antecedents, which, in turn,
determine the biological, psychological and social management of the
condition.

The Psychiatric History This account is chiefly interested in the way
that taking the history sheds light on the mental state. The nature and
type of referral is noted and recorded, for example, from a general
practitioner as an urgent problem, from a solicitor for a court report
and so on. After recording the reason for referral, the history will
usually begin with the patient's verbatim description of their present
symptoms, including the duration of each symptom and an account of the
development of the illness. Using the patient's own words is valuable in
giving insight into their state of mind and how they themself view their
symptoms. It is helpful after receiving a catalogue of complaints to
ask, 'Which is the very worst of all these symptoms?' or 'What is your
main concern?' This reveals how the patient conceptualizes the problem
and also suggests a preliminary target for treatment. Often the
patient's history of their present complaint is literally their story;
there is nothing wrong in recording this in narrative style provided
this is accurate. A chronological account of the present illness reveals
how the patient regards the development of their symptoms as well as
giving information on the actual history. In the history, one wants to
know about the sequence of symptoms and the effects these symptoms had
on the patient's lifestyle, about changes in behaviour and about
alterations in physical function. It is appropriate at this point to
note psychiatric symptoms of which the patient has been aware in the
past but for which they have never consulted a doctor or received
treatment. They may have relevance in the total picture of how the
illness developed, and it is known that the majority of people with
psychiatric conditions of clinical severity do not seek medical
consultation, let alone come to the attention of a psychiatrist (Andrews
et al., 2001). The patient feels it to be innately reasonable to
describe chronologically and meticulously their previous illnesses,
operations and accidents. They also will appreciate the logic of giving
details of hospital and general practice treatment for mental illness
and

will usually give accurate information with regard to dates, duration,
nature of the treatment, in what hospital and whether it was inpatient
or outpatient. Treatment received from the family doctor is recalled
less well; the dates are less reliable, and often the patient does not
know the nature of the treatment or what it was for. The family history
is concerned with the patient's family of origin, the likelihood of
genetic predisposition to mental illness, and the family relationships
and their potential contribution to the patient's presentation. History
of mental illness, suicide, nature of treatment and so on is relevant
for the first-­degree relatives (those sharing 50% of the genetic
material with the patient: parents, siblings, children) and more distant
relatives. It is important to know about the quality of relationships,
emotional bonding and interpersonal conflicts, both for the family in
which the patient was a child and for the family in which the patient
may be a parent. Relationships between individual members of the family
are described, as are the general emotional atmosphere and social and
financial problems. The occupations of different family members give
information about the social context; a record of health may be
relevant, as may a description of their personalities. Of course, the
family is seen through the patient's eyes; this means that it is not
just a factual description but rather an account of the emotional impact
the patient feels their family has had on them. If the history from the
patient is supplemented by an account from another informant, this bias
of the patient will itself give information that may be useful in
subsequent treatment. The personal history traces the stages of the
patient's development, health and formation of relationships from
conception, birth and infancy through childhood, school experiences,
adolescence and further education to occupational, marital and sexual
history. The factual details of these stages need to be recorded, as do
the way they have influenced the personality development and attitudes
of the patient, how he feels about them, how he has related to other
people (e.g., teachers and workmates) and how all these details may be
connected to the psychiatric condition. There are at least two processes
at play in taking a history. There is the simple business of taking a
factually accurate account of a patient's history of complaints as well

2

as the family, personal and social history. In addition to this
approach, there is the requirement to grasp the meaning of the patient's
history, that is, their story, to understand how they see themself in
relation to the world and how their development and circumstances have
been influential in provoking, exacerbating or ameliorating their
present illness. The factual history is the foundation of the clinical
diagnosis. Human beings live in a world of meanings, and the symbolic
and social dimension of the history are the basis of an adequate and
humane response to the patient's illness and distress. Accounts that
emphasize, for example, the fact that the patient is an only child, a
precious child, a victim of other people's malicious intentions, a
fighter who has struggled against the odds or an unlucky individual for
whom only failure and rejection characterize their life all say
something about the dominant themes, the prism through which the
individual analyses and perceives the world. So, although it is
important to record the facts, the meanings and understanding that
patients have of the trajectory of their life all communicate something
that enriches the clinical encounter and potentially make possible a
deeper doctor--patient relationship that should be satisfying for both
doctor and patient.

Premorbid, Previous or Usual Personality Assessment of personality is
the most complex and problematic task that a psychiatrist faces. In
clinical interviews, the doctor assesses the patient's personality using
three areas of information. First, the examiner asks the patient to
describe in detail their relationship with other people, their interests
and activities. Second, the examiner studies the way in which the
patient reacts to the examiner in the interview situation. Third, the
examiner tries to help the patient describe and demonstrate what they,
the patient, is like as a person; how they feel inside themself in
different situations; and their interests, goals and standards.
Personality assessment is not the exclusive preserve of psychiatrists or
psychologists but an important learned skill of many professionals who
deal with people---for example, schoolteachers, lawyers and bank
managers, although their terminology is different. Personality is that
part of a person, excepting their physical characteristics, that makes
them individual and

Eliciting the Symptoms of Mental Illness

23

unique, that is, different from other people. Personality is revealed by
a person's characteristic behaviour, the enduring patterns of responding
and reacting to given situations. If a clinician can attempt to predict
how a patient will react in hypothetical situations, what their
behaviour will be in particular circumstances, then the basis of that
prediction is founded on a reasonable and relatively accurate evaluation
of their personality. Subjectively, personality is shown in the totality
of a person's aims and goals, formed of everything that they value and
to which they aspire. Personality is not a thing but an abstraction, a
model. It is simply a way of thinking about human character, temperament
and conduct. Furthermore, it is multidimensional and is best defined in
action. Verbal description is unlikely to exhaust the essence of any
individual. Indeed, no description can exhaust the rich and complex
essence of any individual person. It is a truism that human beings are
full of potential and continue to surprise and astonish with the
capacity for change, for transformation and for moral conduct including
virtues and vices, which may not be readily identifiable on first
contact. Categorization into normal and abnormal personality requires a
further level of abstraction. Normal, an ordinary word in everyday use,
needs to be used more rigorously in this context (see Chapter 1). In
medicine, the term normal is often used to denote a statistical norm,
that is, what occurs in the majority of people. Equally, the term is
also sometimes used to mean 'ideal' in the sense of a description that
conforms to an 'ideal' type. In relation to personality, classification
and definitions of personality disorders depend on deviance from the
norm, but the definitions depend on 'ideal' descriptions of personality
types or better still a typology. This can sometimes be difficult to
grasp. We may have an ideal notion of what it is like to be 'extrovert'
and then a particular individual is compared against this abstract
notion. This comparison presupposes that the ideal notion, sometimes
termed a trait, varies in a dimensional manner among people. An
individual is more or less extroverted compared against this ideal
notion. The implication is that abnormal personality has some
characteristics that are either overdeveloped or underdeveloped compared
with an ideal notion to such an extent as to significantly deviate from
the mass of people. In other words, abnormalities of personality

24

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

are differences of degree; the deviant traits are shared in common with
others but exaggerated in expression. In the clinical interview, there
are various areas of dialogue with the patient that are likely to lead
to useful information for depicting the detail and colouring of their
personality---the personality type. Painting the picture and defining
the type are both necessary clinical exercises. Social relations are
investigated. How do they relate to their family? Are they detached or
overly dependent? What sort of friendships do they form with what sort
of people, and are they close-­knit or superficial with an exclusive few
or an unlimited crowd? How do their interests and leisure activities
involve them with others? Are they sociable or solitary? Are their
relationships structured or informal? How do they relate to bosses,
workmates and employees at work? Are they a leader or a follower, an
organizer or a loner? Are they pliant or truculent, cooperative,
sympathetic or clubbable? Their sexual preferences and relationships
should be noted. The nature of their interests and activities is
informative. What do they like doing in their spare time? If they are
interested in sport, it is useful to know if they can feel partisan and
involved and also whether they are a participant or an observer. Enquiry
is made of their preference and interests in films and literature: how
they observe, criticize and enjoy the material. To what social
organizations do they belong? Religion requires more than a single word
designating religious affiliation in the case notes. The
phenomenological method is equally relevant for this area of life. What
is the individual's self-­ experience of their religious beliefs, and how
do these interact with psychiatric symptomatology (Sims, 1994)? An
account of the patient's predominant mood is explored and whether his
mood is fluctuating or stable, responsive to precipitants or
endogenously determined. Character traits imply a detailed adjectival
list, for example, irritable, reserved, fussy and so on. It will, of
course, be helpful to corroborate their description with an account from
another person. Enquiry is made about their attitudes and values; their
views about themself and their body; how they regard others close to
them; their more general social values in religion, morality, politics
and economics; how they feel events occur and can be made to occur.
Drive and energy and the way these are expressed in ambition,

lethargy, effectiveness and persistence are all important aspects of
personality. Study of their fantasy life is made: the frequency and
duration of daydreams and their content; whether these are goal-­directed
and realistic or dissociated from any expectation of fulfilment. Dreams
and other supposed signs of unconscious psychic activity are useful,
especially when the subject attempts to interpret them. We may comment
on their habits of ingestion, inhalation and excretion---whether they
are regular and to what extent they depend on this regularity. Is there
an indication that there should be a more detailed history and
exploration of current habits of eating, smoking, drinking alcohol and
taking other drugs? As the patient unfolds the facets of their
personality, so the overall emphases that they put on areas of
description become illuminating in understanding them as a whole person.

Differentiation of Personality Disorder Allocating the patient to a
personality type without taking into account the infinite variability of
individuals is inadequate. However, certain characteristics tend to
occur together and are of clinical significance. Allocation to a
particular category of personality disorder is made on the relative
predominance of these different character traits. Having decided that a
certain definite trait or traits are present in this individual to an
abnormal extent, does the abnormality of personality cause the person
themself or other people to suffer? That is, is personality disorder
present? More than one abnormal type of personality may be present in
any individual; they are not mutually exclusive. In formulating the
psychiatric history and evaluation of mental state, comment on premorbid
personality should always be made, even if it is only to state that due
to the ravages of the mental illness, it is impossible to accurately
assess premorbid state. The predominant traits should be described,
preferably with verbatim comments of the patient to illustrate them. The
interviewer should decide whether these traits are there to a
significantly abnormal extent and, if so, whether this amounts to
personality disorder. The type of disorder should be differentiated.

2

THE MENTAL STATE EXAMINATION The mental state examination is the special
area of expertise of psychiatrists. It is the psychiatrist's equivalent
of the neurologic examination. The mental state examination is guided by
the same principles and communication skills as any other clinical
interview (Box 2.2). It is dependent on facility with language because
that is the tool with which psychiatric practice is conducted. The
clinician uses 'open' questions at the beginning of clinical enquiries
and utilizes 'closed' questions to clarify specific points. There are
specific techniques for signalling active listening. These include the
use of summary statements to summarize what the clinician has made of
what the patient is saying and to provide the opportunity for the
patient to correct any misapprehension on the part of the clinician.
Furthermore, normalizing statements can be used to introduce difficult
subjects; for example, the clinician could introduce the issue of
suicidal thoughts by saying, 'It is not uncommon for people who are
depressed to find that they feel hopeless and that life is not worth
living; have you felt like that?' Statements that comment on the
emotional aspects of the patient's communication or behaviour, such as
'I can see that it must be very difficult for you to talk about these
experiences', may help to deepen the rapport between clinician and
patient. Further practical advice on conducting the psychiatric
examination is found in Leff and Isaacs (1990). As the interviewer asks
each question, they should be thinking what the possible answers to that
question could be from a reasonable person in this context. In everyday
conversations, one is conditioned to avoid asking embarrassing questions
and so, when someone makes an odd remark, the tendency is to fill in the
meaning of the response to make it ordinary, sensible and avoid asking
further questions in this area. This is exactly the opposite of
phenomenological investigation in which the interviewer is looking for
ways into the patient's private way of thinking. When the patient says
something unreasonable, odd or unexpected, the interviewer must note it
and, without intending to embarrass or disturb the patient's equanimity,
clarify the inner experience already partly revealed. This will entail
the use of the empathic method described in Chapter 1. One of the
difficulties for the aspiring phenomenologist is

Eliciting the Symptoms of Mental Illness

25

BOX 2.2 COMMUNICATION SKILLS TECHNIQUES • Introductory statements and
setting the context: 'My name is Dr Smith. I have a letter from your GP
informing me that you have been feeling low for the past 6 weeks.', etc.
• Open questions: 'Can I start off by asking how you have been feeling
lately?' • Closed questions: 'I understand that you have been hearing
voices for several weeks now. Are these voices there all the time?' •
Summary statements: 'From what you have been saying, I understand that
you have been feeling low for the past 6 weeks and that this has been
steadily getting worse to the degree that you are now tearful all the
time for no good reason and that your sleep has also been badly
affected.' • Normalizing statements: 'It is not uncommon for people in
your kind of situation to feel so low that life no longer seems worth
living. Have you felt like that?' • Reflective and empathic statements:
'As I understand it, when your husband lost his job, you had a lot of
money worries. That must have been quite difficult for you, especially
with the new baby.' • Concluding statements: 'I now have a good grasp of
how things have been for you in the past year. Are there things that you
wanted to tell me that you have not yet had the opportunity to bring
up?'

to know when to pursue what the patient reveals in more detail---that
is, when to make the incision for the psychopathological operation.
Clinical wisdom involves knowing when to do what. Words limit as well as
liberate. The clinical interviewer needs to be careful not to restrain
their patient's answers by imposing the shackles of psychiatric
technical jargon. Careful attention must be paid to the patient's use of
language, and, as far as possible, the clinician should use language
that mirrors the patient's language. It is important to be certain that
both clinician and patient are using words in the same sense. The
question 'Do you hear voices?' is a good example of this. The patient
may truthfully answer 'No' and yet be suffering from almost continuous
auditory hallucinations. Although patients and their doctors quite often
describe auditory verbal hallucinations as 'voices', the patient may
regard phonemes in quite other terms. They may make no distinction at
all between these auditory perceptions, 'voices' they hear for which an
outside observer realizes there is an appropriate stimulus and auditory
hallucinations. They may be largely oblivious of the form of the
communication

26

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

as auditory and hallucinatory because they are totally absorbed with its
content (an order telling them to go to Strasbourg and preach).
Obviously, another patient may answer the question 'Do you hear voices?'
truthfully in the affirmative and yet have a quite different form of
phenomenological experience from auditory hallucination (see Chapter 7).
Almost every technical term in general medicine has diagnostic
implications. This is also true in psychiatry. A symptom may not be
pathognomonic of a certain condition but nevertheless is predominantly
found with that illness. If the doctor uses the term perseveration in
describing their patient's mental state to a colleague, they are, by
inference, suggesting a diagnosis of an organic psychiatric state. If
this is not the diagnosis, they have some difficult explaining to do to
justify the use of that word. Is it really perseveration or just the
repetitious use of words and phrases in a person who has intellectual
disability and shows poverty of expression? To avoid misunderstanding,
it is best to use longer descriptions until the interviewer is sure that
the symptom is truly present. Observation of the appearance and
behaviour of the patient is an invaluable supplement to their self-­
description. The observations of others and at times other than the
interview need to be taken into account. As the interview proceeds, the
interviewer more definitely pursues their real intention of finding out
the meaning behind the words the patient uses. What is the patient
feeling and experiencing? Their own account may be a blind to prevent
other people, or even themself, from seeing how bad they really feel.
The empathic method is invaluable in working out what they are implying.
So also is acute, insightful and trained observation. Observation may
reveal white lines across the knuckles of an anxious person talking
about what upsets them most and which render them impotently angry.
Empathy allows the observer to employ their own capacity for emotion as
a diagnostic and therapeutic tool. Training and experience are essential
for knowing in which areas delving will be rewarded with useful
information; how to ask questions that are comprehensible to patients of
different verbal abilities and cultural backgrounds and that will result
in appropriate answers; and how to avoid damaging the patient still
further with well-­directed but blunt questions that are likely to be
perceived as brutal

and emotionally traumatizing. Observation and empathy must always be
used together in eliciting the mental state. Note also the double
meaning of the word observant: it means not only noticing what is going
on around oneself but also conforming with the cultural mores of the
immediate society. A good phenomenologist will be observant in both
senses of the word.

Systematic Enquiry The appearance and behaviour of the patient are
observed for the clinical medical information they carry. Does the
patient look ill? Are they alert, oriented, fully conscious, fluctuating
in their mental state? Are there any behavioural or neurologic
abnormalities? Observation is also useful for assessing nonverbal
communication (Argyle, 1975). From their posture, gestures, facial
expression and so on, they betray their state of emotion, providing
information about their personality and their attitude to the observer
and to others despite their silence or contradictory verbal
communication. Obviously, observation of behaviour also indicates
psychiatric symptomatology such as tics, catatonic movements, possible
hallucinatory perception, and feeding and excreting disorders. Posture
can be revealing to the acute observer, for instance, the pharaonic
posture and the slow deliberate movements of head and neck of the
patient with schizophrenia. If the patient is mute, the observed
behaviour is the only source of clinical information, but the importance
of observation needs to be stressed also for those patients who do
speak. Observation may be valuable to corroborate the patient's
complaints, to make clear the degree of emotional involvement they have
in their symptoms or sometimes to contradict their statement, for
example, the person who manifests physically extreme anxiety yet denies
any worries on enquiry. Talk reveals thought. Listening to and studying
the patient's utterances is usually the most important part of assessing
their mental state. Thought disorder and the interpretation of
abnormalities in the use of words, syntax and association of ideas are
discussed in more detail in Chapter 9. The flow of talk merits notice.
Do they talk volubly and easily or in taciturn monosyllables? Do they
just answer questions or speak spontaneously? Is their conversation
appropriate to the social context, and is it coherent? Is the train of

2

thought readily distracted? Throughout the interview, as much of the
patient's speech as possible should be recorded verbatim. This provides
a clearer picture of this individual person's inner milieu, and the data
of self-­experience will allow another person to evaluate the diagnosis.
As the interviewer enquires about and forms their own assessment of
mood, they have three areas for exploration: subjective and objective
description of mood and evaluation of rapport. There is much more to
mood than just depression or elation; the finer nuances of this person's
subjective emotional experience must be carefully dug out like truffles,
using a sensitive nose and delicate extraction. A person anticipating an
event may be acutely apprehensive, exquisitely excited but rather
anxious, hopelessly resigned and so on; 'afraid of the future' is not an
adequate description. Mood can be studied for its direction (depression
or elation), its consistency (stable or labile), its appropriateness,
its amplitude and the degree of discrepancy between subjective
description and objective observation. Of course, there is really no
such thing as wholly objective assessment of mood. The doctor comments
on the mood state of their patient from their observation of the
patient's demeanour and the general tone of their conversation during
the interview. They make the comment, 'The patient appears depressed;
they are agitated and tense'. In fact, this comment on the patient's
emotion abbreviates the empathic process through which they go to make
this judgement. The doctor observes the patient and picks up available
cues for mood, relating these to their experience with other patients
and other people through their life and ultimately to their knowledge of
their own affective state. Their assessment runs as follows: 'If I felt
how my patient looks, speaks and acts, I would feel profoundly depressed
and agitated; they are, on observation, depressed and agitated'. Rapport
is a useful measure of the patient's ability to communicate their
feelings to another person. The interviewer needs to make themself into
a yardstick, a constant rapport maker, against which the patient's
ability to make rapport can be measured. To do this, the doctor requires
clinical experience and an objectivity in which they know how they react
to and communicate with many different sorts of people. They know
themself and their own competence well enough to

Eliciting the Symptoms of Mental Illness

27

exclude this from the assessment of rapport so that, as far as possible,
it is only the patient's capacity for emotional communication that is
being tested. The ideas and beliefs the patient holds and abnormalities
of perception they experience are ascertained and explored during the
interview. In ordinary conversation, there is a great deal of filling in
or editing to eliminate the deficiencies of communication. A person
talks and comes to a halt halfway through a sentence for the loss of a
word. The other person provides the word and thus continues the
conversation to both parties' satisfaction. This is the nature of
discourse. There is a tendency for those coming new to dialogue with the
mentally ill to bring into their conversation these social niceties that
are used to save embarrassment. The doctor tends to note what they think
the patient meant to say, as if the latter's thinking processes were
similar to their own, rather than concentrating on what the patient
actually said. A lot of significant psychopathology is thus missed.
Delusions and hallucinations are rarely, if ever, volunteered by the
patient as symptoms for the obvious reason that they are not experienced
as different from the rest of the person's thinking or perceiving. To
the patient, subjectively, a delusion is indistinguishable from any
other idea they have, a hallucination is indistinguishable from any
other normal perception. Skill in interviewing therefore comes very much
in knowing when to look for a delusion and how to make a clear
distinction between what the person describes as experience and what it
reveals phenomenologically. Passivity or delusions of control,
obsessions, compulsions and depersonalization may be obvious or only
made plain with some difficulty. It is important to try to categorize
the type of experience as early in the course of exposure to
professional enquiry as possible, because patients' explanations tend to
become contaminated on repeated questioning. When passivity, for
example, is suspected, it is generally best to follow up the clues right
away and decide once and for all whether the symptom is present.
Assessment of the cognitive state includes, at least briefly, testing
for orientation, attention, concentration and memory. The Mini-­Mental
State Examination (Folstein et al., 1975) is a widely used standardized
bedside test of cognitive function that is useful to administer in the
clinical setting.

28

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

The doctor, from specific questions and from the interview in general,
needs to form an idea of the patient's attitude towards their illness,
difficulties and prospects. To what extent does the patient have insight
into their condition? Any illness of some severity will alter the
patient's world and view of the world. Insight assesses the awareness of
this change by the patient and the accurate labelling of this change as
originating from a mental illness that requires treatment. Insight is
therefore highly complex as a function. It is the ability of the
individual to be self-­aware and to be sensitive to inner subjective
change. The capacity to correctly attribute the subjective psychological
change to pathologic causes is evidence of intact self-­awareness despite
evidence of mental illness. It is potentially an extremely valuable part
of the mental state examination, as it is associated with compliance
with treatment and also with the likelihood of treatment under
compulsion. In summary, insight has three components: recognition of
subjective psychological change, the labelling of this change as
pathologic in nature and recognition of need for treatment as well as
compliance with treatment (David, 1990; see Chapter 11). Many textbooks
and numerous psychiatric institutions have their own scheme for
psychiatric interviewing. This account is a general commentary rather
than yet another scheme. See Box 2.1 earlier in the chapter

for a memorandum of key areas to be covered in the history and
examination of a psychiatric patient. REFERENCES Andrews, G., Issakidis,
C., Carter, G., 2001. The shortfall in mental health service
utilisation. Br. J. Psychiatry 179, 417--425. Argyle, M., 1975. Bodily
Communication. Methuen, London. Carlat, D.J., 2005. The Psychiatric
Interview, second ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia.
David, A.S., 1990. Insight and psychosis. Br. J. Psychiatry 156,
789--808. Folstein, M.F., Folstein, S.E., McHugh, P.R., 1975.
'Mini-mental state'. A practical method of grading the cognitive state
of patients for the clinician. J. Psychiatr. Res. 12, 189--198.
Greenberg, M., Szmuckler, G., Tantam, D., 1986. Making Sense of
Psychiatric Cases. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Leff, J.P., Isaacs,
A.D., 1990. Psychiatric Examination in Clinical Practice, third
ed. Blackwell Scientific, Oxford. MacKinnon, R.A., Michels, R., Buckley,
P.J., 2006. The Psychiatric Interview in Clinical Practice. American
Psychiatric Publishing, Arlington, VA. Morrison, J., 2008. The First
Interview, third ed. Guildford Press, London. Rix, K.J.B., 1987.
Handbook for Trainee Psychiatrists. Baillière Tindall, London. Saddock,
B.J., Saddock, V.L., Ruiz, P., 2009. Kaplan and Saddock's Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry, ninth ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
Philadelphia. Sims, A., 1994. Psyche' -- spirit as well as mind? Br. J.
Psychiatry 165, 441--446. Sims, A., Curran, S., 2001. Examination of the
psychiatric patient. In: Henn, F., Sartorius, N., Helmchen, H., Lauter,
H. (Eds.), Contemporary Psychiatry. Springer, Berlin, pp. 479--496.

Section II

CONSCIOUSNESS AND COGNITION

29

This page intentionally left blank

     

Chapter 3

Consciousness and Disturbed Consciousness Chapter Outline Summary
Disorders of Consciousness Dimensional Changes in Levels of
Consciousness Qualitative Changes of Consciousness Other Terms

KEYWORDS Consciousness Delirium Stupor Twilight state Automatism

Summary Consciousness is a defining characteristic of animals, although
conscious self-­ awareness may be particular to human beings.
Abnormalities of consciousness are problematic from a phenomenology
point of view because, by definition, self-­reports of pathologic states
of consciousness, unlike self-­ reports of conscious experience, are not
immune from error. The unconscious state is not privileged because the
subject is unable to report on the nature and quality of the experience,
even in situations when there is only minimal impairment of
consciousness; self-­reports are still open to qualification and query.
Hence, the terminology is determined by the observation of either the
quantitative degree of abnormality or the apparent qualitative changes
in conscious state. The terminology is imprecise, and often several
terms are used for identical or frankly indistinguishable states. In
this chapter, terms such as vigilance, lucidity, clouding of
consciousness, delirium, stupor, coma and some others are introduced and
defined: Psychiatry and neuropathology are not merely two closely
related fields, they are but one field in which only one language is
spoken and the same laws rule. Wilhelm Griesinger (1868)

I have always been intrigued by the specific moment when, as we sit
awaiting in the auditorium, the door to the stage opens and a performer
steps into the light, or, to 31

32

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

take the other perspective, the moment when a performer who waits in
semidarkness sees the same door open, revealing the lights, the stage,
and the audience ... as I reflect on what I have written, I sense that
stepping into the light is also a powerful metaphor for consciousness,
for the birth of the knowing mind, for the simple and momentous coming
of the self into the world of the mental. Antonio Damasio (1999)

Consciousness is one of the most challenging philosophic problems of our
times. In this chapter, the focus is on the subjective state of
awareness of the sensible world, which terminates when we go to sleep,
are comatose or are dead. It is important to emphasize that the term
consciousness does not refer merely to the distinction between being
asleep or awake. To be awake presupposes being conscious. The focus is
on the process of being conscious of something, rather than merely being
awake. In other words, it is the process of being conscious of something
in the sense that one is aware that they can see a particular object or
hear a particular conversation. At the outset, it is important to
distinguish consciousness from attention. Attention refers to the
capacity to focus our interest or consciousness on specific aspects of
the objective world. This might entail selecting, shifting and thereby
focusing attention, for example, on a passing vehicle rather than on a
lamppost. No doubt both processes are related, but there is empirical
work to show that both processes can operate independently of one
another. The global workplace theory, an influential psychological model
of consciousness, uses a theatre metaphor in which attention resembles
choosing a television channel and consciousness is the picture on the
screen (Baars and Franklin, 2007). The distinction that is being drawn
here is that between selecting an experience and being conscious of the
selected event. It is a truism that we are only conscious of a fraction
of the information processing going on in our brain at any one time. The
function of attention seems to be to select some aspects of stimulus
input defined by location in space, a given feature such as shape or by
an object. In contrast, the function of consciousness pertains to
summarizing all the information from the environment that we need to
ensure that it is available for planning,

decision-­making, language, rational thought and setting long-­term goals
(Tononi and Koch, 2008). This is what Jaspers (1997) refers to as 'the
immediate experience of the total psychic state'. Any theory of
consciousness must attempt to explain certain basic facts about mental
life, namely, (1) that consciousness has a subjective nature that is
united by a unique individual's inner perspective; (2) that conscious
awareness appears to have a quality that is recalcitrant to physical or
materialist description, that is, that it cannot simply be reduced to
physic--­ chemical processes; and (3) that conscious experience is
directed towards objects, that is, it is intentional in nature. It is
the particularly striking inner subjective aspect of conscious awareness
that is of prime concern to psychiatrists. Consciousness has a pivotal
role in Husserl's (1859-- 1938) phenomenology. As previously described,
phenomenology is the study or description of phenomenon and involves the
description of things as one experiences them. In other words,
phenomenology is concerned with subjective conscious experience. It is
therefore the case that one must first be conscious to be able to
experience the world. So the logical starting place for the study of
symptoms, from a subjective standpoint, is that feature of mental
life---namely, consciousness---that allows subjective experiences to
exist. Until quite recently, studies of consciousness were looked on
with suspicion by neuroscientists, thereby leaving clinicians, both
neurologists and psychiatrists, in intellectual darkness. This has been
rectified in the past two decades by combining and sharing the
perspectives of different disciplines: philosophy, psychology, medicine
and neurosciences (Bock and Marsh, 1993). Although it is essential for
our clinical work concerning disturbances in consciousness that we use
the principles of descriptive psychopathology and applied phenomenology,
we need to be aware of the limitations (Dennett, 1991). Dennett has
pointed out that from Descartes via Locke, Berkeley and Hume,
phenomenology has tended to describe consciousness from the first-­person
plural: 'according to longstanding philosophic tradition we all agree on
what we find when we "look inside" at our own phenomenology'. We may not
all be the same inside, and even if we are, we may get it wrong when we
try to describe our inner

3 Consciousness and Disturbed Consciousness

experiences. He also questions the purely third-­person perspective of
behavioural psychology and advocates the 'Method of
Heterophenomenology'. This depends, for its authenticity, on the
meticulous precision of the questions asked, the objectivity of
recording the transcript (three stenographers preparing separate
documents from an audiotaped interview), adopting the 'intentional
stance' (assuming that the subject of investigation was intending to
make a statement about something) and scope for clarification. When this
process has been followed, the text 'is taken to be the sincere,
reliable expression and to be a single, unified subject of that very
subject's beliefs and opinions'. It becomes clear that this process is
similar, although more highly structured for research purposes, to the
separate steps in the method of empathy as described in Chapter 1. There
is a further problem for phenomenological analysis as it concerns
psychopathology, precisely in that it requires a description of
subjective experience. However, abnormalities of consciousness, as
usually construed in psychopathology, concern experiences that are
characterized by demonstrable impairments of the capacity to accurately
report subjective experiences. Karl Jaspers (1883--1969) recognized this
problem but was also additionally aware of another issue, namely, that
in Husserl's phenomenology there is an inseparability of acts of
consciousness such as attention, perception and so on and the actual
objects of consciousness. Jaspers gave an account that treated
consciousness as distinct from acts of consciousness. He identified
three aspects of consciousness, namely (1) actual inner awareness, (2) a
subject-- object dichotomy and (3) knowledge of a conscious self. In
this account, Jaspers used the metaphor of a stage, very reminiscent of
the metaphor of a theatre that has currency today and that of a medium.
These metaphors allowed Jaspers to refer to the idea that 'the stage can
shrink (narrowing of consciousness) or the medium can grow dense
(clouding of consciousness)' (Jaspers, 1997). For Jaspers, loss of
actual inner awareness is synonymous with loss of consciousness. In
Jaspers' conception, attention is conceived as either an active or
passive turning towards an object, and the degree of clarity and
distinctness of the content of consciousness is referred

33

to as the field of attention. Finally, Jaspers (1997) also commented on
the role of attention for 'rousing further associations ... guiding
notions, set tasks, target ideas' and so on. In summary, consciousness
is pivotal in Husserl's phenomenology, hence it is equally important in
clinical psychopathology. Abnormalities of consciousness are problematic
insofar as the terminology is appallingly confused. In this and
subsequent chapters, I attempt to clarify the words used, sometimes at
the expense of sacrificing altogether terms with a long history and
sometimes lumping as a single concept words between which there are only
minute differences of meaning. One major problem is that different
disciplines and medical specialties use different terms to cover partly
overlapping concepts and meanings. I propose to deal with abnormalities
of consciousness under the following major headings: (1) dimensional
changes in levels of consciousness and (2) qualitative changes of
consciousness.

Disorders of Consciousness It has proved complicated to describe exactly
what is disordered in pathologic states of consciousness, hence this
rather convoluted definition of a disturbed state of consciousness (DSC)
by Aggernaes (1975): A state in a person in which he has no experiences
at all, or in which all of his experiences are deviant, concerning other
or more qualities than tempo and mood colouring, from those he would
have under similar stimulus conditions in his habitual waking state. The
state is a DSC only if the individual cannot return to, and remain in,
his habitual state by deciding to do so himself, and if others bring
about a lasting return to his habitual state by the application of a
simple social procedure. DIMENSIONAL CHANGES IN LEVELS OF CONSCIOUSNESS
Impairment of consciousness can be seen as a continuum from alertness
through to drowsiness and ultimately coma and death. In that sense,
consciousness may be regarded as lying on a quantitative dimension (Fig.
3.1). Lishman (1998) makes the point that 'considerable difficulties can
surround the conceptual

34

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

levels of consciousness of patients with acute organic reactions, partly
because of problems inherent in the use of certain terms and partly
because of the expectation that impaired consciousness must necessarily
be accompanied by decreased responsiveness to stimuli ... In most
conditions impairment of consciousness is accompanied by diminished
arousal and alertness'. Unconsciousness

Unconscious, according to Jaspers (1997), 'means something that is not
an inner existence and does not occur as an experience; secondly,
something that is Normal consciousness: alert, vigilant, lucid Clouding
Drowsiness Sopor Coma Death Fig. 3.1 Levels or stages of diminished
consciousness.

not thought of as an object and has gone unregarded; thirdly, it is
something which has not reached any knowledge of itself'. In clinical
practice, the term unconscious is used in three quite different ways
that have in common only the phenomenological element in that there is
no subjective experience (Fig. 3.2): • A person suffering from serious
brain disease may be unconscious; consciousness in this instance is seen
as being on a continuum, with a normal state of consciousness at one end
and death at the other. • Someone who is asleep is unconscious; again,
there is a continuum from full wakefulness to deep sleep. • An alert and
healthy person is aware of only certain parts of their environment both
externally and internally; of the rest, they are unconscious. There is
also a continuum here from full vigilance directed towards the immediate
object of awareness to total unawareness. The organic state of the brain
as, for instance, demonstrated by the electroencephalogram is utterly
different in these three situations. 3. Unconscious mind

2.  Deep sleep Stages of sleep

Preconscious -- not readily available

Reduced wakefulness Normal sleeping Organic impairment Brain disease

Normal consciousness Clouding Drowsiness Sopor 1. Coma (stages) Death

Fig. 3.2 Three dimensions of unconsciousness.

Attention awareness

3 Consciousness and Disturbed Consciousness

The third meaning of unconsciousness implies that certain mental
processes cannot be observed by introspection alone, even when the brain
is normal and healthy. Among such processes for which there is good
evidence of their existence, frequency and complexity, there are some
that have been, or may yet become, conscious. This is what Freud called
the preconscious (Frith, 1979). Whereas there is a strict limit to the
number of items available in the conscious state and that are therefore
capable of being memorized (approximately seven, for example, a number
with seven digits), there is much more information stored at the
preconscious level. If a stimulus is ambiguous, only one interpretation
is possible in consciousness at any one time; however, multiple meanings
are available preconsciously. It is difficult to carry out more than one
task at a time consciously, but undertaking parallel tasks is usual at a
preconscious level. Preconscious processes are automatic, whereas
conscious ones are flexible and strategic. This function of the
preconscious was well known long before Freud, for example, Brodie
(1854): But it seems to me that on some occasions a still more
remarkable process takes place in the mind, which is even more
independent of volition than that of which we are speaking; as if there
were in the mind a principle of order which operates without our being
at the time conscious of it. It has often happened to me to have been
occupied by a particular subject of inquiry; to have accumulated a store
of facts connected with it; but to have been able to proceed no further.
Then, after an interval of time, without any addition to my stock of
knowledge, I have found the obscurity and confusion, in which the
subject was originally enveloped, to have cleared away; the facts have
all seemed to have settled themselves in their right places, and their
mutual relations to have become apparent, although I have not been
sensible of having made any distinct effort for that purpose.
Unconscious in the preceding sense is a theory that psychiatrists and
psychopathologists have to explain some aspects of observable behaviour,
whereas in the other two senses of the term unconscious, it is the fact
that the individual is unconscious to the world---that

35

is, they are unrousable and unable to participate with this awareness of
the sensory world intact---that is at stake. The three dimensions of
consciousness (contrasted with unconsciousness, as in Fig. 3.1) are
vigilance, lucidity and self-­consciousness. Abnormalities of Vigilance

Vigilance is taken to mean the faculty of deliberately remaining alert
when otherwise one might be drowsy or asleep. This is not a uniform or
unvarying state but fluctuates. Factors inside the individual that
promote or adversely influence vigilance are interest, anxiety, extreme
fear or enjoyment, whereas boredom encourages drowsiness. The situation
in the environment and the way the individual perceives that situation
also affect one's position on the vigilance--drowsiness axis. Some
abnormal states of health increase vigilance, whereas many diminish it.
In addition to the contrast between vigilance and drowsiness, there are
qualitative differences in the nature of wakefulness. The vigilant state
of mind of a person scanning a radar screen for a possible enemy
interceptor is very different from the rapt attention of a music lover
listening to a symphony. These aspects of attention and their
abnormalities are discussed in Chapter 4. Drowsiness is a persistent
state and is the next level of progressive impairment of consciousness.
The patient is 'awake' but will drift into 'sleep' if left without
sensory stimulation. They are slow in actions, slurred in speech,
sluggish in intention and sleepy on subjective description. There is an
attempt at avoidance of painful stimuli. Reflexes, including coughing
and swallowing, are present but reduced; muscle tone is also diminished.
In psychiatric practice, this is commonly seen after overdosage with
drugs that have a central nervous system depressant effect (for example,
tricyclic antidepressants). From the psychiatrist's point of view, it
means, of course, that interviewing the patient is impossible. These
levels of diminished consciousness are quite nonspecific and occur
whatever the nature of the cause: head injury, tumour, epilepsy,
infection, cerebrovascular disorder, metabolic disorder or toxic state.

36

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

In coma, the patient is unconscious, whereas the drowsy patient is
conscious but lapsing at times into unconsciousness. In lighter states
with strong stimuli, they may be momentarily rousable. There are no
verbal responses or responses to painful stimuli. The righting response
of posture has been lost; reflexes and muscle tone are present but
greatly reduced; breathing is slow, deep and rhythmic; the face and skin
may be flushed. In later stages, the patient is no longer rousable; they
are deeply unconscious. Distinct stages of coma have identifiable
physical signs ultimately culminating in brain death, but these are not
discussed further in this book---they are beyond psychiatry (Conference
of Medical Royal Colleges and Their Faculties, 1976). Practical
assessment of the depth and duration of impaired consciousness and coma
has been quantified on the scale devised by Teasdale and Jennett (1974).
Abnormalities of Lucidity

Consciousness is inseparable from the object of conscious attention:
lucidity can be demonstrated only in clarity of thought on a particular
topic. The sensorium, the total awareness of all internal and external
sensations presenting themselves to the organism at any particular
moment, may be clear or clouded. Obviously, lucidity is not unrelated to
vigilance: unless the person is fully awake, they cannot be clear in
consciousness. Clouding of consciousness denotes the lesser stages of
impairment of consciousness on a continuum from full alertness and
awareness to coma (Lishman, 1998). The patient may be drowsy or agitated
and is likely to show memory disturbance and disorientation. In
clouding, most intellectual functions are impaired, including attention
and concentration, comprehension and recognition, understanding, forming
associations, logical judgement, communication by speech and purposeful
action. This represents the lesser stages of impairment of consciousness
with deterioration in thinking, attention, perception and memory and,
usually, drowsiness and reduced awareness of the environment. There are
important differences between the reduced wakefulness before falling
asleep and clouding in an organic state (Lipowski, 1967). Although the
patient's awareness is clouded, they may be agitated and excitable
rather than drowsy.

Clouding may be seen in a wide variety of acute organic conditions,
including drug and alcohol intoxication, head injury, meningeal
irritation caused by infection and so on. Drowsiness as a descriptive
term simply means diminished alertness and attention that is not under
the patient's control. The term clouding should be used for the
psychopathological state: impairment of consciousness, slight drowsiness
with or without agitation and difficulty with attention and
concentration. This will usually occur with organic impairment of
function, for instance, with cerebral tumour, after head injury or with
raised intracranial pressure. If it occurs in schizophrenia, it is as a
part of the cognitive deficit that has been shown sometimes to occur in
this disease (Frith, 1979). It is suggested that in this condition there
is an awareness of automatic processes that normally occur below the
level of consciousness. These processes are concerned with the selection
of appropriate interpretation of stimuli and of response. Heightened
lucidity is the opposite of clouding of consciousness described earlier.
Even though most abnormal states of consciousness show a lowering or
diminution of consciousness but heightened lucidity of consciousness
occurs in which there is a subjective sense of richer perception:
colours seem brighter and so on; there are changes in mood, usually
exhilaration, perhaps amounting to ecstasy; there is subjective
experience of increased alertness and a greater capacity for
intellectual activity, memory and understanding. Such states of
heightening of consciousness may occur in normal, healthy people,
especially in adolescence or at times of emotional, social or religious
crisis: when falling in love, on winning a large sum of money, at sudden
religious conversion and so on. Heightened lucidity is not uncommon with
certain drugs, notably with the hallucinogens (e.g., lysergic acid
diethylamide) and central nervous system stimulants (e.g., amphetamine).
A similar state of awareness may occur occasionally in early psychotic
illness, especially mania or, less often, in schizophrenia.
Abnormalities of Consciousness of Self

Alongside full wakefulness and clear awareness is an ability to
experience self, and an awareness of self, that

3 Consciousness and Disturbed Consciousness

37

is both immediate and complex. This is considered in more detail in
Chapter 12.

formation can be present, despite apparent unconsciousness. He wrote:

QUALITATIVE CHANGES OF CONSCIOUSNESS Various other organic disturbances
in brain function are recognized. These are virtually always associated
with some degree of quantitative impairment. The use of terminology in
this whole area of discourse is, unfortunately, muddled, with the same
term sometimes having different meanings and similar phenomena being
described by different words.

During the period 26--30 November I was, for the most part, completely
unconscious, unaware of the passage of time, the presence of visitors,
the attention of nurses and doctors or my transfer by trolley or
ambulance from ward to ward and hospital to hospital. However, within
that period there were several brief fluctuations (perhaps 5 min or so)
in degree of awareness, and subsequently I could recall having some
human contact and some idea (partly mistaken) about my whereabouts and
state of health in these episodes. In the first two episodes I accepted
that I was ill in some quite unspecified way and thought that I was to
be transferred for operation (unspecified) first to India and then to
Australia; in the fourth episode, although much the same in feeling, I
thought that I was changing planes on the flight home from Australia.

Delirium

Lipowski (1990) defines delirium as 'a transient organic mental syndrome
of acute onset, characterized by global impairment of cognitive
functions, a reduced level of consciousness, attentional abnormalities,
increased or decreased psychomotor activity and a disordered sleep--wake
cycle'. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th
edition (DSM-5), defines delirium as a condition in which there is a
disturbance in attention that develops over a short period of time and
that may include other disturbances in cognition, including in memory,
orientation, language and spatial ability or perception. In addition,
these disturbances are not the result of a pre-­existing neurocognitive
disorder, and investigation reveals that the disturbance is a direct
result of physiologic consequences of another medical condition
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013). It is important to
conceptually distinguish between the term delirium in the sense of a
subjective experience of a qualitatively altered state of consciousness
as against the term when it refers to a nosologic entity as described in
the DSM-­5. This chapter's focus is on the subjective experience of the
altered state of consciousness denoted by the term delirium. A detailed
account of delirium as a condition is outside the scope of this book but
can be found in Maldonado (2015). Subjective accounts of delirium are
rare, and the few published descriptions are open to criticism given the
established fact that consciousness is impaired in delirium and the
descriptions have had to be constructed with hindsight. Nonetheless,
Crammer's (2002) account confirmed partial states of arousal during
which some memory functions and belief

Crammer describes his subjective experiences and also attempts to
explain them in retrospect: I come half-­awake lying on a vague bed in a
very vague room with two young women (in white coats?) standing by my
side. I identify them as physiotherapists. One is dark-­haired (Indian?)
and says nothing; the other is fair, does the talking and laughingly
tells me that I need an operation and it will be best for me to transfer
to India for it, perhaps to a Christian Mission hospital, possibly
called Vellore, with which they have a staff exchange programme (clearly
the dark-­haired girl). I receive this information passively without
curiosity: I do not know or care where I am, or what is wrong with me,
although I am prepared to believe I have something requiring treatment
and am reassured that it will be well done. I fail to be myself, not
very aware of surroundings and with no recollection of any injury or
hospitalization. He continued, 'the idea of India may have been prompted
by the (Indian?) nurse and perhaps by an unconscious memory of a fall in
India 3 years earlier' and the idea of Australia by the fact that 'on
admission to hospital I had been struck by the Australian accents of
some of the nurses (and I had read previously in the local paper that
Oxford

38

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

hospitals had imported numbers of Australians to help), although all
this was out of the conscious mind. Perhaps an Australian nurse helped
me into the ambulance'. Crammer attempts to make sense of his experience
in retrospect. He is fully aware of the vagaries of memory and the
likelihood of bias, but nonetheless his explanations demand our
attention: The impairment of understanding -- disorientation,
misidentification of others, development of false beliefs -- which is
the central disturbance in the confusional state, developed slowly as
consciousness declined and was based in memory failure and inattention.
I believed that I was living in Australia, presumably because of an
overheard voice, and thereafter held to this belief and denied that I
could be or ever had been in the John Radcliffe Hospital (in reality,
previously I had been both an out-­patient and an in-­patient). I thought
that I had been at a doctor's social and checking-­in for a flight home.
A woman in a white coat was a physiotherapist, not a doctor; the doctor
who later inspected my monitors was a flight engineer and the nurse was
a check-­in girl ... These are not absurd answers to the self-­posed
questions (who, where, what is this?) but near-­misses based on brief,
limited sensory impression with limited associative memory, a sort of
guess without any uncertainty or any correction in relation to previous
experience or immediately subsequent events, processes that go on all
the time in normal life. In his comments on Crammer's account, Fleminger
(2002) drew attention to the fact that the experience of delirium is
akin to dreaming but that delirium is remembered with greater vividness
than dreams. Also, that whereas it is traditional to conceive of
delirium as being a disturbance of consciousness, it might be more
profitable to think of it as a disturbance of the sleep-- wake cycle.
This is why the experience of delirium is akin to dreaming and why there
is evidence that delirium is more likely in individuals with sleep
deprivation. David Aaronovitch (2011) wrote another account of delirium
in an intensive care ward setting. Although his account is similar to
that of Crammer, there was a more obvious narrative structure to the
account. This may, of course, be because Aaronovitch is a journalist and
his account necessarily had this structure. Or it

could be that even though delirium is experienced as isolated events
occurring in the ward at the time of the experience, the tendency to
structure experiences into a whole is retained and that this is what
gives accounts of delirium their narrative quality. He wrote: Every time
I closed my eyes, the inside of my eyelids would display a kaleidoscope
of red, black and yellow violent cartoon images. So for four days and
nights I didn't sleep and much of that time didn't know if it was day or
night. After a while I noticed the clock on the wall of the room
opposite, so now I could see the time, but I didn't know which 12-­hour
cycle I was in -- whether it was 7 am or 7 pm, lunchtime or four hours
before dawn. All I did know was that the nurses came and went in shifts,
handing over to each other every 12 hours in a rather cacophonous
atmosphere of greetings, innuendo and consultations over the patients'
notes, and that this handover was going on up and down the passageway.
In this passage, it is clear that Aaronovitch's time sense was
compromised and that sleep disturbance was a characteristic aspect of
his experience. In other parts of his account, he described heightened
acuity of hearing, persecutory beliefs including that a cup of coffee
was injected through a large syringe into his drip line and he had
grandiose beliefs: 'I told her of my plan to sue the hospital and
everyone associated with it. I'd get £1 million, I told her. Hadn't they
nearly killed a leading journalist on one of Britain's top newspapers?
We'd also reach a settlement in which the millionaire consultants were
forced to give me their 2012 Olympic tickets'. Both Aaronovitch's and
Crammer's accounts point to the extreme vividness of the experience and
the difficulty in distinguishing reality from an experience within an
altered state of consciousness, namely delirium. Fluctuation of
Consciousness

Fluctuations in consciousness levels are seen in various conditions. It
occurs in health, in sleep and in fatigue. In patients with epilepsy,
there is fluctuation in relation to fits, and it may occur before,
during or after the seizures. Alterations of consciousness level are
described with third-­ventricle tumours associated with variations in
intracranial pressure (Sim, 1974). In delirious states, there may be
considerable diurnal fluctuation of consciousness. Characteristically,
the patient becomes more

3 Consciousness and Disturbed Consciousness

disorientated, disturbed in mood and distracted perceptually with
illusions and hallucinations in the late evening and shows greatest
lucidity mid-­morning. Such variation of consciousness level is also
described and observed with drugs, such as mescaline, in which there may
also be fluctuations of time sense. Confusion

The concept of confusion was originally developed in France (confusion
mentale) and later in Germany (Verwirrtheit) in the 19th century
(Berrios, 1981). It is a term, imprecisely defined, referring to
subjective symptoms and objective signs indicating loss of capacity for
clear and coherent thought. It is purely a descriptive word and does not
only apply to clouding of consciousness. When physicians, psychiatrists
and nurses were asked what confusion meant, marked discordance was
found. The term should be used only if clearly defined (Simpson, 1984).
It occurs with impairment of consciousness in acute organic states and
with disruption of thought processes due to brain damage in chronic
organic states, but it is also seen in nonorganic disturbance. Thus
confusion of thinking may occur as part of the picture in functional
psychoses and in association with powerful emotion in neurotic
disorders. It should therefore be used simply to describe these
disturbances of thought and not as a term pathognomonic of organic
psychosyndromes. To simplify, therefore confusion of thinking can be
described as occurring either when the individual describes their own
thinking as being confused or when the external observer considers that
the thought processes are disturbed and confused. Phenomenologically,
therefore, it is simply a description of the patient's self-­experience
or the doctor's observation. OTHER TERMS Twilight State

A twilight state is a well-­defined interruption of the continuity of
consciousness (Sims et al., 2000). It is usually an organic condition
and occurs in the context of epilepsy, alcoholism (mania à potu), brain
trauma and general paresis; it may also occur with dissociative states.
It is characterized by (1) abrupt onset and end; (2) variable duration,
from a few hours to several weeks; and (3) the occurrence of unexpected
violent acts or emotional outbursts during otherwise

39

normal, quiet behaviour (Lishman, 1998). If the term is reserved for
these three features in combination, as a psychopathological entity,
then it should be used whenever they concur, irrespective of cause. The
forensic implications of this condition are therefore important, and it
has been used as a legal defence for violent behaviour for which the
person had subsequent amnesia. Consciousness may be markedly impaired or
relatively normal between episodes. There may be associated dream-­like
states, delusions or hallucinations. It is sometimes associated with the
temporal lobe seizures of epilepsy; it may occur with other organic
states without epilepsy; similar behaviour may occur in apparent
hysterical dissociation; and it is also described as an acute reaction
to massive catastrophe. In the forensic context, it is important to
demonstrate (1) the occurrence of similar episodes with inexplicable
behaviour before the key happening and (2) other objective evidence of
physical or mental illness. The Ganser state (described with memory
disorders in Chapter 5) is, in practice, a sort of twilight state in
which the organic element is often dubious. Mania à Potu (Pathologic
Intoxication)

This is one type of twilight state specifically associated with
alcoholism. It is important to distinguish this syndrome of acute
pathologic intoxication with alcohol from delirium tremens, which is a
symptom of withdrawal. Keller (1977) has defined mania à potu as: an
extraordinarily severe response to alcohol, especially to small amounts,
marked by apparently senseless violent behaviour, usually followed by
exhaustion, sleep and amnesia for the episode. Intoxication is
apparently not always involved and for this reason pathological reaction
to alcohol is the preferred term. The reaction is thought to be
associated with exhaustion, great strain or hypoglycaemia, and to occur
especially in people poorly defended against their own violent impulses.
Coid (1979) describes four components: 1. the condition follows the
consumption of a variable quantity of alcohol; 2. senseless, violent
behaviour then ensues; 3. there is then prolonged sleep; and 4. total or
partial amnesia for the disturbed behaviour occurs.

40

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Because there is often doubt as to whether intoxication really followed
the consumption of an inappropriately small amount of alcohol and
because several of the other causal factors are diagnostic categories in
their own right (hypoglycaemia, epilepsy), Coid would do away with the
diagnostic category of pathologic intoxication in the preceding
definition, leaving only acute drunkenness or another condition
associated with alcohol intake. Automatism

Automatism implies action taking place in the absence of consciousness.
It has been defined by Fenwick (1990) as follows: An automatism is an
involuntary piece of behaviour over which an individual has no control.
The behaviour itself is usually inappropriate to the circumstances, and
may be out of character for the individual. It can be complex,
co-­ordinated, and apparently purposeful and directed, though lacking in
judgement. Afterwards, the individual may have no recollection, or only
partial and confused memory, of his actions. Epileptic automatism may be
defined as a state of clouding of consciousness that occurs during or
immediately after a seizure and during which the individual retains
control of posture and muscle tone and performs simple or complex
movements and actions without being aware of what is happening (Fenton,
1975). It occurs as part of the clinical presentation of psychomotor
epilepsy, most often arising from discharge in the temporal lobes. It
was particularly common in those patients with chronic epilepsy who were
resident in an epilepsy colony or a mental hospital. An aura may be the
first sign of an epileptic attack with temporal lobe automatism and may
be manifested as abdominal sensations; feelings of confusion with
thinking; sensations elsewhere in the body, especially the head;
hallucinations or illusions (especially olfactory or gustatory); and
motor abnormalities such as tonic contracture, masticatory movement,
salivation or swallowing. Behaviour during automatism is usually
purposeful and often appropriate, for instance, continuing to dry the
dishes. Awareness of the environment is impaired;

the patient appears to be only partly aware of being spoken to and does
not reply appropriately. Initially, activity is diminished, with staring
eyes and slumped posture; it then becomes stereotyped, with repetitive
movements, lip smacking, fumbling and other actions. Finally, more
complex purposeful behaviour occurs, such as walking about, making
irrelevant utterances, removing clothing and so on. Sometimes, the
patient may continue during automatism with whatever they were doing
before---for example, driving their car---although there is subsequent
amnesia, and the behaviour or speech at the time never appears entirely
normal. Violence is rare during automatism, and when it occurs, it
usually amounts to resisting restraint. However, automatism is, rarely,
cited as an explanation for a person's violent and criminal action of
which they are unaware afterwards. The legal definition then becomes
'The state of a person who though capable of action, is not conscious of
what he is doing ... it means unconscious, involuntary action and it is
a defence because the mind does not go with what is being done'
(Viscount Kilmuir, 1963). Clearly, when such violent behaviour occurs,
automatism fulfils the criteria for the definition of twilight state as
defined earlier. Speech automatism occurs when there is utterance of
identifiable words or phrases at some stage during the epileptic attack
of which the patient has no memory later. Phenomenologically, then,
automatism is action without any knowledge of acting, and it is the
latter claim that requires careful investigation. Dream-­like (Oneiroid)
State

This is an unsatisfactory term not clearly differentiated from twilight
state or delirium. The patient is disorientated and confused and
experiences elaborate hallucinations, usually visual. There is
impairment of consciousness and marked emotional change, which may be
terror or enjoyment of the hallucinatory experiences; there may also be
auditory or tactile hallucinations. The patient may appear to be living
in a dream world, and occupational delirium could be mentioned in this
context, for instance, the ship's petty officer admitted to hospital
after a head injury at sea (associated with excess alcohol intake), who
kept shouting, 'Man the boats.'

3 Consciousness and Disturbed Consciousness

It is important to look for other symptoms or organic states to make the
important distinction between physical illness and a dissociative
nonorganic condition. Stupor

'Stupor names a symptom complex whose central feature is a reduction in,
or absence of, relational functions: that is, action and speech'
(Berrios, 1996). It is distinct from coma and does not lie on a
continuum from wakefulness to coma. This term should be reserved for the
syndrome in which mutism and akinesis occur; that is, the inability to
initiate speech or action in a patient who appears awake and even alert.
It usually occurs with some degree of clouding of consciousness but does
not refer solely to a diminished level. The patient may look ahead or
their eyes may wander, but they appear to take nothing in. This syndrome
is characteristic of lesions in the area of the diencephalon and upper
brainstem and also the frontal lobe and basal ganglia, and the term
akinetic mutism has sometimes been reserved by neurologists to describe
a much more narrowly defined organic syndrome. A rare but specific
condition involving the motor pathways in the ventral pons is called the
locked-­in syndrome in which there is quadriplegia and anarthria with
preserved consciousness and vertical eye movement (Plum and Posner,
1972; Smith and Delargy, 2005). It is important to realize, however,
that the symptoms of akinesis and mutism in a conscious patient also
occur with schizophrenia, with affective psychoses (both depressive and
manic) and in dissociative states. The difference between psychogenic
(so-­ called functional) and neurologic (organic) causes of stupor can be
clinically extremely perplexing. Psychiatric definitions have demanded
that the condition occurs when there is 'a complete absence, in clear
consciousness, of any voluntary movements' (Wing et al., 1974). Of
course, it is not possible at the time of observation to know whether
consciousness is quite clear or not, and even for functional stupors,
subsequent amnesia is common. A phenomenological definition of stupor
must therefore exclude the state of consciousness of a mute patient, and
diagnosis of stupor must then be followed by investigation of the
differential

41

diagnosis, which includes both organic and nonorganic conditions. Sleep
Disorders

These are discussed in Chapter 4. REFERENCES Aaronovitch, D., 2011. ICU
psychosis---my nightmare in hospital. The Times. 12 November 2011.
Aggernaes, A., 1975. The concepts: disturbed state of consciousness and
psychosis. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 51, 119--133. American Psychiatric
Association, 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, fifth ed. American Psychiatric Publishing, Washington, DC.
Baars, B.J., Franklin, S., 2007. An architectural model of conscious and
unconscious brain functions: global workspace theory and IDA. Neural
Netw 20, 955--961. Berrios, G.E., 1981. Delirium and confusion in the
19th century: a conceptual history. Br. J. Psychiatry. 139, 439--449.
Berrios, G.E., 1996. The History of Mental Symptoms: Descriptive
Psychopathology since the Nineteenth Century. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge. Bock, G.R., Marsh, J., 1993. Experimental and
Theoretical Studies of Consciousness. John Wiley, Chichester. Brodie,
B.C., 1854. Psychological inquiries. In: A Series of Essays. Longman,
Brown, Green & Longman, London. Coid, J., 1979. Mania à potu: a critical
review of pathological intoxication. Psychol. Med. 9, 709--719.
Conference of Medical Royal Colleges and Their Faculties, 1976.
Diagnosis of brain death. Br. Med. J. 2, 1187--1188. Crammer, J.L.,
2002. Subjective experience of a confusional state. Br. J. Psychiatry.
180, 71--75. Damasio, A., 1999. The Feeling of what Happens: Body and
Emotion in the Making of Consciousness. William Heinemann, London.
Dennett, D., 1991. Consciousness Explained. Allen Lane, London. Fenton,
G.W., 1975. Epilepsy and automatism. In: Silverstone, T., Barraclough,
B. (Eds.), Contemporary Psychiatry. Headley Brothers, Ashford,
pp. 429--439. Fenwick, P., 1990. Automatism. In: Bluglass, R., Bowden,
P. (Eds.), Principles and Practice of Forensic Psychiatry. Churchill
Livingstone, Edinburgh. Fleminger, S., 2002. Remembering delirium. Br.
J. Psychiatry. 180, 4--5. Frith, C.D., 1979. Consciousness, information
processing and schizophrenia. Br. J. Psychiatry. 134, 225--235.
Griesinger, W., 1868, 1941. Quoted in Zilboorg, G. In: Henry, G.W.
(Ed.), A History of Medical Psychology. W.W. Norton, New York. Jaspers,
K., 1997. In: Hoenig, J., Hamilton, M.W., Trans (Eds.), General
Psychopathology. The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. Keller,
M., 1977. A lexicon of disablements related to alcohol consumption.
Edwards, G., Gross, M.M., Keller, M., Moser, J., Room, R., (Eds). In:
Alcohol Related Disabilities. World Health Organization, Geneva.
Kilmuir, V., 1963. Bratty v Attorney General for Northern Ireland AC
386, 1961. 3WLR965; (1961) 3 All ER 523. Lipowski, Z.J., 1967. Delirium,
clouding of consciousness and confusion. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 145,
227--255. Lipowski, Z.J., 1990. Delirium: Acute Confusional States.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.

42

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Lishman, W.A., 1998. Organic Psychiatry: The Psychological Consequences
of Cerebral Disorder, third ed. Blackwell Scientific, Oxford. Maldonado,
J.R., 2015. Delirium -- neurobiology, characteristics, and management.
In: Fogel, B.S., Greenberg, D.B. (Eds.), Psychiatric Care of the Medical
Patient, third ed. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Plum, F., Posner,
J.B., 1972. Diagnosis of Stupor and Coma, second ed. F.A. Davis,
Philadelphia. Sim, M., 1974. Guide to Psychiatry. Churchill Livingstone,
Edinburgh. Simpson, C.J., 1984. Doctors and nurses use of the word
confused. Br. J. Psychiatry. 145, 441--443. Sims, A., Mundt, C., Berner,
P., Barocka, A., 2000. Descriptive phenomenology. In: Gelder, M.G.,
López-­Ibor, J.J., Andreasen, N.

(Eds.), New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. Smith, E., Delargy, M., 2005. Locked-­in syndrome. Br. Med. J.
330, 406--409. Teasdale, G., Jennett, B., 1974. Assessment of coma and
impaired consciousness: a practical scale. Lancet 2, 81--84. Tononi, G.,
Koch, C., 2008. The neural correlates of consciousness: an update. Ann.
N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1124, 239--261. Wing, J.K., Cooper, J.E., Sartorius,
N., 1974. The Measurement and Classification of Psychiatric Symptoms.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Chapter 4

Attention, Concentration, Orientation and Sleep Chapter Outline Summary
Attention, Awareness and Concentration Alteration of the Degree of
Attention Disorder of Attention in Psychosis Hemi-­Inattention
Orientation Disorientation Sleep Disorders Insomnia Hypersomnia
Parasomnias Dreams Hypnosis

KEYWORDS Attention Concentration Sleep Hypersomnia Parasomnia Hypnosis

Summary Consciousness, attention, concentration and sleep are all
interrelated phenomena. In the previous chapter, consciousness and its
abnormalities were described. Attention is often likened to a beam of
light that focuses on a limited area of interest within a general field,
but it is best to conceive of it as a limited-­capacity channel that is
dynamic in the selection and inhibition of information for further
processing (Broadbent, 1958; Smith and Kosslyn, 2007). It is important
for an organism's ability to engage with aspects of its environment. It
is required for orientating the organism within its environment.
Abnormalities of impairment therefore underlie such disparate phenomena
as disorientation and impairment of new learning. The sleep--wake cycle
is a physiologic mechanism that determines the alteration from
wakefulness, that is, consciousness and the special temporary state of
unconsciousness that is manifest as sleep. Abnormalities of this cycle
including disturbances of amount, quality and so forth are described in
this chapter. Come, Sleep! O Sleep, the certain knot of peace The
baiting--place of wit, the balm of woe, The poor man's wealth, the
prisoner's release, Th' indifferent judge between the high and low. Sir
Philip Sidney (1554--86), Astrophel and Stella, sonnet 39

43

44

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

The terms attention, concentration and orientation have often been used
very loosely. It is suggested that their use is restricted to the
following. Attention is the active or passive focusing of consciousness
on an experience such as sensory inputs, motor programmes, memories or
internal representations. It can be defined as the process that enhances
some information and inhibits others, thereby allowing us to select some
information for further processing (Smith and Kosslyn, 2007). The
concept overlaps with the terms alertness, awareness and responsiveness.
Voluntary attention occurs when the subject deliberately focuses his
attention on an internal or external event; involuntary attention occurs
when the event attracts the subject's attention without his conscious
effort. Concentration is only one aspect of attention. It involves
focused or selective attention. Other aspects of attention include
sustained attention, or vigilance, divided attention and alternating
attention. Orientation is an awareness of one's setting in time and
place and of the realities of one's person and situation. It is not a
discrete function but is closely bound up with memory and the clarity or
coherence of thought. This chapter is concerned with cognitive function,
but it is not limited to the functions that are disturbed by organic
lesions and covers a wider field than just consciousness and its
disorders.

Attention, Awareness and Concentration Attention is a different function
from consciousness, but it is dependent on it. Thus variable degrees of
attention are possible with full consciousness, but complete attention
and concentration are impossible with diminished consciousness. William
James' (1842--1910) (1890) account is still a good starting point:
Attention is ... the taking into possession of the mind, in clear and
vivid form, of one out of what seem several simultaneously possible
objects or trains of thought. Focalization, concentration, of
consciousness are of its essence. There are passive and active modes of
attention. In passive attention, the subject responds to, for example, a
loud noise, whereas in active attention, an

individual's prior expectations and goals determine in a top-­down
fashion what is attended to (for a fuller description, see Eysenck and
Keane, 2010). A central feature of attention is its limited capacity.
This refers to the fact that only so much cognitive processing activity
can be carried out at any one time. Attentional capacity is usually
tested by the digit span, and, although it is a relatively stable
feature of attention, it is prone to influence by, for example, fatigue,
depression and brain injury. Components of attention include orientating
to sensory events, detecting signals for focused processing and
maintaining a vigilant and alert state. It is important to recognize
that knowledge, prior beliefs, goals and expectations can alter the
speed and accuracy of the processes that select meaningful or desirable
information from the environment. There are four other aspects of
attention. Focused, or selective, attention refers to the capacity to
highlight the one or two important stimuli or ideas being dealt with
while suppressing awareness of competing distractions. This aspect of
attention is usually referred to as concentration. 'Serial sevens' are
usually employed to assess this aspect of attention, and it requires
focused attention as well as other cognitive processes. Sustained
attention, or vigilance, involves the ability to maintain attentional
activity over a period of time. It is usually measured by vigilance
tests. Divided attention involves the ability to respond to more than
one task at a time or to multiple elements within a task. Alternating
attention allows for shifts in focus of attention and tasks (Lezak et
al., 2004; Table 4.1). Automatic cognitive processes, that is, those
that occur without intention, that are involuntary and that do not
interfere with other ongoing activities, exist in parallel with those
that require attentive processes (Kolb and Whishaw, 1996). These
automatic processes allow for the effortless extraction of features of a
perception in a bottom-­up fashion, whereas attentive processes allow for
the top-­down processing of information (Fig. 4.1). ALTERATION OF THE
DEGREE OF ATTENTION Attention is decreased in normal people in sleep,
dreams, hypnotic states, fatigue and boredom. It may be pathologically
decreased in organic states, usually with lowering of consciousness, for
instance, with head injury, acute toxic confusional states such as

4

TABLE 4.1 Aspects of Attention Aspect of Attention

Definition

Focused attention

The capacity to highlight important stimuli while suppressing awareness
of competing distractions The capacity to maintain attentional activity
over a prolonged period The ability to respond to more than one task at
a time, including taking account of the multiple elements within a
complex task The ability to shift attentional focus from task to task
The extent of the processing ability inherent in the attentional system;
it is often considered to be a form of working memory

Sustained attention or vigilance Divided attention

Alternating attention Attentional capacity

Attention, Concentration, Orientation and Sleep

drug-­and alcohol-­induced conditions, epilepsy, raised intracranial
pressure and brainstem lesions. In psychogenic states, attention may be
altered, for example, it may be diminished in dissociative disorders.
Narrowing of attention is also prominent in depressive illness in which
the morbid mood state results in attention being limited to a restricted
number of themes--- mostly unhappy or morbid ones. A severe deficit of
attention is a prominent feature in the hyperkinetic disorders in
childhood (World Health Organization, 1992) but also occurs in adult
life (see Chapter 3). Observation of the child's behaviour by adults
such as parents or teachers concentrates on three aspects: inattention,
impulsiveness and hyperactivity. Inattention is shown in that the child,
most often a boy and usually aged between 3 and 10 years, fails to
finish activities he starts, appears not to listen, is easily
distracted, has difficulty concentrating on any task requiring sustained
attention and has difficulty sticking to a play activity.

Normal Object of awareness Conscious awareness Unconscious

Conscious awareness

Field of attention

Unconscious

Clear consciousness with voluntary attention directed towards an object
of awareness (e.g., watching a radar screen)

Clear consciousness with involuntary attention drawn to a field of
attention (e.g., thinking in a deck chair)

Pathological

Narrowing of consciousness with constriction of the field of attention
(e.g., epileptic aura)

45

Lowering of consciousness with patchy areas of attention

Fig. 4.1 Variations in level of awareness.

46

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Impairment of focused attention and concentration denotes an inability
to exercise attention on an object in a purposeful way, implying
weakening of the determining tendency. This is a feature of mania and
hypomania and also occurs in organic states. These features combine to
show the symptoms of distractibility, which is prominent in mania and
some organic states. Narrowing of attention entails the ability of the
subject to focus on a small part of the field of awareness and occurs in
conditions in which involuntary attention is directed elsewhere---by
hallucinations, by delusions or by strong emotion. After an unprofitable
conversation with a patient with schizophrenia in which she repeatedly
ignored questions, she said, 'I wish you would not interrupt when I am
being given my instructions'.

detailed in the seminal studies of McGhie and Chapman (1961). In
Chapman's (1966) later work, he gave several examples of problems with
attention:

DISORDER OF ATTENTION IN PSYCHOSIS To recapitulate, attention is
designed to present to the mind, with clarity and vividness, an
appropriate selection, of only some of the objects in our environment
where there are several simultaneous possible objects. It includes the
capacity to focus, sustain, disengage and shift attention. There is a
passive and an active element to attention, the former controlled in a
bottom-­up approach by external stimuli and the latter controlled in a
top-­down approach by the individual's goals or expectations. There is
also an attentional capacity, which is the extent of the inherent or
intrinsic processing capacity of the attentional system. A full
description of the current cognitive neuroscience model of attention is
outside of the scope of this chapter. There is little doubt that there
are attentional problems that are demonstrable on formal cognitive
neuropsychological testing associated with psychiatric disorders. Thus
impairments of attention and/or working memory are demonstrable in
diverse conditions such as generalized anxiety disorder, depressive
disorder, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia and organic brain disorders
such as delirium and dementia. Attentional disturbance is a core aspect
of attention deficit/ hyperactivity disorder. Subjective accounts of
abnormal attention in early schizophrenia are at their most rich and

It happens when I'm watching the television as well and my concentration
drifts away and focuses on any point in the room and I can't pick
anything up that is going on. I go into a daze because I can't
concentrate long enough to keep up the conversation and something lifts
up inside my head and puts me into a trance. (Case 12).

I can't shut things out of my mind and everything closes in on me. It
stops me thinking and then the mind goes blank and everything gets
switched off. I can't pick things up to memorize because I am so
absorbing everything around me and take in too much so that I can't
retain for any length of time -- only a few seconds, and I can't do
simple habits like walking or cleaning my teeth. I have to use all my
mind to do these things. (Case 10). At times there is nothing to hold
the mind and this is when I go into a trance. (Case 15).

Nothing settles in my mind -- not even for a second. It just comes in
and then it's out. My mind goes away -- too many things come into my
head at once and I lose control. I get afraid of walking when this
happens. My feet just walk away from me and I've no control over myself.
(Case 29). These subjective descriptions draw attention to a number of
cognitive difficulties, including problems with focusing attention, of
disengaging from environmental cues and of selecting from a range of
possible cues in the environment and thereby feeling overwhelmed by
information. These are disparate difficulties and probably reflect
distinct neural underpinnings. The most distinct subjective description
refers to being overwhelmed by information. This speaks to Broadbent's
(1958) theory in which he proposed a sensory buffer that allows only
certain sensory data to pass through a filter for later processing and
that this filter prevents overloading of the limited capacity mechanism
beyond the filter.

4

McGhie and Chapman's (1961) own view is expressed as follows: Now let us
suppose that there is a breakdown in this selective--inhibitory function
of attention. Consciousness would be flooded with an undifferentiated
mass of incoming sensory data, transmitted from the environment via the
sense organs. To this involuntary tide of impressions there would be
added the diverse internal images, and their associations, which would
no longer be coordinated with incoming information. Perception would
revert to the passive and involuntary assimilative process of early
childhood and, if the incoming flood were to carry on unchecked, it
would gradually sweep away the stable constructs of a former reality.
John Cutting interprets these accounts differently. He makes the point
that the patients had heightened attention rather than that the proposed
sensory buffer was unable to streamline what information was available
for processing (Cutting, 2011). Furthermore, Cutting used the term lures
to describe features of the environment that seemed to capture the
attention of patients with schizophrenia in such a manner that they were
unable to disengage their attention. In his view, the potential lures
are inanimate objects in the physical environment. In cognitive
neuroscience terms, this implies an impairment of passive attention so
that the patient is excessively liable to passive attentional capture.
In addition, there are problems with disengaging and shifting attention.
There is well-­established evidence that in mood disorders, including
bipolar mood disorders, during the acute phase as well as in the
euthymic state, there are demonstrable impairments in sustained
attention and working memory (Clark et al., 2002; Marvel and Paradiso,
2004; Thompson et al., 2005). In addition, however, depressed mood is
often associated with a preoccupation with gloomy thoughts to such an
extent that concentration and attention are impaired. This suggests that
attention, whether active or passive, can be in thrall to negatively
valued features of the individual's inner or external world. In such a
situation, misinterpretations of perception influenced by the mood state
frequently arise. Every hearse is believed to be there to carry the
patient to the graveyard, and a passing black car is noticed just
sufficiently to be

Attention, Concentration, Orientation and Sleep

47

considered as strengthening this belief. Similarly, acute anxiety often
results in diminished attention. Cutting (2011) argues that, in mood
disorder, what lures the individual's attention are people and not
objects, in contrast to schizophrenia in which the reverse is true. The
subjective description to support this view is drawn from Minkowski
(1970): I feel that, when you insist, I ought to submit to your will and
do what you demand of me. It irritates me to be someone's fool, but I am
incapable of resisting; I feel that you have control of me. I don't dare
do anything unless you ask me to. I do everything unconsciously. If you
insist that I go out, I will go out. I can't resist anymore. It is
atrocious! After dinner, when the others get up from the table, I get up
automatically, carried along by their movements. I am the reflection of
others. In sum, I vibrate with people, I reflect their movements; it is
their vibrations that make me vibrate myself. Minkowski classifies this
as an example of the influence of events, words and people on patients
in depressive states. I am uncertain that this is an example of passive
attention, namely, of what Cutting terms lures. Nonetheless, it is
incontrovertible that depressed mood is associated with gloomy thoughts,
memories of past morbid incidents to such a degree that there is marked
impairment of concentration and attention. This suggests that both
active and passive attention may be 'lured' by negative aspects of the
patient's inner world. As described earlier, schizophrenia is recognized
as involving deficits of attention (Posner et al., 1988). However, there
is considerable difficulty in establishing what aspects of attention are
impaired in schizophrenia because the tasks that are used to assess
attention may involve other cognitive functions, particularly given that
attention is closely tied to concepts of working memory and to executive
function. Current evidence suggests that schizophrenia is associated
with significant impairment in the control of selection, the ability to
identify and attend to task-­relevant inputs, whereas there may not be
impairment of the implementation of selection---the processes that
determine the processing of relevant informational inputs (Luck and
Gold, 2008).

48

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

It seems likely that in schizophrenia, on the basis of these reports,
there is a greater susceptibility to lures within the environment that
capture the passive attention of the patient. A good way to understand
this is to imagine how a sudden, unexpected noise captures our passive
attention. It does seem as if patients with schizophrenia are in thrall
to irrelevant features of their environment. HEMI-­INATTENTION A number
of neuropsychiatric conditions illustrate the relationship between
disorders of attention and impaired conscious awareness of objects.
These conditions are complex and not completely understood. They include
unilateral neglect, anosodiaphoria (lack of concern about hemiparesis),
defective appreciation of hemiparesis with rationalization, denial of
hemiparesis and unawareness of hemiparesis (anosognosia). In their
seminal paper, Paterson and Zangwill (1944) described unilateral neglect
in a previously healthy male who suffered a penetrating injury of the
right parietal occipital region after an explosion in 1943. He lost
consciousness for 2 or 3 minutes and showed minimal post-­traumatic and
retrograde amnesia. On recovery his most significant deficit was a
strong neglect of the left side of space. He collided with objects on
his left and ignored food on the left side of his dish. It was concluded
that the lesion was on the upper borders of the supramarginal and
angular gyrus on the right side (Mattingley, 1996). The aim in this
section is not to examine in detail the varying hypothesis and findings
regarding these disorders of conscious awareness but to draw out the
fact that syndromes of unawareness exist, that these syndromes involve
attentional systems and that these systems require intact brain function
in particular hemispheres and regions. These conditions in which
individuals demonstrate a degree of unawareness or denial of hemiplegia
have been recognized for well over a century by, among others, Babinski
(1857--1932), Lhermitte (1877--1959) and Critchley (1900--97). Stuss and
Benson (1986) described a classic case of denial of hemiplegia:

A 62-­year old man suffered a subarachnoid haemorrhage. A right middle
cerebral artery was demonstrated and successfully ligated, but the
patient awoke with left hemiplegia. At first he vehemently denied the
hemiplegia. At this time he was disoriented and had a retrograde amnesia
covering at least 2 years prior to the surgery. When evaluated early one
morning about 2 weeks post-­ operatively, he spontaneously described his
paralysis, was oriented to both time and place, but had no memory of his
cranial surgery. In another case they described the extent to which
individuals with anosognosia will go to deny their disability: A 57-­year
old hypertensive man sustained an acute intracerebral haemorrhage
involving the right putamen. On admission to hospital he was stuporous
with profound left hemiplegia, left hemisensory loss, and left
hemianopsia ... He was disoriented for time and place, could not
remember his doctors' names, and actively denied any physical
disability. When asked if he could walk or dance, he would immediately
say yes; when asked to raise his arms or legs, he would raise the right
limbs and insist that both arms or legs had been raised. When his
hemiplegia was demonstrated to him he would accept the obvious fact and
repeat the examiner's statement concerning the cause of his disability
but within minutes, if asked whether he had any disability, he would
adamantly deny disability. These accounts of unilateral neglect and
anosognosia emphasize that the neural systems underpinning attention to
both right and left visual fields are probably controlled by the right
hemisphere, whereas the dominant hemisphere (the left hemisphere in
right-­handed individuals) only oversees the contralateral visual fields.
Hence damage to the dominant hemisphere is not followed by unilateral
neglect or anosognosia because the right hemisphere continues to monitor
sensory information from all fields. Damage to the right hemisphere, on
the other hand, is accompanied by hemineglect and anosognosia for the
left visual field. However, these matters also pertain not merely to
visual fields but also to how our bodies are experienced. This is made
most manifest in a

4

case that presented after embolism of the right cerebral artery reported
by Critchley (1950): It felt as if I was missing one side of my body
(the left), but it also felt as if the dummy side was lined with a piece
of iron so heavy that I could not move ... I even fancied my head to be
narrow, but the left side from the centre felt heavy, as if filled with
bricks. In summary, abnormalities of attention have a complex set of
consequences, not merely inattentiveness or impaired concentration as
measured by crude bedside tests but also significant abnormalities that
would not normally be attributed to abnormalities of attention and that
are demonstrable in schizophrenia, mood disorders and neuropsychiatric
disorders.

Orientation Orientation is the capacity of an individual to accurately
gauge time, space and person in his current setting. This enables him to
make sense of, and be at home in, his environment. This is virtually the
same faculty as intellectual grasp in that various perceptual cues are
used, and with correct sense of time and place, the person is able to
come to appropriate conclusions from his context. A man suffering from
an advanced dementia was being interviewed by a doctor in the presence
of a dozen student nurses who were taking notes with pen and notebook.
When asked where he was, he looked around the rather dingy hospital
classroom and said, 'Well, we're waiting to see the doctor'. He had
picked up certain clues that reminded him of a general practitioner's
waiting room; he had totally missed the fact that all the nurses were in
uniform, that they were taking notes and that he was being asked formal
questions. He was disorientated in place and in person. Orientation in
time is labile and quite readily disturbed by rapt concentration, strong
emotion or organic brain factors (for example, alcoholic intoxication).
Milder degrees of disorientation are shown by inaccuracy of more than
half an hour for the time of day or duration of interview. More advanced
states are demonstrated with incorrect day of the week, year or period
of day. Yet further disturbance is shown when the season of the year is
not known correctly.

Attention, Concentration, Orientation and Sleep

49

Orientation in space is disturbed later in the disease process than
time. A patient may be unable to find his way, especially in an area
that is relatively new to him. It may take him an inordinate length of
time to learn his way to the dining table in the ward after admission.
Disorientation in time and place are, when clearly established, evidence
of an organic mental state; they may be the earliest signs in a
dementing process. In disorientation for person, the patient fails to
remember his own name. Loss of knowledge of the patient's own name and
identity occurs at a very late stage of organic deterioration. Loss of
intellectual grasp (apprehension) occurs in organic states as a form of
disorientation, usually combined with other evidence of deterioration.
Such a person cannot understand the context of his present situation and
connects outside objects and events with himself. Disorientation may
occur with a disturbance of consciousness, attention, perception or
intelligence. In severe intellectual defect and severe disturbances of
memory, orientation is impaired even when consciousness is clear
(Scharfetter, 1980). DISORIENTATION Orientation may fluctuate in some
organic conditions; for example, a patient with delirium associated with
congestive cardiac failure was disorientated in time every evening but
quite clear mentally in the morning. Disorientation in time and loss of
intellectual grasp (situational disorientation) usually occur first in a
progressive illness; disorientation in place usually occurs later and,
in person, last of all. Disorientation for one's own identity occurs at
a later stage than for that of other people. An elderly woman who knew
who she was and her previous status as a professor's wife kept on
referring to her daughter as 'that minx who comes in every time the
doctor visits'. Delusions that Mimic Disorientation

It is, of course, important to understand the phenomenological
distinction between disorientation and a delusion that results in
misinterpretation of place, of situation or of person. Disorientation is
usually associated with other organic features, such as lowering of
consciousness or disturbance of memory. Delusions of misorientation have
the features of a delusion (see Chapter 8): a person on the ward may
believe himself

50

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

to be in prison, and a visiting relative may be considered to be an
interrogator from the Gestapo. Dissociation and Disorientation

Definite, undisputed disorientation is indicative of either an acute
organic brain syndrome if coupled with lowering of consciousness or
chronic organic deterioration. Dissociative disorders may mimic this,
however, with apparent disorientation. Careful examination of the mental
state is likely to reveal suggestive discrepancies; for example,
disorientation for person may be much more marked than for time or may
be bizarre to an excessive extent. A patient is described in the next
chapter who lived in Birmingham, United Kingdom, but found himself after
a dissociative fugue in Montreal. Although apparently disorientated, he
actually showed an abnormality of memory as part of a dissociative
state.

Sleep Disorders Sleep---deep, satisfying and undisturbed---is
conventionally associated with well-­being and good health, as
exemplified by the quotation with which this chapter begins; its absence
or poor quality is equally held to account for disorder of mood and
misery. There is a relationship between disturbed sleep and psychiatric
disorder; mental illness may cause and manifest as sleep disturbance,
disturbed sleep may precipitate psychiatric symptoms, or the two may
occur together but independently. The International Classification of
Sleep Disorders subsumes 85 sleep disorders into seven categories
including: 1. insomnias, 2. sleep-­related breathing disorders, 3.
hypersomnias not due to a breathing disorder, 4. parasomnias, 5.
sleep-­related movements disorders, 6. other sleep disorders, and 7.
isolated symptoms, apparently normal variants and unresolved issues. For
a fuller account, see American Academy of Sleep Medicine (2005). The
objective assessment of sleep is usually carried out
electrophysiologically. Five stages of sleep can be identified
(Rechtschaffen and Kales, 1968). Sleep is entered through non--rapid eye
movement (NREM)

sleep. NREM and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep alternate with a period
near 90 minutes. NREM sleep accounts for approximately 75% to 80% of
sleep, and REM sleep accounts for 20% to 25% of sleep, occurring in four
to six discrete episodes (Pelayo and Dement, 2017). Using an
electroencephalogram and electromyogram of the external ocular muscles,
the duration of the various stages is recorded. It has been shown that
REM sleep is associated with dreaming. With current neuroimaging
techniques, it is possible, by showing changes in regional cerebral
blood flow, to localize and represent visually altered activity,
especially in the medial thalamus, which is associated with different
stages of sleep from relaxed wakefulness to the slow-­wave sleep of stage
4. There are also changes in the visual and auditory cortex, possibly
associated with dreaming (Hofle et al., 1997). When considering the
quality and duration of sleep and its stages and whether this amounts to
a symptom, it is important to take into account the age of the patient,
any medication he may be taking and whether he has slept during the day.
The subjective experience, as described by the patient, may be very
different from the objective findings of observation and measurement.
The psychiatrist should investigate the meaning of this discrepancy
phenomenologically and consider the consequences for diagnosis and
treatment. INSOMNIA Insomnia implies subjective dissatisfaction with the
duration or quality of sleep (Oswald, 1981); however, in many
psychiatric conditions there is also objective disturbance of sleep.
There are several approaches to the definition of insomnia from the
subjective that merely specifies whether an individual has had trouble
sleeping to the strictly formal that stipulates that there must be
greater than 30 minutes of sleep-­onset latency or wake time after sleep
onset (Lichstein et al., 2017). Formally, insomnia is defined as a
complaint of dissatisfaction with sleep quality associated with
difficulty initiating sleep, difficulty maintaining sleep that is
characterized by frequent awakenings or problems returning to sleep
after awakenings or early-­morning awakening with inability to return to
sleep (Ahmed and Thorpy, 2010; American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
The individual may complain that the duration of sleep is too short;
that sleep feels broken, less

4

refreshing or insufficiently deep; or that the pattern of sleep has
changed for the worse. Insomnia is more common in women and in older
people and is more often associated with a feeling of excessive mental
arousal than bodily disorder. Causes of dissatisfaction include
unrealistic expectations from the elderly that they will sleep for as
long as they did when they were younger and from the sedentary that they
will sleep as deeply as after exhausting physical activity. A discussion
of primary insomnia is outside the scope of this book. It is well
recognized that complaints of sleeping poorly are common and occur in
many psychiatric disorders, including depression, generalized anxiety,
panic and phobia, hypochondriasis and personality disorders. They are
among the most frequent symptoms in anxiety-­related disorders and
affective disorders. Comparing those people with neuroses with a normal
population, Jovanovic (1978) found that neurotic patients complained of
more wakefulness in the first third of the night; they spent more time
lying awake in bed, they awoke during the night more frequently, they
spent a relatively short period in deep sleep and their sleep was more
likely to be impaired by unfamiliar surroundings. Those with major
depressive disorder suffer from disturbed sleep in which they take
longer to fall asleep and spend less time asleep because of periods of
wakefulness during the night and early-­morning wakening. Early insomnia,
or difficulty in getting to sleep occurs in normal people who are
aroused through anxiety or excitement. Their thoughts tend to dwell on
the affect-­laden experiences of the immediate past and also to rehearse
ways of dealing with problems. Fatigue is experienced, but there is also
a high level of arousal that prevents the necessary relaxation and
withdrawal from perception that is required for sleeping. Late insomnia,
or early-­morning wakening, is particularly characteristic of the
depressive phase of affective disorders. The patient may wake frequently
in the night after getting off to sleep satisfactorily and thenceforward
sleep only fitfully and lightly. Alternatively, he may wake early in the
morning and be unable to get to sleep again. The important
characteristic of depression is that there is a marked change in sleep
rhythm from the normal pattern for that person. In depression, the
early-­morning wakening is often associated with marked diurnality of
mood, with the most severe feelings of despondency and retardation
occurring in

Attention, Concentration, Orientation and Sleep

51

the early morning. There is also often a marked reduction of sleep
requirement in mania. The mean sleep requirement diminishes with
increasing age. It is usually about 7 to 8 hours through the middle
adult years but is markedly reduced from about 50 years of age onwards.
With insomnia, intermediate stages of light, restless sleep occur. These
are often associated with abnormal experience in the sleepy state, such
as hypnagogic and hypnopompic hallucinations (Chapter 7).
Pseudohallucinations also occur, as does vivid imagery that is difficult
to distinguish from hallucination. Normally, passage into sleep is rapid
and occurs passively rather than with active intention to sleep. Waking
is also normally rapid, and the slowing of this process of becoming
awake may be described as a symptom: a complaint of feeling drowsy and
being incompetent and uncoordinated for an excessive time on
wakening---in other words, sleep drunkenness or more accurately
confusional arousals from NREM sleep in which confusion and
disorientation and slowed speech and mentation occur (Lishman, 1997;
Ahmed and Thorpy, 2010). Such patients may sleep for 17 hours or more
and always require vigorous stimulation to wake them. The condition may
persist throughout life. HYPERSOMNIA In hypersomnia the defining
characteristic is daytime sleepiness. These cases are more often seen by
a neurologist than a psychiatrist and are described only briefly here.
In the Kleine-­Levin syndrome, attacks of somnolence occur, usually in
adolescents. The condition is rare. In earlier accounts, the patient
sleeps excessively by day and night but is rousable as from normal
sleep. When awake, the patient eats voraciously (megaphagia) and may
show marked irritability (Critchley, 1962). More recently it has become
clearer that the condition is characterized by relapsing--remitting
episodes of severe hypersomnia, cognitive impairment, apathy,
derealization and psychiatric and behavioural disturbances. Boys are
more frequently affected than girls. Slightly more than half of patients
have hyperphagia, are hypersexual (mainly boys) or have depressed mood
(mainly girls), and about a third have other psychiatric symptoms, such
as anxiety, delusions or hallucinations. The hallucinations are usually
brief and visual

52

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

in nature---for example, of snakes near the bed or of a dangerous man
with a bear in the hospital elevator (Arnulf, 2017). The delusions are
said to be grandiose or persecutory in nature. Although some symptoms
are similar to those in patients with encephalopathy, imaging and
laboratory findings are unremarkable. The first episode of hypersomnia
is often triggered by an infection, with relapses occurring every 1 to
12 months for a median of 14 years. Between episodes, patients generally
have normal sleep patterns, cognition, mood and eating habits. During
episodes, electroencephalography might show diffuse or local slow
activity. Functional imaging studies have revealed hypoactivity in
thalamic and hypothalamic regions and in the frontal and temporal lobes
(Arnulf et al., 2012). Narcolepsy is a form of hypersomnia and can occur
either with or without cataplexy. Narcoleptic attacks are short episodes
of sleep (10--15 minutes) that occur irresistibly during the day; they
usually begin during adolescence and persist throughout life. Narcolepsy
is often associated with cataplexy, during which the subject falls down
because of a sudden loss of muscle tone provoked by strong emotion.
Hypnagogic hallucinations and sleep paralysis may also occur but less
commonly. Narcolepsy is associated with short sleep latency and
sleep-­onset REM periods. There is usually no structural brain disease
present. Hypnagogic hallucinations are usually auditory but may be
visual or tactile. They occur between wakefulness and sleep, less
commonly between sleep and wakening (hypnopompic hallucination). Sleep
paralysis is the inability to move during the period between wakefulness
and sleep (in either direction). In the Pickwickian syndrome, named
after the fat boy of The Pickwick Papers (Dickens, 1837), or more
specifically obstructive sleep apnoea, profound daytime somnolence is
associated with gross obesity and cyanosis due to hypoventilation.
Breathing is periodic during sleep and somnolence, with apnoeic phases
that may last for up to a minute. Sustained drowsiness may occur with
organic lesions of the midbrain or hypothalamus from various causes.
Hunger, weight gain, excessive thirst and polyuria may also occur. The
most important conditions giving rise to secondary hypersomnia are brain

tumours, neurosarcoidosis and Niemann-­Pick type C disease. Hypersomnia
may also occur as a psychogenic symptom. There may be a state amounting
to dissociative stupor, and other conversion symptoms may be present.
Other patients with neurotic disorders complain persistently of daytime
somnolence and an inability to concentrate. PARASOMNIAS The parasomnias
are disorders of arousal and sleep-­ stage transition that consist of
abnormal sleep-­related movements, behaviours, emotions, perceptions,
dreaming and autonomic nervous system functioning that accompany sleep
(Ahmed and Thorpy, 2010). Sleepwalking is an example and consists of a
series of complex behaviours arising during slow-­wave sleep and
resulting in walking during a period of altered consciousness. It is
more characteristic of children than adults and of males than females.
Activity is usually confined to aimless wandering and purposeless
repetitive behaviour for a few minutes. The sleepwalker may reply
monosyllabically to questions, and there is little awareness of the
environment, but injury is unusual. Frequently there is a family
history, and enuresis is often associated. As sleepwalking occurs in
deep sleep (stages 3 and 4), usually during the first third of the
night, it is unlikely to be the acting out of dreams. It is not the same
phenomenon as epileptic automatism, which may also result in a person,
who is apparently asleep, getting up and walking around. It is important
to establish the diagnosis in each case. Night terrors also occur in
deep sleep early in the night and often in the same individual who
sleepwalks. Intense anxiety is manifested, the subject may shout and
there is rapid pulse and respiration. Usually there is complete amnesia
for the experience on waking. It is not the same experience as a
nightmare because the latter is a type of dream, occurring in lighter
states of sleep, and is remembered vividly if the person awakes
immediately after the experience. Most children grow out of night
terrors and sleepwalking. Claims have been made that automatic, violent
behaviour has taken place during a night terror. A person who commits a
criminal act while asleep is not conscious of his actions and cannot be
held legally responsible for them; the law calls this sane

4

automatism (Fenwick, 1986; Ebrahim and Fenwick, 2010). If the act---for
instance, homicide---is remembered by its perpetrator as following a
chain of psychic events ('being chased by Japanese soldiers'), these
images are most likely to have occurred in the context of a nightmare,
and the act therefore took place on waking from the dream and would be
regarded as motivated. During the nightmare itself, sleep paralysis will
prevent violent emotions being acted on. For the act to be convincingly
ascribed to night terror, neither the act nor its antecedent storyline
should be remembered, and all the evidence should point to the
individual being asleep at the time. Previous evidence of night terror
and sleep activity is important for corroboration. Less known are the
reports of sexsomnia in which sexual behaviour occurs during sleep.
These cases seem to occur in the setting of disorders of arousal, the
so-­called NREM parasomnias that include confusional arousal, sleep
terror and sleepwalking; REM sleep behaviour disorder; nocturnal partial
complex seizures; and obstructive sleep apnoea (Ebrahim and Fenwick,
2010).

Dreams How does phenomenology view dreams, their significance and their
interpretation? First, phenomenology is concerned only with what is
conscious; it cannot comment on that which is unconscious, although it
may infer the existence of the unconscious insofar as it explains some
observed behaviours and phenomena. Second, the meaning belongs to the
dreamer and not to an interpreter or theorist. This has implications for
the way in which the phenomenological approach will be used in therapy.
Phenomenology can make contributions to our understanding of dreaming
but only in a limited way. Phenomenology is a study of the objects that
are available to conscious subjective awareness. However, the content of
dreams can only be recollected and described after the event. This has
implications for the accuracy and verisimilitude of the recollected
accounts. Graham Greene (1904--91) kept a dream diary from a very early
age and always had a pencil and paper at hand on his bedside so that
when he woke up from a dream, he could note down a few key

Attention, Concentration, Orientation and Sleep

53

words that he later used to reconstruct his dreams. His descriptions are
vivid and highly detailed. These descriptions demonstrate that memory of
the content of dreams can be accurate and detailed, sometimes very
detailed indeed. And, once the premise of the dream is understood, the
logic and reasoning become comprehensible. Even the bizarre elements
become comprehensible. An example from Graham Greene's posthumous A
World of My Own (Greene, 1992) illustrates these points: I remember
having a discussion with Sartre. I had made notes of various questions
to ask him, and I tried to be very precise. I apologized for the badness
of my French, which prevented me from being as precise as I wanted to
be, and Sartre said kindly, 'You speak French very well, but,' he added,
'I don't understand a word you say.' Then he became amiable and referred
to a book of mine which Robert Laffont had published in France, the
English title being The Origin of Brighton Rock. It was a reproduction
of a childish manuscript in brown ink -- a story with animal characters
-- and it was illustrated by Beatrix Potter. Sartre very much admired
her drawings, but he said nothing of my writing. The account of this
dream is compelling, and it is difficult to fully grasp that it is not a
description of a real encounter with Sartre in what Greene termed the
Common World but an account of a dream event, or an experience in what
he termed A World of My Own. Orthodox sleep (stages 1--4) and
paradoxical sleep (REM sleep) have been distinguished from each other
through the use of sleep electroencephalographic tracings in human
subjects (Oswald, 1980). Normal reflex activity occurs in the stages of
orthodox sleep, but localized activity is seen in paradoxical sleep
while other muscle actions are paralysed. REMs in paradoxical sleep are
to some extent associated with dreaming. Nightmares are unpleasant
dreams; often the particular horror of a nightmare is that there is
nothing the sufferer can do about the terrifying experience. Dreaming
occurs in REM (paradoxical) sleep, and the transfixed sensation of the
nightmare is an accurate representation of the sleep paralysis that
occurs in that phase.

54

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Dreams have been used to establish elaborate psychiatric theories
concerning the origins of conflict; it is outside the scope of this book
to enter into any discussion of this area. It is, of course, a topic
that was extensively written about by Sigmund Freud (1976). More
recently, the meaning of dreams has been explored empirically by Kramer
et al. (1976). Dreams are remembered and described as a psychic event:
nightmares (unpleasant dreams) are often complained of and may be a
prominent symptom, for instance, in depression. Dreams are highly
complex experiences and, so far, have defied adequate analysis and
explanation. However, certain characteristics can be described. There is
a loss of some of the structures of waking consciousness, thus there is
a loss of self-­awareness and awareness of the confines of one's own
body. The margin between self and not-­self becomes indefinite. The
dreamer may dream of himself merging or transforming into someone else
without contradiction. Time sense is also lost: there is no sense of
progression of events but only immediate awareness of the present.
Events occurring in the dream include those in which the dreamer himself
is instrumental. There is often a loss of the sense of his having
circumstances within his control, and there is also a loss of the
physical and mental associations between the different parts of a whole
experience. There are, therefore, gaps unaccounted for in space as well
as in time and causation. As well as the loss of temporal and spatial
connections, there is a loss of the psychological associations between
events. There is no progressive sequence of serial ideas or pictures.
The dream is often like a group of short excerpts from very different
films. In addition to the loss of structure that is typical in the
dreaming state, there are also elements that do not occur in the normal
waking state. These are best called dream images because they are not
accurately delusions, hallucinations, false memories or other
abnormalities of perception or ideation characteristic of being awake.
These images are more vivid than fantasy and have a characteristic of
immediacy and importance, so it is not surprising that, from the
beginning of time, people have acted on their dreams as if they were
instructions. To regard dreaming as a symptom rather than merely a
remembered experience, it has to become invested with unpleasant affect.
A patient may

describe pleasant dreams if requested, but he does not usually complain
of these as symptoms or ask for their removal. However, if the dream is
associated with anxiety, terror, gloom or foreboding and especially if
the content or the theme is recurrent, it will be complained of and will
indicate a prevailing affect; possibly the areas of conflict that have
precipitated the distress will be revealed in the content of the dream.
Unpleasant dreams in which a part of the traumatic event is re-­
experienced are a diagnostic feature of post-­traumatic stress disorder
after major disaster or catastrophe.

Hypnosis It has been suggested by Marcuse (1959) that we 'define
hypnosis by what it does rather than by what it is'. At one extreme,
hypnosis is considered to be a very different state of awareness from
normal waking consciousness. At the other extreme, Merskey (1979)
considers that 'the phenomena of hypnosis are identical with those of
hysteria: they involve self-­deception and the production of alternative
symptoms or behaviour to solve a problem, even if not a conflict'.
Merskey further goes on to propose as definition: Hypnosis is a
manoeuvre in which the subject and hypnotist have an implicit agreement
that certain events (e.g., paralysis, hallucinations, amnesias) will
occur, either during a special procedure or later, in accordance with
the hypnotist's instructions. Both try hard to put this agreement into
effect and adopt appropriate behavioural rules, and the subject uses
mechanisms of denial to report on the events in accordance with the
implicit agreement. This situation is used to implement various motives,
therapeutic or otherwise, on the part of both participants. There is no
trance state, no detectable cerebral physiological change and only such
peripheral physiological responses as may be produced equally by
nonhypnotic suggestions or other emotional changes. Hypnosis in
contemporary practice is defined as a psychophysiologic state of
attentive, receptive concentration with a relative suspension of
peripheral awareness, what is sometimes termed the trance state. It is
thought that the ability to enter the trance state is widely distributed
in the general population (Maldonado, 2015).

4

Superficially, hypnosis appears to resemble sleep, but there are no
electroencephalographic findings to distinguish hypnosis from other
states of relaxed wakefulness. The trance in hypnosis is therefore
produced in a waking state by one person on another using suggestion
with compliance (Marcuse, 1959). It is understood that hypnosis involves
three interconnected factors: absorption, dissociation and
suggestibility (Maldonado, 2015). Absorption involves the tendency to
engage in self-­altering and highly focused attention with complete
immersion in a central experience at the expense of contextual
orientation such that the hypnotized subject can be intensely absorbed
in their trance experience that they often choose to ignore
environmental cues. Dissociation is the capacity to separate mental
processes so that they seem to occur independently from each other, and
thus a past memory may be dissociated from current events. Finally,
suggestibility refers to the ability in a subject to be easily
influenced because of heightened responsiveness to social cues including
instructions given during the hypnotic trance. Hypnosis has been claimed
to occur in nonhuman species, but this state cannot necessarily be
considered identical with hypnosis. Hypnosis has been used for the
control of pain, in the treatment of hyperemesis gravidarum and
especially in the control of anxiety (Waxman, 1984). The induction of
hypnosis requires the implicit contract that Merskey implies. The
subject must be willing and cooperative; he or she relaxes and exercises
imagination. The field of consciousness is narrowed to include only the
instructions of the hypnotist. The subject relinquishes some degree of
control to the hypnotist and accepts reality distortion. After the
successful induction of hypnosis, autohypnosis can become established.
Marcuse considers the following to be the characteristics of a hypnotic
state: • The subject ceases to make his own plans. •  Attention is
selectively directed, for example, towards the voice of the hypnotist. •
Reality testing is diminished, and distortions are accepted. •
Suggestibility is increased. • The hypnotized subject readily enacts
unusual roles. • Posthypnotic amnesia is often present.

Attention, Concentration, Orientation and Sleep

55

Suggestion for the hypnotic subject is straightforward and obvious; it
does not imply gullibility or loss of willpower. It describes the
emotion of trust occurring within the implicit relationship in which the
subject accepts the hypnotist's statements, acts on his commands and
denies evidence from his own senses that would contradict those
statements. A capacity for fantasy is necessary for hypnosis to take
place. The relaxation that accompanies hypnosis may progress to normal
sleeping, even during a hypnotic session. The alteration in conscious
awareness occurring in hypnosis is similar to that in dissociative
states but different from the fluctuations of consciousness level
occurring in organic psychosyndromes. Suggestion has been used to
produce many physical sequelae (e.g., blisters, alterations in pulse and
blood pressure, levitation of an arm, opisthotonos, absence of pain
sensation and so on). The psychological effects are equally variable and
include alterations to perception, cognition, ideation, memory and
affect. The subject enters a dramatically altered state in which he
temporarily surrenders responsibility for his actions to the hypnotist.
In his turn, the hypnotist retains the confidence of the subject only as
long as he keeps within the limits of behaviour that the subject finds
acceptable; beyond this, the subject will relinquish his dependent
relationship and come out of the hypnotic state. Hypnosis remains an
enigma. There is now emerging evidence of the underlying neural
correlates of hypnotizability and of the hypnotic state itself. These
point to greater functional connectivity between the left dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex, an executive-­control region of the brain, and the
salience network composed of the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex,
anterior insula, amygdala and ventral striatum, involved in detecting,
integrating and filtering relevant somatic, autonomic and emotional
information in highly hypnotizable subjects compared with less
hypnotizable subjects (Hoeft et al., 2012). As for the hypnotic state
itself, during mental imagery for rehabilitation of neurodisability,
functional magnetic resonance imaging signal increases exclusively
related to hypnosis have been observed in the left superior frontal
cortex, the left anterior cingulate gyrus and the left thalamus. Whereas
the superior frontal cortex and the anterior cingulate were activated
related more to movement performance than to imagery, the thalamus was
activated only during

56

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

motor imagery. These areas represent central nodes of the salience
network linking primary and higher motor areas. This suggests hypnosis
enhances motor imagery (Müller et al., 2012). Much work still needs to
be done to unravel the physiology of hypnosis. REFERENCES Ahmed, I.M.,
Thorpy, M.J., 2010. Classification of sleep disorders. In:
Pandi-­Perumal, S.R., Kramer, M. (Eds.), Sleep and Mental Illness.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. American Academy of Sleep
Medicine, 2005. International Classification of Sleep Disorders.
American Academy of Sleep Medicine, Chicago, p. 2. American Psychiatric
Association, 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, fifth ed. American Psychiatric Publishing, Washington, DC.
Arnulf, I., 2017. Kleine-­Levine syndrome. In: Kryger, M., Roth, T.,
Dement, W.C. (Eds.), Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine, sixth
ed. Elsevier, Philadelphia. Arnulf, I., Thomas, J.R., Emmanuel, M.,
2012. Diagnosis, disease course, and management of patients with
Kleine-­Levin syndrome. Lancet Neurol. 11, 918--928. Broadbent, D.E.,
1958. Perception and Communication. Pergamon, London. Chapman, J., 1966.
The early symptoms of schizophrenia. Br. J. Psychiatry. 112, 225--251.
Clark, L., Iversen, S.D., Goodwin, G.M., 2002. Sustained attention
deficit in bipolar disorder. Br. J. Psychiatry. 180, 313--319.
Critchley, M., 1950. The body-­image in neurology. Lancet 255, 335--341.
Critchley, M., 1962. Periodic hypersomnia and megaphagia in adolescent
males. Brain 85, 627--656. Cutting, J., 2011. A Critique of
Psychopathology. The Forest Publishing Company, Forest Row. Dickens, C.,
1837. The Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club. Penguin, London.
Ebrahim, I., Fenwick, P.B., 2010. Forensic issues of sleep in
psychiatric patients. In: Pandi-­Perumal, S.R., Kramer, M. (Eds.), Sleep
and Mental Illness. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Eysenck,
M.W., Keane, M.T., 2010. Cognitive Psychology: A Student's Handbook,
sixth ed. Psychology Press, Hove. Fenwick, P., 1986. Murdering while
asleep. Br. Med. J. 293, 574. Freud, S., 1976. The Interpretation of
Dreams (J. Strachey, Trans). Penguin, Harmondsworth. Greene, G., 1992. A
World of My Own. Penguin, Harmondsworth. Hoeft, F., Gabrieli, J.D.E.,
Whitfield-­Gabrieli, S., et al., 2012. Functional brain basis of
hypnotizability. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry. 69, 1064--1072. Hofle, N., Paus,
T., Reutens, D., et al., 1997. Regional cerebral blood flow changes as a
function of delta and spindle activity during slow wave sleep in humans.
J. Neurosci. 17, 4800--4808. James, W., 1890. Principles of Psychology.
Holt, New York. Jovanovic, U.J., 1978. Sleep profile and ultradian sleep
periodicity in neurotic patients compared with the corresponding
parameters in healthy human subjects. Waking Sleep. 2, 47--55. Kolb, B.,
Whishaw, I.Q., 1996. Fundamentals of Human Neuropsychology, fourth
ed. W.H. Freeman, Basingstoke. Kramer, M., Hlasny, R., Jacobs, G., Roth,
T., 1976. Do dreams have meaning? An empirical enquiry. Am. J.
Psychiatry. 133, 778--781. Lezak, M.D., Howieson, D.B., Loring, D.W.,
2004. Neuropsychological Assessment, fourth ed. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.

Lichstein, K.L., Taylor, D.J., McCrae, C.S., Petrov, M.E., 2017.
Insomnia: epidemiology and risk factors. In: Kryger, M., Roth, T.,
Dement, W.C. (Eds.), Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine, sixth
ed. Elsevier, Philadelphia. Lishman, W.A., 1997. Organic Psychiatry: The
Psychological Consequences of Cerebral Disorder, third ed. Blackwell
Scientific, Oxford. Luck, S.J., Gold, J.M., 2008. The construct of
attention in schizophrenia. Biol. Psychiatry. 64, 34--39. Maldonado,
J.R., 2015. Hypnosis in psychosomatic medicine. In: Fogel, B.S.,
Greenberg, D.B. (Eds.), Psychiatric Care of the Medical Patient, third
ed. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Marcuse, F.L., 1959. Hypnosis: Fact
and Fiction. Penguin, Harmondsworth. Marvel, C.L., Paradiso, S., 2004.
Cognitive and neurological impairment in mood disorders. Psychiatr.
Clin. North Am. 27, 1--17. Mattingley, J.B., 1996. Paterson and
Zangwill's (1944) case of unilateral neglect: insights from 50 years of
experimental inquiry. In: Code, C., Wallesch, C., Jonette, Y., Lecours,
A.R. (Eds.), Classic Cases in Neuropsychology. Psychology Press,
Brighton, pp. 243--262. McGhie, A., Chapman, J., 1961. Disorders of
attention and perception in early schizophrenia. Br. J. Med. Psychol.
34, 103--115. Merskey, H., 1979. The Analysis of Hysteria. Baillière
Tindall, London. Minkowski, E., 1970. Lived Time: Phenomenological and
Psychopathological Studies. Northwestern University Press, Evanston, IL.
Müller, K., Bacht, K., Schramm, S., Seitz, R.J., 2012. The facilitating
effect of clinical hypnosis on motor imagery: an fMRI study. Behav.
Brain Res. 231, 164--169. Oswald, I., 1980. Sleep, fourth ed. Penguin,
Harmondsworth. Oswald, I., 1981. Assessment of insomnia. Br. Med. J.
283, 874-- 875. Paterson, A., Zangwill, O.L., 1944. Disorders of visual
space perception associated with lesions of the right cerebral
hemisphere. Brain 67, 331--358. Pelayo, R., Dement, W.C., 2017. History
of sleep physiology and medicine. In: Kryger, M., Roth, T., Dement, W.C.
(Eds.), Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine, sixth ed. Elsevier,
Philadelphia. Posner, M.I., Early, T.S., Reiman, E., Pardo, P.J.,
Dhawan, M., 1988. Asymmetries in hemispheric control of attention in
schizophrenia. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry. 45, 814--821. Rechtschaffen, A.,
Kales, A., 1968. A Manual of Standardized Terminology, Techniques and
Scoring System for Sleep Stages of Human Subjects. US Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare, Bethesda. Scharfetter, C., 1980. General
Psychopathology: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Smith, E.E., Kosslyn, S.M., 2007. Cognitive Psychology: Mind and Brain.
Pearson Prentice Hall, Hoboken, NJ. Stuss, D.T., Benson, D.F., 1986. The
Frontal Lobes. Raven Press, New York. Thompson, J.M., Gallagher, P.,
Hughes, J.H., et al., 2005. Neurocognitive impairment in euthymic
patients with bipolar affective disorder. Br. J. Psychiatry. 186,
32--40. Waxman, D., 1984. Psychological Influences and Illness: Hypnosis
and Medicine. Macmillan, London. World Health Organization, 1992. The
ICD-­10 Classification of Mental and Behavioral Disorders: Clinical
Description and Diagnostic Guidelines. World Health Organization,
Geneva.

Chapter 5

Disturbance of Memory Chapter Outline Summary Mechanisms of Memory
Sensory Memory Short-­Term Memory Long-­Term Memory Organic Impairment of
Memory Impairment of Registration/Encoding Impairment of Retention
Impairment of Retrieval or Recall Impairment of Recognition Disturbances
of Memory Normal Variations Meaningful Disturbances of Memory Memory
Disturbance Secondary to Psychiatric Disorder Affective Disorder of
Memory Ganser State

KEYWORDS Memory Confabulation Ganser state

Summary Memory has a well-­described and delineated architecture, namely,
sensory memory, short-­term memory and long-­term memory. Short-­term
memory is itself subdivided into a central executive and the slave
systems, termed the visuospatial scratch pad and the phonological loop.
This architecture allows for a systematic understanding of the
underlying processes at play in memory. It is helpful to conceptualize
the memory processes as including registration, retention, retrieval,
recall and recognition. These terms allow for an understanding of the
anomalies that are exhibited in organic impairments of memory. Cans't
thou not minister to a mind diseas'd; Pluck from the memory a rooted
sorrow; Raze out the written troubles of the brain; And with some sweet
oblivious antidote Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff
Which weighs upon the heart? William Shakespeare (1606)

Disturbance of memory is always of significance for the sufferer;
sometimes, however, forgetting is equally important and is an active
process, as in the preceding quotation from Shakespeare. That memory
disturbance was a specific feature after head injury and other
conditions was recognized in neuropsychiatric writings in the mid-­19th
century. Hughlings Jackson (1835--1911; 1887) considered it to be an
integral part of deterioration in organic mental functioning. The
earliest detailed study of disordered memory from a psychological
standpoint was by Théodule-­Armand

57

58

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Ribot (1839--1916; 1882). Sergei Korsakov (1854-- 1900; 1890)
subsequently described his eponymous condition, pointing out that gross
disorder of memory may occur in patients in whom other intellectual
functions and judgement are preserved.

Mechanisms of Memory One of the major justifications for using
psychopathology in the description of memory disturbance is that there
exists no good analogue of memory in animals. Conventionally,
disturbance of memory is described by the length of time for which
information has been retained. If one concentrates on the
phenomenological aspects, the analysis of experience, it is in fact
quite arbitrary to make a distinction between memory and perception
because they are both stages in information processing (Weinman, 1981).
Memory storage is organized in three ways. SENSORY MEMORY Sensory memory
is the initial and early phase of memory. It holds large amounts of
incoming information briefly. It is a selecting and recording system via
which perceptions enter the memory system (Lezak et al., 2004). Fleeting
visual image, iconic memory lasts up to 200 ms, whereas auditory, echoic
memory lasts up to 2000 ms. The information selected and recorded at
this level needs to be further processed as short-­term memory, or it
quickly decays and is lost. SHORT-­TERM MEMORY Short-­ term memory is
conceptualized as a limited-­ capacity system that operates as a set of
subsystems. Although it is theoretically distinguishable from attention,
in practice it is profitably equated with a simple span of attention
limited to six or seven items and lasting 15 to 30 seconds unless the
items are rehearsed. Baddeley and Hitch (1974) hypothesized a model of
working memory comprising a central executive, a visuospatial scratch
pad and a phonological loop. In this system, the central executive is
the attentional controller assisted by the visuospatial scratch pad that
allows for the temporary storage and manipulation of visual and spatial
information. The phonological loop holds memory traces of verbal
information for a couple of seconds combined with subvocal rehearsal
(Baddeley, 1986, 2002).

LONG-­TERM MEMORY Long-­term memory can be conceptualized into two
retrieval systems: a declarative system, or explicit memory, which deals
with facts and events and is available to consciousness for declaration,
and a nondeclarative or implicit system (Lezak et al., 2004). The
declarative system can be further divided into semantic (fact memory)
and episodic (memory for specific autobiographical incidents) memory. In
other words, semantic memory is the storage of information in pure form
without specification of time or place ('General Psychopathology was
written by Karl Jaspers'), whereas episodic memory refers to personally
experienced events ('I had a kipper for breakfast today') (Baddeley,
1990). Long-­term memory can hold information for periods of time from a
few minutes to many decades, and the capacity is very large. Forgetting
may be by loss of information or failure of retrieval. Normal forgetting
rates are determined by such variables as personal meaningfulness of the
material, conceptual style and age. Storage in and retrieval from the
long-­term memory are impaired in the dysmnesic syndromes. Information is
stored in reorganized and sometimes distorted form. Description of the
requirements for memory is chiefly referable to long-­ term memory and
can be subdivided phenomenologically into the following five
functions: 1.  Registration or encoding is the capacity to add new
information to the memory store. 2.  Retention or storage is the ability
to maintain knowledge that can subsequently be returned to
consciousness. 3.  Retrieval is the capacity to access stored
information from memory by recognition, recall or implicitly by
demonstrating that a relevant task is performed more efficiently as a
result of prior experience. 4.  Recall is the effortful retrieval of
stored information into consciousness at a chosen moment. It requires an
active, complex search process. It is influenced by primacy (first item)
and recency (last item) effects. The question 'What is the capital of
France?' requires the recall function. 5.  Recognition is the retrieval
of stored information that depends on the identification of items
previously learned and is based on either re-

5

membering (effortful recollection) or knowing (familiarity-­based
recollection). In this process, a stimulus triggers awareness;
remembering or knowing then takes place. The question 'Which of the
following is the capital of France: Paris, Lille or Lyon?' tests the
recognition function. Abnormality of memory may occur in any of these
areas. In other words, there can be impairment of encoding, impairment
of storage or impairment of retrieval.

Organic Impairment of Memory Memory disturbances can be separated into
those that are psychogenic, sometimes occurring in healthy people, and
those that are organic, associated with disease of the brain. The latter
are referred to as organic or true amnesias and can be described by the
different functions of memory. IMPAIRMENT OF REGISTRATION/ENCODING In
anterograde amnesia, the impairment is usually demonstrated in the
failure of retrieval of information encountered after the onset of a
clinical disorder. This impairment of retrieval may, of course, be due
to problems at the registration (encoding) stage, particularly in
patients with Korsakov's syndrome. There is evidence that these patients
may have difficulty in spontaneously encoding the semantic features of
information to a sufficient level at input, and this failure results in
poor memory (Mayes, 2002). It is therefore problems in the initial
analysis and representation of information and the inability to select
the salient semantic features of information that underlie impairment of
registration. In a list-­learning test situation, for example, the
semantic features of the words, such as the fact that the words are
derived from a list of the names of flowers, fails to assist the subject
to encode the new information. IMPAIRMENT OF RETENTION Retrograde
amnesia is the loss of memory for events preceding the onset of brain
injury. As with anterograde amnesia, the deficit is demonstrated in the
impairment of retrieval, but it is thought to be due to impairment of
retention (storage), particularly in cases of cerebral trauma. Usually,
it is of short duration of

Disturbance of Memory

59

less than 30 minutes. Typically, it follows a temporal gradient in which
newer memories are more vulnerable to loss than older ones. There is a
dissociation between anterograde and retrograde amnesia such that
registration may be impaired without any impairment of retention. This
suggests that the anatomic structures involved in new learning and
retention of old memories are distinct. IMPAIRMENT OF RETRIEVAL OR
RECALL Retrieval is the capacity to access information from memory
stores. Impairment of retrieval can be due to a deficit in either direct
retrieval, in which a cue elicits a memory automatically or strategic
(indirect) retrieval in which a cue provokes a strategic search process
that produces a result. In direct retrieval, the question 'Have you ever
been to Lagos?' acts as a cue that elicits a memory automatically. In
strategic retrieval, the question 'Who won the World Cup before the
current champions?' instigates a strategic process that frames the
memory problem, initiates the search and constrains it, guiding it
towards local, proximal cues that then activate associative memory
processes. The memory output is then monitored for accuracy and placed
in a proper temporal-­spatial context in relation to other memories
(Gilboa and Moscovitch, 2002). Direct retrieval is thought to be
dependent on medial temporal lobes and related structures, whereas
strategic retrieval is dependent on the ventromedial prefrontal cortex.
Confabulation is a good example of a condition that is a result of
impairment of retrieval. It results from a faulty memory system creating
faulty cue--memory associations, faulty search strategies and defective
monitoring of faulty memories (Gilboa and Moscovitch, 2002; DeLuca,
2009). IMPAIRMENT OF RECOGNITION Recognition is the retrieval of stored
information that depends on the identification of items previously
learned. In episodic memory, that is, memory for events that includes
the context, time, place and emotions associated with the event,
recognition can take the form of either conscious recollection
(remembering) or knowing based simply on a sense of familiarity. This is
the so-­called remember--know paradigm, and it proposes a dual process
memory system, one relying on conscious recollection and the other based
on familiarity. In other

60

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

words, the phenomenal experience that accompanies the recognition of a
previously presented stimulus seems to take at least two forms.
Recognition can occur when the stimulus evokes some specific experience
in which the stimulus was previously involved, or alternatively the
stimulus gives rise only to a feeling of familiarity without any
recollective experience. A 'remember' response indicates that
recognizing the stimulus brings back to mind some conscious recollection
of its prior occurrence, whereas a 'know' response indicates that
recognizing the stimulus is not accompanied by any conscious
recollection of its prior occurrence (Dalla Barba, 1997; Tulving, 2000).
Impairment of recognition has been described in Alzheimer's disease
(Dalla Barba, 1997) and in schizophrenia (Drakeford et al., 2006).

Disturbances of Memory NORMAL VARIATIONS Déjà Vu and Related Phenomena
(Paramnesia)

Déjà vu is not primarily a memory disorder but a disturbance in which
the associated feeling of familiarity that normally accompanies
previously experienced events occurs with a novel event, that is, when
the event is experienced for the first time. An example might be having
a strong feeling that one has been previously in a restaurant situated
in a city that one is visiting for the first time. In jamais vu, an
experience that the patient knows they have experienced before is not
associated with the appropriate feeling of familiarity. An example might
be that of visiting a museum in one's own hometown that one has visited
several times in the past but, on this particular occasion, failing to
have any sense of familiarity. The person may also have the feeling that
some important memory is about to be recalled, although it does not
actually arrive. Déjà vu and jamais vu are relatively common, normal
experiences but may also be significant symptoms of temporal lobe
epilepsy or cerebrovascular disorder (Lishman, 1998). An epileptic
patient said, 'I feel that I've done something terribly wrong'. However,
these experiences on their own or associated only with vague feelings of
depersonalization should not be accepted as evidence of temporal lobe
epilepsy, as these symptoms are also frequently experienced both in
patients with anxiety-­related disorders and in normal individuals.

Selective Forgetting

In normal forgetting, there is loss of or diminished access to recently
acquired and stored information. Rates of forgetting are influenced by
the personal meaningfulness of the information, the conceptual style of
the individual, the degree of processing and elaboration of the
information and age. It is likely that normal forgetting is determined
by disuse or interference by more recently learned or more vivid
material and underpinned by physiologic or metabolic processes (Lezak et
al., 2004). Additionally, there are two forms of interference: proactive
and retroactive. In proactive interference, newly learned material
interferes with the recall of previously learned material. In
retroactive interference, previously learned material interferes with
the recall of newly learned material (for a fuller discussion, see
Eysenck and Keane, 2010). The process of repression or selective
forgetting, however, suggests that forgetting is not simply down to
errors in the filing and retrieval mechanism. Forgetting is subject to
the influence of affect: which sensations are registered, what is
retained and for how long and what information is available for recall.
In Freud's (1856--1939) account, traumatic or threatening memories are
kept out of conscious awareness by the mechanism of repression. Other
forms of active forgetting exist, including motivated forgetting, which
subsumes repression as an example. Directed forgetting is the term for
the process by which we actively use executive control processes within
the prefrontal cortex to forget items that we do not wish to recall. It
is obvious from the foregoing that forgetting is an important and
normative process. The processes underlying directed forgetting are
still being investigated. It is unclear to what degree intentional
forgetting is an active process based on the inhibition of unwanted
memory traces or reduction of selective rehearsal (Han et al., 2020).
Furthermore, there is some evidence that depression may impair the
capacity to forget negative material (Xie et al., 2018). In short,
selective forgetting including directed forgetting involves unconscious
and conscious mechanisms. Falsification of Memory

False memories concern report of events that never happened or distorted
memories of events that happened with the result that an individual
claims that

5

something happened and they believe and remember that it happened
despite the fact their belief is erroneous (French et al., 2009). The
mechanisms underpinning false memories in normal populations are
relatively well established. First, false memories are commonplace in
nonclinical populations as demonstrated by the significant numbers of
people reporting alien abduction experiences. Second, studies of the
flashbulb memories have shown that even for culturally significant and
unique events such as the World Trade Centre attacks in New York in
2001, there is considerable distorted recall by witnesses of the event
(French et al., 2009). The mechanisms underlying the creation of false
memories include exposure to postevent information and the role of
misinformation in facilitating addition of nonexistent detail in
reports. Susceptibility to false memory is at least partly determined by
the quality of memory for the relevant observed event. It is remarkable
that it is practically impossible to distinguish between true and false
memories in terms of the associated emotions or the degree of confidence
with which the belief is held and, as French et al. (2009) suggest, this
probably means that both kinds of memories are constructed in the same
way. Both involve source monitoring and plausibility. Source monitoring
involves determining the source of the experience whether it be internal
(imagination) or external (actually experienced). Plausibility refers to
the degree to which the event is likely to occur in the real world.
Mazzoni et al. (2001) propose that there are three steps necessary for
people to develop a false memory: (1) they must believe that the
specific event could plausibly have happened, (2) they must develop a
belief that the event actually happened to them and (3) they must make a
source monitoring error and erroneously conclude that the details they
remember must have come from a real experience. The nature and origins
of false memories in the normal population help to inform our
understanding of false memories in clinical populations by drawing
attention to the underlying mechanisms and to the similarities and
differences in the nature, extent and behavioural consequences of false
memories as described earlier. However, studies of false memories have
not fully established any consistent findings either with regard to
personality factors or to

Disturbance of Memory

61

motivational factors. Yet these factors probably play a significant role
in clinical populations. In pseudologia fantastica---fluent, plausible
lying--- the untruthful statements are often grandiose and extreme.
Questions are answered with fluency, and the story appears to be
believed implicitly by the pseudologics themselves. Hence, it is often
unclear the degree to which the patient believes the account. This
usually occurs with an associated personality disorder and often when
the individual is experiencing a major life crisis such as facing
criminal proceedings. The picture is of a very isolated person, without
family or friends, drifting into the accident and emergency department
of a large hospital in a strange city late at night, with stories of
their own exploits and importance and the unfortunate vicissitudes they
have experienced. There is overlap with factitious disorder. With
personality disorders and also with affective disorders, especially at
times of heightened emotion, memory is falsified and distorted, and
events and circumstances can be misrepresented. The advice of doctors
may be grossly misconstrued. An ophthalmic surgeon examined a depressed
patient's eyes and informed her that her visual acuity was satisfactory
and no treatment was required. She reported the following to her
psychiatrist: her 'eyesight would be bad forevermore, and the surgeon
has told me that nothing can be done about it'. Inaccuracy of recall is
sometimes called paramnesia. As well as occurring in the normal state
and in personality disorders, it is a prominent feature of affective
disturbances. A woman with depressive illness falsified the events of
her life: 'I am not married. My children are illegitimate. We do not own
this house. We are bankrupt.' All these statements were untrue, and the
falsification of her memory occurred in response to her severe
depressive mood. Memory itself was accurate, but on remonstrating on any
particular point of fact, further depressive explanations of events
would be given. For instance, the marriage licence was described as a
forgery, and complicated legal explanations were given as to why the
house did not belong to her and her husband. In mania, unacceptable
events or opinions may be brushed aside as not having occurred and
unrealistic goals pursued as though there were nothing to prevent their
attainment.

62

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

MEANINGFUL DISTURBANCES OF MEMORY Psychogenic Disturbance of Memory

Cryptomnesia can be described as a phenomenon in which what is
objectively a memory is subjectively not recognized as such and is thus
wrongly experienced by a person as a novel or original creation of their
own mind. It can be regarded as unintended plagiarism (Taylor, 1965).
There are a number of celebrated cases in the public domain which
illustrate the nature of cryptomnesia including the so-­called twin poems
incident. Clifford Dyment, an English poet and journalist wrote a poem,
Saint Augustine at Thirty-­Two, first published in a journal in 1943 and
included in a book of poems in 1944. The book was reviewed by Vita
Sackville-­West in 1944 after which she wrote to Dyment telling him how
much she liked the poem. In 1949 at the invitation of the Poetry Review,
Sackville-­West submitted a poem for publication entitled The Novice to
her Lover. Sackville-­West's poem replicated 87 of the 100 words of
Dyment's poem. Ironically, when Dyment's poem was once again included in
another book in 1949, she wrote to draw his attention to the
similarities between his poem and hers and she had no recollection of
having previously reviewed his nor of having written to him about her
appreciation of the poem (Taylor, 1965). The underlying mechanism of
this phenomenon is yet to be fully elucidated. Misnaming objects and
momentary loss of memory for words in healthy subjects may result from
faulty retrieval from short-­and long-­term memory stores rather than from
the psychoanalytic explanation of repression. Such errors may be
categorized as acoustic or semantic; acoustic errors tending to occur in
short-­ term stores of up to 30 seconds and semantic ones in long-­term
stores after more than 5 minutes (Shallice and McGill, 1977).
Dissociative Focal Retrograde Amnesia

This is a condition in which there is focal retrograde amnesia for
autobiographical events. There is no demonstrable anterograde amnesia. A
20-­year-­old student was found on the floor of his flat. The retrograde
amnesia was for a period of approximately 3 years. He was conscious when
discovered, and there was no history of head injury or any physical
illness. His magnetic resonance imaging scan and other investigations
including

his electroencephalogram were reported as normal. The social context
included the fact that his parents were separating. However, he said
that there was not a significant or stressful event. He slowly made a
full recovery. This condition can also occur in the context of a
neurologic amnesia, but the extent and severity of the amnesia are
judged to exceed what is expected (see McKay and Kopelman, 2009). The
assumption here is that the focal amnesia results from psychological
stressors that the individual is inappropriately attempting to deal with
by virtue of amnesia. Usually it is assumed that there are unconscious
processes at play. Dissociative Fugue

The symptoms pertaining to dissociative (conversion) disorders in the
International Classification of Diseases (10th revision \[ICD-­10\];
World Health Organization, 1992) are of two types: conversion and
dissociation. In dissociation, there is a narrowing of the field of
consciousness, with subsequent amnesia for the episode. In many ways,
dissociative symptoms represent a layman's impression of 'madness'. In
dissociative fugue states, there is narrowing of consciousness,
wandering away from normal surroundings and subsequent amnesia. It
involves loss of all autobiographical memories including identity. The
person appears to be in good contact with their environment and usually
behaves appropriately, maintaining basic self-­ care, although they
sometimes display disinhibition. There is quite often loss of identity
or assumption of another false identity. The duration of the episode can
be very variable, from a few hours to several weeks, and the subject may
travel considerable distances. A citizen of Birmingham, United Kingdom,
described a state in which he 'came to' in a city he did not recognize
and where people were speaking French. As he walked about the streets,
he found he was near an airport terminal and, to his surprise, he
discovered that he was in Montreal. Germane to his adventure was the
history of a catastrophic row and the breakdown of his marriage just
before he took off. Thus the features of dissociative fugue are
dissociative amnesia, purposeful travel beyond the usual everyday range
and maintenance of basic self-­care (World Health Organization, 1992).
The predisposing factors include (1) precipitating stress resulting from
relationship, marital or financial

5

problems; (2) depressed mood including suicidal thoughts; and (3) a past
history of transient organic amnesia (McKay and Kopelman, 2009).
Recovered Memory and False Memory Syndrome

This is one of the most hotly debated issues in psychiatry and clinical
psychology. Those working with survivors of traumatic experiences noted
in their patients the recovery of additional memories during clinical
sessions after apparent psychogenic amnesia for a long time---sometimes
decades. Recovered memory has been particularly associated with the
return of memory for childhood sexual abuse. Brewin (1996) reviews the
evidence for such events being 'forgotten' and then recalled after many
years and the mechanisms that may account for this amnesia. He concludes
that memories may be recovered from total amnesia, and they may
sometimes be essentially accurate. Equally, such 'memories' may
sometimes be inaccurate in whole or in part. An example of recovered
memory is a 45-­year-­old male patient who was being investigated for
possible colon cancer after presentation with blood in his stool. His
general practitioner conducted a rectal examination, and immediately
after this examination, the patient recalled incidents from his
childhood of sexual abuse that caused him great distress and required
specialized counselling. The term false memory syndrome came into use in
1992, when the False Memory Syndrome Foundation was set up to represent
the interests of parents who had been accused of abusing their children
sexually. In the opinion of Merskey (1998), sufferers from false memory
syndrome are typically female and are usually participating in some type
of psychotherapy. They report sexual abuse in childhood that is claimed
to have been forgotten and subsequently recovered only in adult life,
having been repressed from 8 to 40 years. It is considered that these
'memories' have been implanted during therapy by a process of suggestion
similar to that thought to occur in multiple personality disorder.
Another situation in which false memories have been thought to develop
has been in nursery day care, when caregivers have been subjected to
grave and bizarre accusations. There is empirical evidence demonstrating
that there are differences between individuals whose

Disturbance of Memory

63

recovered memories have been recalled inside therapy, those whose
memories were recalled outside therapy and a third group whose memories
of abuse were continuous from childhood into adulthood. In the first
group, there was 0% corroborative evidence, whereas for the other two
groups, it was 45% and 37%. Furthermore, those who had recovered
memories outside therapy were able to suppress anxiety-­provoking
thoughts relating to those events compared with the groups with
recovered memory from within therapy and the group with continuous
memories, suggesting that women with recovered memories from outside
therapy are especially adept at suppressing emotional memories when
under laboratory conditions, confirming their liability to remain
unaware of traumatic memories for long periods before their recovery
(Geraerts et al., 2007, 2008). MEMORY DISTURBANCE SECONDARY TO
PSYCHIATRIC DISORDER Confabulation

This is a falsification of memory occurring in clear consciousness in
association with an organically derived amnesia (Berlyne, 1972). It is
probably best to conceive of confabulation as a loose term that covers a
wide range of qualitatively different memory phenomena. The term is used
to describe mild distortions of an actual memory, such as intrusions,
embellishments, elaborations, paraphrasing or high false alarm rates on
tests of anterograde amnesia. It can also refer to highly implausible
bizarre descriptions of false realities such as claiming to be a space
traveller temporarily resident on earth (Gilboa and Moscovitch, 2002;
Box 5.1). However, it is also true that the term confabulation has been
extended, unhelpfully in my view, to include the following: 1. memory
confabulations; 2. confabulations about intentions and actions as can
occur in split-­brain subjects or in hemiplegia of the left arm in which
the subject denies their disability; 3. perceptual confabulations that
occur in Anton syndrome characterized by unawareness of blindness; and
4. confabulation about emotions (for a fuller review, see Hirstein,
2009).

64

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

BOX 5.1 CHARACTERISTICS OF CONFABULATION • It is a falsely retrieved
memory, often containing false details within its own context. • The
patient is unaware that he or she is confabulating and often unaware of
the existence of memory deficit. In other words, confabulations are not
intentionally produced. • Patients may act on their confabulation,
confirming their belief in the false memory. • Confabulation is most
apparent in autobiographical memory. From Gilboa, A., Moscovitch, M.,
2002. Cognitive neuroscience of confabulation. In: Baddeley, A.D.,
Kopelman, M.D., Wilson, B.A. (Eds.), The Handbook of Memory Disorders,
second ed. John Wiley, Chichester. With permission of John Wiley.

Bonhoeffer (1901, cited in Berlyne, 1972) observed that confabulation in
Korsakov's syndrome could take two forms: • Confabulation of
embarrassment was a direct result of the memory loss and depended for
its presence on a certain attentiveness and activity. This form of
confabulation is momentary, a term introduced by Berlyne (1972), in
nature. The momentary form of confabulation is often provoked by
questions probing the patient's memory for particular events. The
patient tries to cover an exposed memory gap by an ad hoc confabulated
excuse relating to their recent behaviour. It does, therefore, reveal
social awareness and some realization of the requirements of the
situation in terms of social behaviour. • In other cases, confabulation
exceeded the needs of the memory impairment; the patient describes
spontaneously adventurous experiences of a fantastic nature. The
spontaneity is a key characteristic of this form of confabulation. Such
memory disturbance may occur with organic deterioration after alcohol
abuse and also in the 'organic amnesic syndrome, not induced by alcohol
and other psychoactive substances' (ICD-­10; World Health Organization,
1992), in which there is severe memory impairment, especially for recent
memory; evidence for disorder of the brain; and absence of a defect in
immediate recall, a disturbance of attention and consciousness, and
global intellectual impairment. The terms momentary and fantastic
confabulation overlap somewhat with the terms provoked and spontaneous
confabulation introduced by Kopelman

(1987). Provoked confabulation is said to be common in amnestic patients
and resembles errors produced by healthy subjects at prolonged retention
intervals during memory tests and may represent a normal response to a
faulty memory. On the other hand, spontaneous confabulation is a rare
pathologic phenomenon that probably results from the combination of
frontal lobe pathology on an organic amnesia. There is little doubt that
the classification into subtypes of confabulation is work in progress.
Schnider (2008) proposed an even more complex classification into four
subtypes: (1) intrusions in memory, (2) momentary confabulations, (3)
fantastic confabulations and (4) behaviourally spontaneous
confabulations. This classification was developed to accommodate the
empirical findings about the distinctions between the varying proposed
categories but is, in my view, cumbersome. Suggestibility is a prominent
feature of the confabulating patient and was considered by Pick (1921,
cited by Berlyne, 1972) to be dependent on clouding of consciousness,
weakened judgement and the interplay of fantasy; it may, in fact,
closely resemble daydreams. The confabulating patient may produce
mutually contradictory statements consecutively and not make any attempt
to correct them. The material of confabulations has been likened to
dreams (Scheid, 1934, cited by Berlyne, 1972). It has also been
explained, in terms of memory disturbance, that confabulations are
actual experiences taken out of their chronologic order (Van der Horst,
1932) and that the individual's wishes and interests guide confabulation
in the same way as in dreams and fantasy. It seems probable that
confabulation is related to the normal mechanisms of recollection. For
example, say that all the owners of a certain model of car were asked by
the police, as part of a large-­scale murder hunt, what they were doing
on a particular Monday about 9 months previously. To answer this
question, an individual would have no recollection for that particular
Monday, so they would re-create a typical programme with regular
movements and times of appointments for a Monday from about that period.
It would seem that the mechanism of social confabulation is of that
order. To the question 'What did you do yesterday?', the confabulating
patient might say, 'I pushed my baby in the pram down to the office to
see my old workmates there'.

5

This could indeed have happened 12 years previously after she had
resigned her job in that office during her pregnancy. The fantastic type
of confabulation is also directly associated with memory. Normally, one
has a clear memory of which sensations and events were experienced and
which were fantasized, yet with confabulation it is probable that
distant fantasies are remembered, but it is not remembered that they
were fantasy rather than reality. Such confabulations, like the
momentary type, are autobiographical. The momentary or embarrassment
confabulation is very much more common than the fantastic type and is a
true memory displaced in its time context (Berlyne, 1972). Fantastic
confabulation with persecutory content has been described by Roth and
Myers (1969). This is a falsification of memory occurring in clear
consciousness. Typically, the patient believes others are stealing their
money or trying to defraud them. Memory falsifications of various types
occur in schizophrenia, depressive illness, antisocial personality
disorder and obsessional states. The more definite, fantastic and
gap-­filling features of organic confabulations are always associated
with memory defect. Central to the idea of confabulation is therefore a
notion of false reports in the context of memory disorder. At a minimum,
it involves distortions of both content and temporal context. The issue
of distortions of temporal context has perhaps been understated in the
literature. It refers to the finding that, in confabulation, there are
often recollections of true events but that are incorrectly orientated
in time and place. In other words, it is an impairment of the
chronological order of events, what might be termed an impairment of
temporal order, or source monitoring. The confabulatory recollection
also often includes additions, distortions or elaborations that either
actually or plausibly occurred (DeLuca, 2009): Doctor: What did you do
today? Patient VR: Today I got up this morning and visited the
rehabilitation unit ... then I went home and was expecting some material
and we received it. Then I came to the rehabilitation institute, no I
actually went to Jimsburg store and we had a small meeting there. Then I
came to the hospital and we had lunch and, then met with you.

Disturbance of Memory

65

The example first illustrates content distortion because the patient had
been in hospital for several months without going home and, second,
impaired temporal context because the patient had owned Jimsburg store
many years before and had sold it. The current view is that memory
confabulation usually derives from dual lesions taking in basal
forebrain areas and frontal executive systems. These lesions appear to
result in impaired strategic retrieval of memory and disturbed
verification/monitoring of the abnormal memory output (DeLuca, 2009).
Perseveration

Perseveration usually occurs in association with disturbance of memory
and is a sign of organic brain disease, perhaps the only pathognomonic
sign in psychiatry. Perseveration is defined as a response that was
appropriate to a first stimulus being given inappropriately to a second,
different stimulus. This may be demonstrated verbally or in motor
activity. The interviewer, while conducting the mental state
examination, asks, 'What is the capital of Italy?' The patient responds,
'Rome'. Subsequently the interviewer asks, 'What is the object that you
wear that tells you the time?' The patient again responds, 'Rome'.
Alternatively, the examiner asks the patient to put their right hand on
their left shoulder, which they do correctly, and then, on asking them
to put their left hand on their left knee, they again put their right
hand on their left shoulder. Memory Impairment in Schizophrenia

Earlier writers tended to play down the significance of intellectual
impairment in schizophrenia (Bleuler, 1911; Kraepelin, 1913). However,
decline in intellectual performance (Rogers, 1986), impairment in
neuropsychological test batteries (Taylor and Abrams, 1984), sometimes a
dementia-­like syndrome (Liddle and Crow, 1984) and substantial memory
deficit (Cutting, 1985; McKenna et al., 1990) have been demonstrated.
Memory deficit has been shown not to be restricted to patients with
chronic schizophrenia. There are deficits in long-­term memory, including
evidence of impaired retrieval in both recall and recognition. There is
also evidence of impaired short-­ term memory, demonstrated by deficit of
forward digit span. Furthermore, there is evidence of impairment

66

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

of working memory and semantic memory, but procedural or implicit memory
is intact. The memory deficit has been shown to be associated with
severity and chronicity of illness, negative symptoms and formal thought
disorder (Tamlyn et al., 1992; McKenna et al., 2002). Furthermore, in
schizophrenia, remembered circumstances often take on a new meaning: 'I
remember last week three red cars following me at the traffic lights in
Stafford ... I realized that I have become involved in politics'. This
was stated by a patient who had quite suddenly come to believe that all
her actions were being observed and, subsequently, her behaviour
controlled. Memory is accurate, but its significance is distorted. A
distinction should be made between delusional memories in which the
primary delusional experience is a true memory with delusional
interpretation and delusional retrospective falsification. This is a
backdating of delusion to a time before the patient was ill, based on an
admixture of remembered true events and delusional elaboration of the
meaning of those events. This has been described by some authorities as
a form of confabulation (Nathaniel-­James and Frith, 1996). In the
original study, when subjects were presented with narratives and asked
to recall them, confabulation was defined as recall of information not
present in the original narrative. The degree of confabulation was
related to problems in suppressing inappropriate responses and formal
thought disorder. In summary, there is little doubt that confabulation
occurs in schizophrenia and is related to formal thought disorder, but
it has a different signature compared to confabulation in the setting of
neurological disease (Lorente-­Rovira et al., 2007).

Affective Disorder of Memory Memory is not only disturbed by organic
damage to the brain itself, it is also affected by emotion. This is
certainly true of normal, healthy people in whom the affective state
strongly influences the processes of remembering and forgetting. It is
also true of those with affective and schizophrenic psychoses, and of
neuroses and personality disorders. Depression is linked to
self-­reported memory problems. There is also substantial evidence of an
association between depression and generic

memory impairment. It is thought that mood disorder, such as depression,
reduces the amount of cognitive processing resources available for a
given task, and in the memory domain this is manifest as deficits in the
elaboration, organization, encoding and retrieval of material into and
out of memory (Dalgleish and Cox, 2002). There is also evidence of
memory bias for affectively toned material such that information that
has an emotional valence is more likely to be retrieved if it is
congruent with the individual's mood during retrieval. This mood-­
congruent memory effect is similar but distinct from state-­dependent
memory, which refers to the memory bias for material that is learned in
a particular mood and is more easily retrieved if the individual is in
that same mood during retrieval. GANSER STATE The original paper by
Ganser (1898) has been much misunderstood. In it, he described four
criminals who showed the following symptoms. • Vorbeigehen ('to pass
by'), or approximate answers, described by Ganser thus 'In the choice of
answers the patient appears to deliberately pass over the indicated
correct answer and to select a false one, which any child could
recognize as such'. • Clouding of consciousness with disorientation. •
'Hysterical' stigmata. • Recent history of head injury, typhus or severe
emotional stress. • 'Hallucinations', auditory and visual (from his
description, they are more like pseudohallucinations). • Amnesia for the
period during which the preceding symptoms were manifest. The Ganser
state is rarely seen in English prisons, but, when it does occur, it is
more likely in those awaiting trial than in those already sentenced
(Enoch, 1990). A report of Ganser state in a man held in solitary
confinement in prison both demonstrated the rarity of the condition in
prison as well as the influence of the nature of the criminal charge,
namely paedophilia in this case (Andersen et al., 2001). This case was
only one of 268 remand prisoners and one of 53 held in solitary
confinement for at least 2 months in the study period, all the others
without developing Ganser state.

5

There has been considerable argument as to whether this condition is
primarily dissociative in nature or an organic psychosis, with different
authors supporting each contention (Latcham et al., 1978). A case that
illustrated both the hysterical (dissociative) and organic elements was
that of a female university student, aged 20 years, who experienced head
injury with concussion when in Italy. Her premorbid personality was
markedly histrionic and theatrical and, at the age of 13 years, she had
developed a dissociative motor disorder in that she was unable to walk
for a few weeks. After transfer from the Italian hospital to Britain,
she demonstrated approximate answers: Question: 'What is the capital of
Italy?' Answer: 'Naples'. Question: 'How many legs has a centipede?'
Answer: 'Seven'. This was accompanied by interference in the treatment
of other patients, flirtatious behaviour towards male staff, lability of
mood and a facetious manner. On serial testing of intellectual function
on the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale, initial testing 12 days after
head injury had to be abandoned; after 1 month, there was marked
impairment, worse for performance than for verbal items. Intellectual
function had eventually returned to her premorbid, superior level by 9
months. It is important to emphasize the point that the original
description by Ganser already indicated the role of organic factors in
Ganser state. To further underline this, Anupama et al. (2006) report a
case associated with left-­sided temporoparietal haemorrhage. Whitlock
(1967) considers the distinction between the Ganser state and
pseudodementia to lie in disturbed consciousness, present in the former
and not the latter. However, sometimes clouding of consciousness in an
organic state cannot be distinguished from the altered mental state of
dissociative disorder in the absence of other organic signs. Enoch and
Trethowan (1979) have regarded the four main features of Ganser syndrome
as: • approximate answers, • clouding of consciousness, • somatic
conversion features, and • pseudohallucinations (not always present).

Disturbance of Memory

67

It should be noted that approximate answers are not the random
inaccuracies of the quick guess but responses that appear deliberately
to miss the correct answer. These authors regard the syndrome as a
hysterical dissociative reaction and have pointed out the similarity of
features with those exhibited by normal people asked to simulate mental
disorder, the difference being that the Ganser subjects were
subsequently amnesic for their abnormal behaviour. Ungvari and Mullen
(1997) have classified Ganser syndrome with the controversial group of
reactive psychoses so that a stressful life event is the usual
predisposing factor. Cutting (2011) has a novel and original approach to
Ganser syndrome. On the basis of examination of a number of cases
including two of his own, he concludes that the Ganser syndrome is
either part of a depressive illness or a transient disturbance in the
left hemisphere's lexical or semantic knowledge. Cutting argues that the
knowledge deficit demonstrable in Ganser syndrome is not hysterical on
any account but a manifestation of a particular kind of cognitive
impairment. REFERENCES Andersen, H.S., Sestoft, D., Lillebaek, T., 2001.
Ganser syndrome after solitary confinement in prison: a short review and
a case report. Nord. J. Psychiatry. 55, 199--201. Anupama, M., Rao,
K.N., Dhananjaya, S., 2006. Ganser syndrome and lesion in the
temporoparietal region. Indian J. Psychiatry. 48, 123--125. Baddeley,
A.D., 1986. Working Memory. Clarendon, Oxford. Baddeley, A.D., 1990.
Human Memory: Theory and Practice. Erlbaum, Hove. Baddeley, A.D., 2002.
The psychology of memory. In: Baddeley, A.D., Kopelman, M.D., Wilson,
B.A. (Eds.), The Handbook of Memory Disorders. John Wiley, Chichester,
pp. 3--15. Baddeley, A.D., Hitch, G., 1974. Working memory. In: Bower,
G.A. (Ed.), Recent Advances in Learning and Motivation, vol. 8. Academic
Press, New York, pp. 47--89. Berlyne, N., 1972. Confabulation. Br. J.
Psychiatry. 120, 31--39. Bleuler, E., 1911. Dementia Praecox or the
Group of Schizophrenias (J. Zikin, Trans, 1950). International
Universities Press, New York. Bonhoeffer, K., 1901. Die akuten
Geisteskrankheiten der Gewohnheitstrinker. Gustav Fischer, Jena. Brewin,
C.R., 1996. Scientific status of recovered memories. Br. J. Psychiatry.
169, 131--134. Cutting, J.C., 1985. The Psychology of Schizophrenia.
Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh. Cutting, J.C., 2011. A Critique of
Psychopathology. The Forest Publishing Company, Forest Row.

68

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Dalgleish, T., Cox, S.G., 2002. Memory and emotional disorder. In:
Baddeley, A.D., Kopelman, M.D., Wilson, B.A. (Eds.), The Handbook of
Memory Disorders, second ed. John Wiley, Chichester. Dalla Barba, G.,
1997. Recognition memory and recollective experience in Alzheimer's
disease. Memory 5, 657--672. DeLuca, J., 2009. Confabulation in anterior
communicating artery syndrome. In: Hirstein, W. (Ed.), Confabulation:
Views from Neuroscience, Psychiatry, Psychology, and Philosophy. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. Drakeford, J.L., Edelstyn, N.M., Oyebode, F.,
Srivastava, S., Calthorpe, W.R., Murkhejee, T., 2006. Auditory
recognition memory, conscious recollection, and executive function in
patients with schizophrenia. Psychopathology 39, 199--208. Enoch, M.D.,
1990. Hysteria, malingering, pseudologia fantastica, Ganser syndrome,
prison psychosis and Münchausen's syndrome. In: Bluglass, R., Bowden, P.
(Eds.), Principles and Practice of Forensic Psychiatry. Churchill
Livingstone, Edinburgh. Enoch, M.D., Trethowan, W.H., 1979. Uncommon
Psychiatric Syndromes. John Wright, Bristol. Eysenck, M.W., Keane, M.T.,
2010. Cognitive Psychology: A Student's Handbook, sixth ed. Psychology
Press, Hove. French, L., Garry, M., Loftus, E., 2009. False memories: a
kind of confabulation in non-­ clinical subjects. In: Hirstein, W. (Ed.),
Confabulation: Views from Neuroscience, Psychiatry, Psychology, and
Philosophy. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Ganser, S.J.M., 1898. A
peculiar hysterical state. Archiv fuer Psychiatrie und
Nervenkrankheiten. 30, 633 (C.E. Schorer, Trans, 1965. Br. J. Criminol.
5, 120--126). Geraerts, E., McNally, R.J., Jelicic, M., Merckelbach, H.,
Raymaekers, I., 2008. Linking thought suppression and recovered memories
of childhood sexual abuse. Memory 16, 22--28. Geraerts, E., Schooler,
J.W., Merckelbach, H., Jelicic, M., Haner, B.J.A., Ambadar, Z., 2007.
Corroborating continuous and discontinuous memories of childhood sexual
abuse. Psychol. Sci. 18, 564--568. Gilboa, A., Moscovitch, M., 2002.
Cognitive neuroscience of confabulation. In: Baddeley, A.D., Kopelman,
M.D., Wilson, B.A. (Eds.), The Handbook of Memory Disorders, second
ed. John Wiley, Chichester. Han, Z., Yang, Y., Zhang, Q., Mo, L., 2020.
Can you voluntarily forget what you are planning to forget? Behavioural
evidence for the underlying truth of the cot-­benefit principle. Psychol.
Res. 85 (4), 1567--1582. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00426-­020-­01339-­8.
Hirstein, W., 2009. Introduction: what is confabulation? In: Hirstein,
W. (Ed.), Confabulation: Views from Neuroscience, Psychiatry,
Psychology, and Philosophy. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Jackson,
J.H., 1887. Remarks on evolution and dissolution of the nervous system.
In: Taylor, J. (Ed.), Selected Writings of John Hughlings Jackson,
vol. 2. Hodder & Stoughton, London, p. 1931. Kopelman, M.D., 1987. Two
types of confabulation. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry. 50,
1482--1487. Korsakov, S.S., 1890. Eine psych. Storung combiniert mit
multipler Neuritis. Allgemeine Zeitschrift fuer Psychiatrie. 46.
Kraepelin, E., 1913. Dementia Praecox and Paraphrenia (R.M. Barclay,
Trans, 1919). Livingstone, Edinburgh. Latcham, R.W., White, A.C., Sims,
A.C.P., 1978. Ganser syndrome: the aetiological argument. J. Neurol.
Neurosurg. Psychiatry. 41, 851--854. Lezak, M.D., Howieson, D.B.,
Loring, D.W., 2004. Neuropsychological Assessment, fourth ed. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.

Liddle, P.F., Crow, T.S., 1984. Age disorientation in schizophrenia is
associated with global intellectual impairment. Br. J. Psychiatry. 144,
193--199. Lishman, W.A., 1998. Organic Psychiatry: The Psychological
Consequences of Cerebral Disorder, third ed. Blackwell Scientific,
Oxford. Lorente-­ Rovira, E., Pomarol-­ Clotet, E., McCarthy, R.A.,
Berrios, G.E., McKenna, P.J., 2007. Confabulation in schizophrenia and
its relationship to clinical and neuropsychological features of the
disorder. Psychol. Med. 37, 1403--1412. Mayes, A.R., 2002. Anterograde
amnesia. In: Baddeley, A.D., Kopelman, M.D., Wilson, B.A. (Eds.), The
Handbook of Memory Disorders, second ed. John Wiley, Chichester.
Mazzoni, G., Loftus, E.F., Kirsch, I., 2001. Changing beliefs about
implausible autobiographical events: a little plausibility goes a long
way. J. Exp. Psychol. Appl. 7, 51--59. McKay, G.C.M., Kopelman, M.D.,
2009. Psychogenic amnesia: when memory complaints are medically
unexplained. Adv. Psychiatr. Treat. 15, 152--158. McKenna, P.J.,
Ornstein, T., Baddeley, A.D., 2002. Schizophrenia. In: Baddeley, A.D.,
Kopelman, M.D., Wilson, B.A. (Eds.), The Handbook of Memory Disorders,
second ed. John Wiley, Chichester. McKenna, P.J., Tamlyn, D., Lund,
C.E., Mortimer, A.M., Hammond, S., Baddeley, A.D., 1990. Amnesic
syndrome in schizophrenia. Psychol. Med. 20, 967--972. Merskey, H.,
1998. Prevention and management of false memory syndrome. Adv.
Psychiatr. Treat. 4, 253--262. Nathaniel-­James, D.A., Frith, C.D., 1996.
Confabulation in schizophrenia: evidence of a new form? Psychol. Med.
26, 391--399. Pick, A., 1921. Neues Zur Psychologie der Konfabulation
Msschr. Psychiatr. Neurol. 49, 314--321. Ribot, E., 1882. Diseases of
Memory: An Essay in the Positive Psychology. Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.,
London. Rogers, D., 1986. Cognitive disturbances: real or apparent?
Psychiatry Pract. 5, 6--8. Roth, M., Myers, D.H., 1969. The diagnosis of
dementia. Br. J. Hosp. Med. 2, 705--717. Scheid, W., 1934. Zur
Pathopsychologie des Korsakow Syndroms. Zeitschrift fuer Neurologie und
Psychiatrie. 151, 346--369. Schnider, A., 2008. The Confabulating
Mind---How the Brain Creates Reality. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Shakespeare, W., 1606. Macbeth V, Iii, pp. 41--46. Shallice, T., McGill,
J., 1977. Attention and purpose. In: Requin, J., Bertelson, P. (Eds.),
The Origins of Mixed Errors. Academic Press, New York. Tamlyn, D.,
McKenna, P.J., Mortimer, A.M., Lund, C.E., Hammond, S., Baddeley, A.D.,
1992. Memory impairment in schizophrenia: its extent, affiliations and
neuropsychological character. Psychol. Med. 22, 101--115. Taylor, F.K.,
1965. Cryptomnesia and plagiarism. Brit. J. Psychiat. 111, 1111--1118.
Taylor, M.A., Abrams, R., 1984. Cognitive impairment in schizophrenia.
Am. J. Psychiatry. 141, 196--201. Tulving, E., 2000. Concepts of memory.
In: Tulving, E., Craik, F.I.M. (Eds.), Oxford Handbook of Memory. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. Ungvari, G.S., Mullen, P.E., 1997. Reactive
psychoses. In: Bhugra, D., Munro, A. (Eds.), Troublesome Disguises:
Underdiagnosed Psychiatric Syndromes. Blackwell Science, Oxford. Van der
Horst, L., 1932. Ueber die Psychologie des Korsakowsyndroms. Monatsschr.
Psychiatr. Neurol. 83, 65--84.

5 Weinman, J., 1981. An Outline of Psychology as Applied to Medicine.
John Wright, Bristol. Whitlock, F.A., 1967. The Ganser syndrome. Br. J.
Psychiatry. 113, 19--29. World Health Organization, 1992. The ICD-­10
Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Clinical Description
and Diagnostic Guidelines. World Health Organization, Geneva.

Disturbance of Memory

69

Xie, H., Jiang, D., Zhang, D., 2018. Individuals with depressive
tendencies experience difficulty in forgetting negative material: two
mechanisms revealed ERP data in the directed forgetting paradigm. Sc.
Rep. 8 (1), 113. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-­018-­ 19570-­0.

This page intentionally left blank

     

Section III

AWARENESS OF REALITY: TIME, PERCEPTION AND JUDGEMENT

71

This page intentionally left blank

     

Chapter 6

Disorder of Time Chapter Outline Summary Objective (Clock) Time and
Subjective (Personal) Time Biological Rhythms and Time Disorder of
Objective Time Disorientation in Time Age Disorientation Disorder of
Time Duration Disorder of Chronology (Temporal Order) Disorder of
Subjective (Personal) Time Disorder of Flow of Time Disorder of
Direction of Time Disorder of Uniqueness of Time Disorder of Quality of
Time Biological Rhythms and Their Relation to Psychiatry Circadian
Rhythms Monthly Cycles Seasonal Variation Life Epochs

KEYWORDS Time Circadian rhythm Disorientation

Summary Time is integral to how human beings experience the world.
Although it is difficult to define, there are some overt aspects such as
duration, sequence, synchrony, rhythm, past, present, future orientation
and an arrow of time that are easily recognizable and understood by most
people without the need for further elaboration. There is also an
important relationship with space and with notions of the self.
Abnormalities of time experience can, broadly speaking, be divided into
those that affect objective time and those that affect the subjective
aspects of time experience. There are also influences of circadian
rhythms, seasons, monthly cycles and life epochs that are worthy of
noting. Space and time are always present in sensory processes. They are
not primary objects themselves but they invest all objectivity. Kant
calls them 'forms of intuition'. They are universal. No sensation, no
sensible object, no image is exempt from them. Everything in the world
that is presented to us comes to us in space and time and we experience
it only in these terms. Jaspers (1997)

In the preceding quotation, Jaspers draws attention to the way in which
human beings live in space and time and how all subjective experience is
mediated by space and time. Jaspers continues: If we want to bring these
primary things home to ourselves in some neat phraseology we may say
that they both represent the sundered existence of Being, separated from
itself. Space is extended being (the side-­ 73

74

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

by-­side) and time is sequential being (the one-­after-­the-­ other). A
sense of time is clearly central to the concept of self and its
relationship with the outside world. But what exactly is time, and how
is it experienced? Barbara Adam (1995) in her book Time Watch
interviewed a number of people about how they experience time and some
of their responses are both instructive and helpful: How time enters my
life? I was born and now I am fifteen years old. We use the word when we
ask what time it is. We talk about closing time, lunch-­time, getting up
time, and that time is up. What time is, that is more difficult to say.
It is not a person, not a thing, not a vegetable. It's a period and
units, the day chopped up into hours, minutes and seconds. But it also
divides the past from the future ... The time is now, this very second.
But I do not know what it is we are chopping up into units. I think it's
an illusion since there isn't anything to be chopped. For me time is a
dimension within which everything moves and happens. In conjunction with
space it is a universal framework. We can't move through space without
time and vice versa which means that we can't pass, spend, or allocate
time without occupying space. Nothing exists and happens without time
and space. Adam herself emphasizes various aspects of time as follows:
Thinking about time, therefore, involves rhythm with variation, a
dynamic structure of framing, timing, synchronization, duration,
sequence, tempo and intensity. This cluster of time characteristics is
implicated at all levels of being, from the most physical of planetary
movements via physiological rhythms to patterns of social organization,
from the taken for granted via the invisible to the obvious, from the
imposed via the lived to the culturally constructed. Entailed within
those processes is an irreversible unidirectionality, an arrow of time.
There can be no rejuvenation, no unknowing, no reconstitution of
pollution back into aeroplane.

These accounts indicate that time is difficult to define but that there
are some overt aspects such as duration, sequence, synchrony, rhythm,
past, present, future orientation and an arrow of time. There is also an
important relationship with space and with notions of the self,
particularly with enduring self-­identity that has been remarked upon by
many thinkers including Immanuel Kant (1781/1929; see Critique of Pure
Reason). There is a sense in which time leaves a signature on the most
diverse aspects of human life, yet in such a way that the influence of
time is often unrecognized. Aside from the obvious, such as overt ways
of measuring time, there is a time dimension in memory, in language
(given the reliance on word sequence and order for manifest meaning),
through rhythm and note order on music and in all actions including
symbolic movements, dance, sports and so on. Covertly, time is involved
in such concepts as expectation, desire, hope, prayer and even death.
These latter ideas have evolved from the writings of Eugene Minkowski
(1885--1972; 1970), a phenomenological psychiatrist. Disturbance of
sense of time or time-­related disorder is a sensitive indicator that
something is going wrong either in the self or its mechanisms. Sense of
time and time-­related disorders of biological rhythm will be considered
separately in this chapter. There is no widely agreed classification of
disorders of time. However, it is possible to divide the disorders of
time into two broad categories: disorder of objective time and disorder
of subjective time (Box 6.1). OBJECTIVE (CLOCK) TIME AND SUBJECTIVE
(PERSONAL) TIME An important distinction is that between objective
(clock) time and subjective (personal) time. Objective
time---chronologic, physical or historical time---is quantitative and
independent of the self. It depends on accurate measurement and is
objective to the degree that it is shared with others and verifiable.
Subjective time is the inner, subjective experience of time. Aspects of
both kinds of time may be affected by psychiatric illnesses. Objective
time may be altered so that the knowledge of time, that is, the
orientation to time including age disorientation and appreciation of
time duration and of chronology may be adversely affected. Subjective
time may be altered so that the

6 Disorder of Time

BOX 6.1 CLASSIFICATION OF DISORDERS OF TIME Disorder of Objective Time •
Disorder of knowledge of time: disorientation in time; age
disorientation • Disorder of duration of time • Disorder of chronology
(temporal order) Disorder of Subjective Time • Disorder of flow of time
• Disorder of direction of time • Disorder of uniqueness of time •
Disorder of quality of time

experience of time duration, flow of time, meaning of time, uniqueness
of time and succession of time may be affected. BIOLOGICAL RHYTHMS AND
TIME Although our units of time are to some extent arbitrary, natural
and biological, time operates within definite periods. The four periods
that have the most relevance to mental illness are circadian rhythms
(about 24 hours--- night and day), monthly cycles, seasonal variations
and life epochs (from birth to death). All these rhythms are important
for the mental state in times of health and form the basis for such
conditions as early-­morning wakening in depression, premenstrual
tension, seasonal affective disorder and involutional melancholia. Many
of these biological rhythms with variation of mood are biochemically
mediated through the endocrine system. Personal time (and also, to a
lesser extent, clock time) is often described in relation to these
biological rhythms. Our whole notion of the progression of time is
closely related to processes of physical function: birth, growth and
decay.

Disorder of Objective Time Disorder of objective time involves (1) the
ability to separate events into past, present and future, even if
limited, (2) the capacity to estimate duration and (3) the ability to
put events in the correct sequence. These skills are necessary for
intellectual processes to be carried out satisfactorily. Disorder of
knowledge of time is closely associated with disturbance of
consciousness, attention and memory.

75

DISORIENTATION IN TIME Disorientation for time is demonstrated by the
inability to correctly tell the time without recourse to a clock and to
indicate the date, day and season. This impairment is closely associated
with impairment of attention, concentration, consciousness and memory.
It is a feature of delirium and dementia. It is also a good clinical
criterion for distinguishing between organic and functional disorders
(Cutting, 1997). The second abnormality is impairment of the ability to
assess the duration of time, and this is also disturbed in organic
states. AGE DISORIENTATION The term age disorientation was first used by
Zangwill (1953) in relation to Korsakov's syndrome to describe a 'fixed,
stable disorientation for age, which was impervious to logical
correction'. Age disorientation, now defined as a 5-­year discrepancy
between the patient's actual age and what the patient states to be his
own age, has been considered to correlate clinically with intellectual
impairment in chronic schizophrenia (Crow and Stevens, 1978). Such
patients were much less able than chronic schizophrenic patients without
age disorientation to answer questions about date and the duration of
time. They systematically underestimated the present year and the
duration of their stay in hospital and sometimes their own age. This
gives quantitative support to the observation that for some chronic
patients 'time stands still'; they remain in the cultural set of the
time when they developed their illness. Such patients tend to use the
idiomatic language, sing the popular songs, wear the modish clothes and
tell the characteristic jokes of the time before their illness became
established. It is a mistake to believe that they are indulging in
nostalgia; their cultural life is still firmly fixed within that
particular period. Not only in the back ward of an old-­fashioned mental
hospital, but also in a hostel in the community, these patients live in
their own time capsule with invisible, but impregnable, walls. DISORDER
OF TIME DURATION Estimation of time duration has been studied using
various methods, but the results have been inconsistent. Objective
measures of estimation of the passage of time, for example, show that
patients with depressive illness tend to underestimate the passage of 30

76

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

seconds, on average, by 6 seconds. This is compared with overestimation
of the passage of time by normal control subjects by, on average, 10
seconds (Kuhs et al., 1991). That is to say that depressed patients on
average estimated 30 seconds' duration as 24 seconds and the normal
controls estimated 30 seconds' duration as 40 seconds. In other words,
time appeared to flow more slowly for patients with depression than it
did for normal controls. It is important to emphasize that this refers
to estimation of the passage of momentary time. Other investigations
have demonstrated an overestimation of time duration in depression
(Kitamura and Kumar, 1984; Munzel et al., 1988). There is more consensus
on the subjective experience of time in depression, as discussed
subsequently. DISORDER OF CHRONOLOGY (TEMPORAL ORDER) Memory of the
temporal order of events is an aspect of time sense that is often
ignored. There is evidence that patients with diencephalic lesions
compared with those with medial temporal lobe lesions have distinct
deficits in temporal order memory tasks. These patients are unable to
correctly indicate the temporal order of learned words on a list or the
sequence of presentation of particular stimuli. This has led to the
suggestion that diencephalic structures may have a function in the
encoding of temporal information (O'Connor and Verfaellie, 2002).
Frontal lobe lesions are also associated with impairment of function on
temporal order tasks. In addition to this, an aspect of temporal order
coding, namely frequency estimation, which involves estimating how often
an event has happened, is known to be impaired by left frontal but not
temporal lesions (Baldoa and Shimamura, 2002). Clinically significant
disorders of temporal order for past and current events have been
reported. These take the form of intact memory for autobiographical
events but impaired appreciation of the duration and timing of these
events. These impairments are associated with organic lesions in the
cingulate gyrus, the parietal lobes and the left anterior frontal areas
(Cutting, 1997).

Disorder of Subjective (Personal) Time Disorder of subjective time is
characterized by abnormalities in how time is experienced. This can
involve

the experience of (1) flow of time, (2) direction of time, (3)
uniqueness of time and (4) quality of time. These disorders go to the
heart of how the world is experienced. Any alteration in the way that
time is experienced will by definition influence the experience of the
objective world and may come to imbue perceptions of the objective world
with an alien hue. DISORDER OF FLOW OF TIME The flow (passage) of time
may slow down or speed up. In some instances, it may become arrested and
standstill. Tolstoy's (1895) short story 'Master and Man' is true to
life---or death. Lost at night in a Russian snowdrift, his character,
Vasilii Andreich: Got up and lay down a couple of dozen times. The night
seemed it would never end. It must be getting on for morning now, he
thought once as he raised himself and looked around. Let's have a look
at my watch ... He could not believe his eyes ... It was only ten past
twelve. The whole night still lay ahead. Time, as a modality of personal
experience, is disturbed in mood disorders. It has been observed both
clinically and experimentally that those with depressive illness feel
that time passes slowly (Wyrick and Wyrick, 1977). Lewis (1967) quotes a
patient who was depressed with affective functional psychosis:
Everything seems very much longer. I should have said it was afternoon,
though they say it is midday. They always tell me it is earlier than I
think ... and it looks as if I'm wrong and I can't help feeling I'm
right ... I cannot see any end to anything, only end to the world. The
flow of time can also be arrested such that time appears to stand still.
The patient feels that time is standing still, that in some way
everything temporal has come to an end. This is described not uncommonly
with psychotic depression. A patient says, 'I have stopped being, I have
just stopped, everything else has just stopped as well'. The incessant
sequential march of events no longer impresses the person with its
inevitability. This feeling of time standing still may also be
experienced in ecstasy states, in which the person may feel that he is
existing in the past, the present and

6 Disorder of Time

the future all at the same time. Such states may occur with mania, with
some neurotic conditions or in normal people undergoing an exceptional
psychological experience. When the disturbance in the sense of the
passage of time occurs in the setting of depression, the depressed mood
is also apparent. Another of Lewis' (1967) patients said: I never know
any moment what is going to happen. It's the most terrible outlook I've
ever had to look to. It's all perpetual. I've got to suffer perpetually.

77

time is also known to be affected in organic brain conditions. Patients
with Korsakov's syndrome underestimate the passage of time, and subjects
who have had thalamotomy experience the flow of time as speeded up
(Cutting, 1997). It is more usual to describe in dementias the
disorientation for time, place and person. This disorientation refers to
the disturbance in the appreciation of objective time. However, people
who suffer from dementia also describe abnormalities of subjective
experience of time. The most common is a disturbance in the flow of
time. Christine Bryden (2005) described her experience as follows:

And one of Minkowski's (1970) patients said: I continue to live now in
eternity; there are no more hours or days or nights. Outside things
still go on, the fruits on trees move this way and that. The others walk
to and fro in the room, but time does not flow for me. My watch runs
just as before ... Sometimes when people run quickly to and fro in the
garden or if the wind stirs up the leaves, I would like to live again as
before and be able to run interiorly with them in order that time would
pass again. In these examples, the patients are trying hard to describe
the indescribable, the experience of time standing still. In addition to
this experience there is also the related but distinct phenomenon of
living in the instant, and this feeling is allied to the notion of
finality and lack of continuity: I live in instantaneousness. I don't
have the feeling of continuity anymore ... When I finish something, I
have the feeling of not being able to do anything else afterwards and of
doing this thing, going to dinner for example, for the last time.
Minkowski, 1970

This last sentence is perhaps the key to the abnormal psychopathology.
It is the abnormal mood associated with time sense that is significant,
so depressive inpatients were significantly more likely to feel that
time was passing more slowly than healthy 'control' subjects (Kitamura
and Kumar, 1982). In mania, time passes rapidly, but the picture is
uncertain in schizophrenia (Orme, 1966). The flow of

We have no sense of time passing, so we live in the present reality,
with no past and no future. We put all our energy into now, not then or
later. Sometimes this causes a lot of anxiety because we worry about the
past or the future because we cannot 'feel' that it exists. A distinct
but related disturbance of the flow of time is the Zeitraffer
phenomenon. This is literally a time-­ lapse phenomenon. It was first
described in the German literature in the 1930s, and Cutting (1997) has
now brought it to the attention of the English-­speaking world. The
characteristic features are as follows: 1. the speeding up or slowing
down of events; 2. its association with increased speed, pitch and
volume of auditory perceptions; and 3. alterations in the fluency of
observed movements. There may also be visual hallucinations, anomalous
experience of space such as distortions of horizontal and vertical
lines. This phenomenon invariably occurs in the setting of acute organic
brain disease such as cerebrovascular accident. The original case was
described by Hoff and Potzl (1934, quoted in Cutting, 1997): Doctors and
nurses were first of all moving with a measured step, conspicuously, as
if on a film. Then the tempo of things became very erratic, sometimes
coming at a furious pace, 'like moving pictures speeded up' as if the
people involved were 'running a race' ... Music, whose source was to his
left, sounded very loud and very fast, as if 'several radios were all
blaring away together ... as if all the instruments wanted to show how
much

78

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

noise they could make'. Sometimes, other people's speech seemed
excessively fast and incomprehensible 'as if the doctors and nurses were
practising for a world record'. However, if he were addressed directly,
the rate appeared quite normal and he could understand it quite well. It
was when someone was speaking away to the left that it sounded most
peculiar -- shriller, louder and faster than when to away to the right.
DISORDER OF DIRECTION OF TIME It seems such a fundamental aspect of our
experience of time that the arrow of time travels from the past through
the present to the future. It is incomprehensible that anyone could
experience time as if events were being played in 'rewind mode'
backwards. This phenomenon was reported by one of Lewis' patients
(1967): Whenever anyone said anything to me, it referred back to some
part of my life ... One mind was living back and my mind forward.
Another of Minkowski's (1970) patients said: There is no present
anymore, only a sense of the past. Is there a future? There used to be,
but now it is shrinking. The past is so obtrusive ... I'll give you an
example of what it's like. I'm like a machine that runs but does not
move from its place. It goes at full speed, but it remains in place. I
am like a burning arrow that you hurl before you; then it stops, falls
back, and is finally extinguished as if in a space empty of air. It is
hurled backwards. DISORDER OF UNIQUENESS OF TIME Part of our experience
of time is the sense of uniqueness of the time, momentary or otherwise
that we live through. This uniqueness of time experience is instantiated
in the unique events that populate time. This means that every moment is
given its singular identity by the context, by the events played out in
a given place, by particular personalities and by association with
specific emotions. These coordinates of time stamp each moment with its
specific unique feeling.

The déjà vu experience can be conceptualized as an alteration of the
feeling of uniqueness with which time and events are invested. When this
sense of uniqueness is disrupted, novel events and the time and place in
which they occur seem familiar. In this conceptualization, déjà vu is
the experience of this feeling of familiarity for events and times that
have not been previously encountered becoming associated with a novel
situation. Jamais vu is the absence of this feeling of familiarity for
events that have been previously encountered. In other words, even
previously encountered situations are experienced as novel, that is, as
unique. Although it is possible to conceptualize these experiences as
disorders of time, it is probably more appropriate to regard them as
aspects of memory disturbance (Chapter 5). Déjà vu occurs in the normal
state and in pathologic conditions. The composer Ralph Vaughan Williams,
in describing his first hearing of the tune used in Dives and Lazarus,
explained, 'I had that sense of recognition---here's something which I
have known all my life, only I didn't know it' (Kennedy, 1964). Most
people can recall similar déjà vu experiences. It is also commonly
associated with temporal lobe epilepsy. A patient described his aura
before a fit experienced in hospital: 'I went into the kitchen. The
window looked as if I'd seen it before. I felt very peculiar'. Déjà vu
and jamais vu are quite often described in schizophrenia. Déjà vu has
been produced with brain stimulation. Penfield and Kristiensen (1951)
were able to reproduce a sensation of familiarity with stimulation of a
brain electrode in epileptic patients. This stimulation clearly produced
an abnormality of the feeling of familiarity, not an abnormality of
memory. It was a disturbance of the feeling of recognition that
accompanies recall in the process of memory. Janet considered déjà vu to
be a form of loss of reality or negation of the present (Taylor, 1947),
whereas Freud (1901) regarded it as being associated with the recall of
unconscious fantasies. In a more extreme form, the disorder of the
uniqueness of time presents as reduplication of time. The term was first
used by Weinstein et al. (1952). Petho (1985) described a case in which
the patient's central symptom was the belief that she had lived through
this life once before. The patient experienced a reduplication of every
event and, in relation to attending the 1976 Olympic Games, said, 'It
could happen that I will go;

6 Disorder of Time

I have a memory of it. But I also have a memory that I won't go to those
Games so that that memory won't come back to me.' DISORDER OF QUALITY OF
TIME In these conditions, the normal experience of the quality of time
is either lost or distorted in some way. What is central to these
experiences is that the 'taken for granted' aspect of time is replaced
by a degree of alienation from it such that time becomes salient,
obtrusive and even unreal. In depersonalization and derealization, there
can be a loss of the feeling of reality for time experience; there may
also be alteration in the sense of duration or in the perspective of
time (Freeman and Melges, 1977). The person can assess a time span quite
accurately, and there is no loss of memory. However, he has no feeling
that things are happening or time is passing; the abnormality is always
one of experience. Time itself takes on a feeling of unreality, and he
feels unable to initiate action. This phenomenon can also occur in
schizophrenia. One of Cutting's (1997) patients said: Time is somewhat
changed. Time isn't supposed to be the way it is. I don't know in what
way. Fischer described a number of cases (quoted in Cutting, 1997), of
which one said: Time stood still. Then it became different. Then it
disappeared entirely ... Then a new time emerged. This new time was
endless, more manifold than the previous one, hardly deserving the name
'time' as we know it. Suddenly it came to me that this time did not only
lie in front of and behind me, but spread out in all directions.

Biological Rhythms and Their Relation to Psychiatry Daily, there are
profound changes in the body and brain associated with the external
rhythm of the world. During the waking day, we are active, and at night
we sleep, recuperate and repair our body parts. This biological rhythm
is driven by an internal clock. The

79

primary internal body clock is located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei, a
cluster of approximately 100,000 neurons located on either side of the
midline above the optic chiasma, about three centimetres above the eyes
(Hastings, 1998). There is strong evidence that the clock is an
autonomous property of the suprachiasmatic nuclei, and individual cells,
in vitro, continue to fire rhythmically for several weeks with only the
slightest deviation from 24 hours. It is known that this clock can be
desynchronized by jet lag, shift work and depression (Arendt, 1995).
However, there is still a great deal of ignorance about the connections
with different mental illnesses. In this section, brief reference is
made to daily, monthly and annual rhythms and also to the association
with the stage of life. Among psychiatric disorders, most information is
available on affective disorder and its associations with daily and
annual rhythms (Thompson, 1988). CIRCADIAN RHYTHMS Comparing internal
time with clock time, repeated estimates of fixed time spans show a
gradual increase in time of the estimate, suggesting that there is a
slowing of the internal clock. Subjects were asked repeatedly to guess a
fixed duration of time; their estimate started by being slightly longer
than actual time and became progressively longer still. The intrinsic
period of the circadian rhythm in humans is approximately 25 hours, but
this is usually modified by external cues such as daylight (Wher and
Goodwin, 1983). This has been likened to the finding in vigilance
experiments in which there is a gradual decrease of efficiency. There
was also found to be a greater overestimation of fixed intervals in the
morning, compared with that in the afternoon, and this has been shown to
correlate with body temperature. The internal clock accelerates when the
body temperature is raised. A number of circadian rhythm sleep disorders
have been described including shift-­work type and jet-­lag type (Sack et
al., 2007). These conditions are conceived as recurrent or persistent
patterns of sleep disturbance due primarily to alterations in the
circadian timekeeping system or a misalignment between the endogenous
circadian rhythm and exogenous factors that affect the timing or
duration of sleep. In the shift-­work type, sleep is disrupted by a broad
spectrum of nonstandard work schedules such as occasional on-­call
overnight duty, to

80

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

rotating schedules, to steady and permanent night work. In the jet-­lag
type, the sleep disruption is generated by circadian misalignment, the
inevitable consequence of crossing time zones too quickly for the
circadian system to keep pace. Depending on the number and direction of
time zones crossed, it may take days for the circadian rhythm to
resynchronize (Sack et al., 2007). The clinical features of jet lag
include daytime somnolence, fatigue, impaired alertness and difficulty
initiating and maintaining sleep. The sleep disturbance may be
associated with impairment of work performance (Spitzer et al., 1999).
There is considerable circumstantial, but little direct, evidence that
circadian rhythms are causally associated with affective disorders
(Thompson, 1984). Early-­ morning wakening and diurnal variation in mood,
with the mood most depressed in the early morning, are considered
biological symptoms of depression and have been postulated as phase
advance of the sleep--wake cycle; that is, each point of the rhythm
occurs earlier than usual relative to the light--dark cycle. There is a
change in depression in that rapid eye movement sleep occurs earlier,
rather than later, in the night, and this also may point to phase
advance of the circadian rhythm. Sleep deprivation has been used with
variable success in the treatment of depression; there has been research
into the genetic and familial aspects of sleep disturbance, into sleep
disorders in depression and other neuropsychiatric conditions and into
the relationship of sleep disturbance in depression and other
neuroendocrine changes (Vogel et al., 1980; Linkowski and Mendlewicz,
1993). Although diurnality of mood usually manifests itself by the
subject feeling worse in the early morning, sometimes this is reversed.
Styron (1991) describes this for his own severe depressive illness:
There was now something that resembled bifurcation of mood: lucidity of
sorts in the early hours of the day, gathering murk in the afternoon and
evening. In depression, changes of body temperature and cortisol levels
over 24 hours have also been interpreted as phase advance of the
circadian rhythm, but the results are equivocal. The action of
antidepressant drugs on the rhythm has been investigated by lengthening
the intrinsic cycles of rest, temperature and sleep, but again, the
evidence is not clear. Corroboration

studies of air travellers crossing time zones have suggested that travel
from east to west is more likely to be associated with depression, and
from west to east with hypomania (Jauhar and Weller, 1982). However,
physiologic studies of jet lag would not support such an association
(Arendt and Marks, 1982). Thinking in relation to circadian rhythms in
mood disorders was given further impetus because of the discovery of
clock genes and cellular clocks, even though there is no consistent
finding that disruption of these clocks exist in mood disorders
(McCarthy and Welsh, 2012). It may be that clock gene expression outside
of the suprachiasmatic nucleus is involved in mood regulation (McClung,
2007). This is a matter for future research. It has been suggested that
there may be a shortened rhythm, of less than 24 hours, in patients with
long-­term schizophrenia. Abnormalities of circadian rhythm have also
been described, but not fully substantiated, in people with anorexia
nervosa and with abnormal personalities. MONTHLY CYCLES Clearly, the
most obvious human biological rhythm to recur monthly is the menstrual
cycle, and this has been linked with changes in mental state, but
premenstrual syndrome remains controversial in its definition,
management and politicosocial implications (Bancroft, 1993). Similar
psychological mood swings with a monthly cycle have been sought in the
male but not convincingly found. Estimates for the frequency of
premenstrual syndrome have varied in the general population between 30%
and 80% of women of reproductive age (Clare, 1982). Psychological
symptoms include lethargy, anxiety, irritability and depression, but
many symptoms are both psychological and physical (headache, feeling
bloated, loss of energy). It is the timing rather than the nature of the
symptoms that indicates the diagnosis, and there are clearly differing
constellations of complaint within the syndrome (Sampson, 1989). Much
numeric data have been provided by Dalton (1984) to support the
contention that there is increased psychopathology of various types
during the 8 days of the premenstruum and the menstrual period itself
relative to the rest of the cycle. She stated that 46% of emergency
psychiatric admissions, 53% of

6 Disorder of Time

attempted suicides, 47% of admissions for depression and 47% of
admissions for schizophrenia of women of reproductive age occur during
these stages, but these figures have not yet been substantiated.
However, reports of unusual manifestations of premenstrual syndrome
include descriptions of auditory hallucinations and delusions of
reference present only in the premenstrual period and hypomanic or manic
states present in the 2-­to 3-­day period before the onset of menstruation
(Hsiao and Liu, 2007). The descriptions by Dalton (1984) are distinct
from the careful analysis of cases drawn from a review of cases of
menstrual psychosis over the past 300 years conducted and published by
Ian Brockington (2005). These are cases that present with acute onset
against a background of normality, of short duration with psychotic
symptoms including confusion, stupor, mutism, delusions and
hallucinations and occurring in a circa-­menstrual periodicity and in
rhythm with the menstrual cycle. The relationship with the menstrual
cycle included cases where there was premenstrual onset and abrupt
cessation at the beginning of menstrual bleeding and the so-­called
catamenial psychosis in which the onset of psychosis was associated with
the onset of menstrual flow. It is the relationship with the menstrual
cycle rather than the phenomenology of the cases that makes them
remarkable. SEASONAL VARIATION Season of the year has been invoked for
the onset of episodes of many psychiatric illnesses. Understandably,
this is more pronounced at increasingly higher latitudes in the northern
hemisphere. Similar associations of illness with summer or winter have
been observed in the Southern Hemisphere. In both Northern and Southern
Hemispheres, patients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia are more likely
to have been born in the winter months (Hare, 1988); this is most
strikingly found for those without a family history of the illness
(O'Callaghan et al., 1991). There is a higher rate for admission to
psychiatric hospital during the summer months. For every decade since
1921, suicide rates in England and Wales have been highest in the
quarter comprising April, May and June (Morgan, 1979). There appears to
be no association between season of birth and affective illness;
however, the onset of depressive

81

illness and the administration of electroconvulsive therapy both become
more common in spring and autumn (Rawnsley, 1982). Symonds and Williams
(1976) found a peak for the admission of female manic patients in August
and September. Seasonal affective disorder (recurrent depressive
disorder, F33 in the International Classification of Diseases, 10th
revision; World Health Organization, 1992) is characterized by repeated
episodes of depression, which may vary in severity from mild to severe
and recur with an onset at the same time of year, most often late winter
or spring. It is more common in women than in men and tends to start
later in life, often about the fifth decade. There are often a large
number of episodes of depression in seasonal affective disorder (10--17
per patient), each episode lasting from 17 to 23 weeks; anxiety,
irritability, hypersomnia and gain in appetite and weight were prominent
symptoms (Thompson and Isaacs, 1988). The distinctive symptoms of this
condition have been measured using the Seasonal Pattern Assessment
Questionnaire (Thompson et al., 1988). It occurs more frequently in
higher latitudes in the northern hemisphere. In a study conducted in
Finland (Saarijärvi et al., 1999) in which the prominent symptoms
included lack of energy, hypersomnia, excessive eating, weight gain and
a craving for carbohydrates in addition to other depressive symptoms,
there was lower prevalence among Lapps, who are ethnically and
genetically different from Finns living at the same latitude. LIFE
EPOCHS Virtually the whole of psychopathology is mediated through, and
influenced by, changes in situation and life epoch. It is important to
take into account the relative preponderance of different factors:
biological change, pressure of social context and individual perception
of life situation. It is outside the scope of this book to chart these
associations in detail, but an impressionistic sketch is offered in Fig.
6.1. The psychological effects of important life changes have been
studied in primary care situations: birth of the first child (Jewell,
1984), starting school (Pitt and Browne, 1984), puberty (Howe and Page,
1984) and leaving school (Brown, 1984). Some of the abnormal mental
states associated with life changes of female gender could equally well
be discussed with life epoch.

82

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Intellectual function

Psychotic phenomena

Korsakov's syndrome

Mental handicap manifests

Traumatic

Infantile autism

Hebephrenic schizophrenia

Presenile dementias Huntington's chorea

Depression -- rare

Mood

Multi-infarct dementia

Paranoid schizophrenia

Manic--depressive psychosis

Alzheimer's syndrome

Paraphrenia

Involutional melancholia

Puerperal disorders Enuresis Coping behaviour

Encopresis

School Anorexia nervosa refusal

Neurotic reaction with adverse life events

Depression remains common and treatable

Chronic neurosis

Truancy Drug abuse Alcohol dependence Sexual disorders

0

Senile dementia

20

40

Late-onset neurosis 60

80

Age (years) Fig. 6.1 Psychiatric disturbance and life epoch.

REFERENCES Adam, B., 1995. Timewatch: The Social Analysis of Time.
Polity Press, Cambridge. Arendt, J., 1995. Melatonin and the Mammalian
Pineal Gland. Chapman and Hall, London. Arendt, J., Marks, V., 1982.
Physiological changes underlying jet lag. Br. Med. J. 284, 144--146.
Baldoa, J.V., Shimamura, A.P., 2002. Frontal lobes and memory. In:
Baddeley, A.D., Kopelman, M.D., Wilson, B.A. (Eds.), The Handbook of
Memory Disorders, second ed. John Wiley, Chichester. Bancroft, J., 1993.
The premenstrual syndrome -- a reappraisal of the concept and the
evidence. Psychol. Med. Monogr. Suppl. 24, 1--47. Brockington, I., 2005.
Menstrual psychosis. World Psychiatr. 4, 9--17. Brown, A., 1984. Leaving
school. Br. Med. J. 288, 1884--1886. Bryden, C., 2005. Dancing with
Dementia: My Story of Living Positively with Dementia. Jessica Kingsley
Publishers, London. Clare, A.W., 1982. Psychiatric aspects of
premenstrual complaint. J. Psychosom. Obstet. Gynaecol. 1, 22--31. Crow,
T.J., Stevens, M., 1978. Age disorientation in chronic schizophrenics:
the nature of the cognitive deficit. Br. J. Psychiatry. 133, 137--142.
Cutting, J., 1997. Principles of Psychopathology: Two Worlds -- Two
Minds -- Two Hemispheres. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Dalton, K.,
1984. The Premenstrual Syndrome and Progesterone Therapy, second
ed. Heinemann, London.

Freeman, A.M., Melges, F.T., 1977. Depersonalization and temporal
disintegration in acute mental illness. Am. J. Psychiatry. 134,
679--681. Freud, S., 1901. The psychopathology of everyday life. In:
Standard Edition of the Complete Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. 6. (J.
Strachey, Trans, 1960). Hogarth Press, London, p. 151. Hare, E., 1988.
Temporal factors and trends, including birth seasonality and the viral
hypothesis. In: Nasrallah, H.A. (Ed.), Handbook of Schizophrenia,
vol. 3. Elsevier, Amsterdam. Hastings, M., 1998. The brain, circadian
rhythms and clock genes. Br. Med. J. 317, 1704--1707. Howe, C., Page,
C., 1984. Puberty. Br. Med. J. 288, 1809--1811. Hsiao, M.C., Liu, C.,
2007. Unusual manifestations of premenstrual syndrome. Psychiatry Clin.
Neurosci. 61, 120--123. Jaspers, K., 1997. In: Hoenig, J., Hamilton,
M.W., Trans (Eds.), General Psychopathology. The Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore. Jauhar, P., Weller, M.P.I., 1982.
Psychiatric morbidity and time zone changes: a study of patients from
Heathrow Airport. Br. J. Psychiatry. 140, 231--253. Jewell, M.D., 1984.
Birth of the first child. Br. Med. J. 288, 1584-- 1586. Kant, I.,
1781/1929. Critique of Pure Reason (N. Kemp Smith, Trans). MacMillan
Press, London. Kennedy, M., 1964. The Works of Ralph Vaughan Williams.
Oxford University Press, London. Kitamura, T., Kumar, R., 1982. Time
passes slowly for patients with depressive state. Acta Psychiatr. Scand.
65, 415--420.

6 Disorder of Time Kitamura, T., Kumar, R., 1984. Controlled study on
time reproduction of depressive patients. Psychopathology 17, 24--27.
Kuhs, H., Hermann, W., Kammer, W., Tolle, R., 1991. Time estimation and
the experience of time in endogenous depression (melancholia): an
experimental investigation. Psychopathology 24, 7--11. Lewis, A., 1967.
The experience of time in mental disorder. In: Inquiries in Psychiatry.
Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, pp. 3--15. Linkowski, P., Mendlewicz,
J., 1993. Sleep encephalogram and rhythm disturbances in mood disorders.
Curr. Opin. Psychiatry. 6, 35--37. McCarthy, M.J., Welsh, D.K., 2012.
Cellular circadian clocks in mood disorders. J. Biol. Rhythms. 27,
339--352. McClung, C.A., 2007. Role for the Clock gene in bipolar
disorder. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 637--644. Minkowski, E.,
1970. Lived Time: Phenomenological and Psychopathological Studies (N.
Metzel, Trans, with Introduction). Northwestern University Press,
Evanston. Morgan, H.G., 1979. Death Wishes? the Understanding and
Management of Deliberate Self-­Harm. John Wiley, Chichester. Munzel, K.,
Gendner, G., Steinberg, R., Raith, L., 1988. Time estimation of
depressive patients: the influence of interval content. Eur. Arch.
Psychiatry Neurol. Sci. 237, 171--178. O'Callaghan, E., Gibson, T.,
Colohan, H.A., et al., 1991. Season of birth in schizophrenia. Evidence
for confinement of an excess of winter births to patients without a
family history of mental disorder. Br. J. Psychiatry. 158, 764--769.
O'Connor, M., Verfaellie, M., 2002. The amnesic syndrome. In: Baddeley,
A.D., Kopelman, M.D., Wilson, B.A. (Eds.), The Handbook of Memory
Disorders, second ed. John Wiley, Chichester. Orme, J.E., 1966. Time
estimation and the nosology of schizophrenia. Br. J. Psychiatry. 112,
37--39. Penfield, W., Kristiensen, K., 1951. Epileptic Seizure Patients.
Thomas, Springfield, IL. Petho, B., 1985. Chronophrenia -- a new
syndrome in functional psychosis. Psychopathology 18, 174--180. Pitt,
G., Browne, M.J., 1984. Starting school. Br. Med. J. 288, 1655-- 1657.
Rawnsley, K., 1982. Epidemiology of affective psychoses. In: Wing, J.K.,
Wing, L. (Eds.), Handbook of Psychiatry 3: Psychoses of Uncertain
Aetiology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 129--133.

83

Saarijärvi, S., Lauerma, H., Helenius, H., Saarilehto, S., 1999.
Seasonal affective disorders among rural Finns and Lapps. Acta
Psychiatr. Scand. 99, 95--101. Sack, R.L., Auckley, D.A., Auger, R., et
al., 2007. Circadian rhythm sleep disorders: part 1, basic principles,
shift work and jetlag. Sleep 30, 1460--1483. Sampson, G.A., 1989.
Premenstrual syndrome. Baillières Clin. Obstet. Gynaecol. 3, 687--704.
Spitzer, R.L., Terman, M., Williams, J.B.W., et al., 1999. Jet lag:
clinical features, validation of a new syndrome-­specific scale, and lack
of response to melatonin in a randomized, double-­blind trial. Am. J.
Psychiatry. 156, 1392--1396. Styron, W., 1991. Darkness Visible. A
Memoir of Madness. Jonathan Cape, London. Symonds, R.L., Williams, P.,
1976. Seasonal variations in the incidence of mania. Br. J. Psychiatry.
129, 45--48. Taylor, W.S., 1947. Pierre Janet 1859--1947. Am. J.
Psychol. 60, 637--645. Thompson, C., 1984. Circadian rhythms and
psychiatry. Br. J. Psychiatry. 145, 204--206. Thompson, C., 1988.
Biological rhythms and mental illness. Curr. Opin. Psychiatry. 1,
66--71. Thompson, C., Isaacs, G., 1988. Seasonal affective disorder -- a
British sample: symptomatology in relation to mode of referral and
diagnostic subtype. J. Affect. Disord. 14, 1--11. Thompson, C., Stinson,
D., Fernandez, M., Fine, J., Isaacs, G., 1988. A comparison of normal,
bipolar and seasonal affective disorder subjects using the Seasonal
Pattern Assessment Questionnaire. J. Affect. Disord. 14, 257--264.
Tolstoy, L., 1895. Master and Man (P. Foote, Trans, 1977). Penguin,
London. Vogel, D.W., Vogel, F., McAbee, R.S., Thurmond, A.J., 1980.
Improvement of depression by REM sleep deprivation. Arch. Gen.
Psychiatry. 37, 247--253. Weinstein, E.A., Kahn, R.L., Sugarman, L.A.,
1952. Phenomenon of reduplication. Arch. Neurol. Psychiatry. 67,
808--814. Wher, T.A., Goodwin, F.K., 1983. Circadian Rhythm in
Psychiatry. Boxwood Press, Pacific Grove. World Health Organization,
1992. The ICD-­10 Classification of Mental and Behavioral Disorders:
Clinical Description and Diagnostic Guidelines. World Health
Organization, Geneva. Wyrick, R.A., Wyrick, L.C., 1977. Time experience
during depression. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry. 14, 1441--1443. Zangwill,
O.L., 1953. Disorientation for age. J. Mental Sci. 99, 698--701.

This page intentionally left blank      

Chapter 7

Pathology of Perception Chapter Outline Summary Sensation and Perception
Imagery Form Constants, Extension and Synaesthesia Private Speech and
Inner Speech Abnormal Perception Sensory Distortions False Perception
Hallucination Auditory Hallucination Visual Hallucination Hallucination
of Bodily Sensation Olfactory and Gustatory Hallucination
Differentiation of Hallucinations Pseudohallucinations Other
Abnormalities of Perception Autoscopy Extracampine Hallucination
(Concrete Awareness) Hypnagogic and Hypnopompic Hallucination Functional
Hallucination Reflex Hallucination Abnormal Imagery Sensory Deprivation

KEYWORDS Imagery Form constants Synaesthesia Illusions Hallucination
Pseudohallucination Autoscopy

Summary Abnormalities of perception remain some of the most compelling
experiences with which patients present. These experiences speak to the
underlying structures of the perceptual world and the neural correlates
that make perception itself possible. Sensory distortions and false
perceptions between them point to the relative importance and the
distinctions to be drawn between sensation and perception. Illusion,
which is the misinterpretation of a normal perception, and
hallucinations, the perception of an object in the absence of a
stimulus, are the two most frequently encountered false perceptions in
clinical practice. For almost seven years -- except during sleep -- I
have never had a single moment in which I did not hear voices. They
accompany me to every place and at all times; they continue to sound
even when I am in conversation with other people, they persist
undeterred even when I concentrate on other things. Daniel Schreber
(1842--1911)

Disorders of perception, particularly auditory hallucinations or
'hearing voices', have a central place in psychopathology. Along with
delusions (Chapter 8), they are thought of as synonymous with mental
illness. This apparent association with mental illness has come to imply
that 'hearing voices' is a sign of serious mental illness and that
hallucinations portend madness. In this chapter, the nature of
sensation, perception and 85

86

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

imagery is discussed as a prelude to examining the nature of disorders
of perception.

Sensation and Perception Sensation is only the first stage in receiving
information from outside the self. The sensory system includes the
visual, auditory, tactile, olfactory, gustatory, kinaesthetic and
proprioceptive pathways. These pathways deal with the receipt,
transformation and transmission of raw and disparate sensory data from
peripheral receptors to the central nervous system. The transformation
of raw sensory stimuli into sensory information that is then decoded
into meaningful perception at the cortical level involves active
processes that are influenced by attention, affect, cultural
expectations, context, prior experiences, memory and, most importantly,
prior concepts. It is therefore the case that perception is not a
passive process but an active one that involves the construction of an
external world that depends on internal templates. Much of what we know
about sensation and perception derives from our understanding of the
visual system. In the visual system, light sensation is received by the
retina and transformed into a neural code that is transmitted from the
retinal ganglion cells to the primary visual cortex via the lateral
geniculate nucleus of the thalamus. Perception occurs when a stimulus
has undergone processing according to its form, colour, motion and
meaning. The distinction between sensation and perception is well
illustrated by the dissociation between intact sensation and impaired
perception in the agnosias. In visual object agnosia, the subject is
able to recognize that an object is in their field of vision (i.e.,
sensation is intact), but they are unable to recognize what the object
or its function is (impaired perception). This visual model of
perception is likely to have counterparts within the other sensory
systems. Oliver Sachs (1995) recounts the story of Virgil, a 51-­year-­old
man who had been blind since infancy. He had a cataract extraction, but
the return of visual sensation was unaccompanied by uncomplicated
perception. Virgil was able to 'pick up details incessantly---but would
not be able to synthesize them to form a complex perception at a glance.
This was one reason the cat, visually, was so puzzling: he would

see a paw, the nose, the tail, an ear, but could not see all of them
together, see the cat as a whole'. This case is reminiscent of Gregory's
(2004) patient, S.B., who, when he was first shown a lathe after
recovering his sight, 'was quite unable to say anything about it, except
he thought the nearest part was a handle ... He complained that he could
not see the cutting edge, or the metal being worked, or anything else
about it, and appeared rather agitated ... S.B. was allowed to touch the
lathe. The result was startling ... He ran his hands eagerly over the
lathe, with his eyes shut. Then he stood back a little and opened his
eyes and said: "Now that I've felt it I can see"'. These two cases
underline the distinction between sensation and perception and confirm
that 'we are not given the world: we make our world through incessant
experience, categorization, memory, reconnection' (Sachs, 1995). There
are various competing models of the way that recognition is achieved by
the visual system. A detailed description of these models is outside the
scope of this chapter (see Smith and Kosslyn, 2007). Bottom­up processing
consists of the primary processes that transform sensation into the
perception of objects that have form, colour, motion and location in
space. On the other hand, top-­down processes involve the influence of
our learned experience of perceiving objects to narrow the competition
between the possible interpretations of the sensory information. The
alternative models of the top-­down processes that attempt to explain
object recognition, that is, perception are (1) the template-­ matching
model, (2) the feature-­ matching model, (3) the
recognition-­by-­components model and (4) the configural models. The
template-­matching model requires an internal template in memory to which
an object can be matched. The weakness of this model is that the
template must accommodate object size and orientation, for example, and
must still be rapid and reliable. The feature-­matching model requires
only that a distinct and discriminating feature of an object on its own
should specify what the object is. Trees need only be specified by the
fact that they have a trunk and branches. The exact location of the
branches and size of the trunk do not matter. The recognition-­by-­
components model requires knowledge of the correct arrangement of parts
in three-­dimensional space. Thus irrespective of the perspective, a
bicycle is still

7

recognized as a bicycle. Finally, the configural model is a refinement
of the recognition-­ by-­ components model. It deals with the mechanism
whereby individual examples of a class are recognized. This is the
distinction between different makes of cars, the variation that
determines that one car is a Mercedes and another is a Volvo, for
example. IMAGERY Imagery is the internal mental representation of the
world and is actively drawn from memory. Imagery underlies our capacity
for many crucial cognitive activities, such as mental arithmetic, map
reading, visualising and imagining places previously visited and
recollecting spoken speech. In day-­to-­day life, it is common to refer to
'seeing in the mind's eyes' or 'hearing in the mind's ears'. These terms
refer to imagery. Jaspers (1997) described the formal characteristics of
images as follows: 1. Images are figurative and have a character of
subjectivity. 2. They appear in inner subjective space. 3. They are not
clearly delineated and come before us incomplete. 4. Although sensory
elements are individually the equal of those in perception, mostly they
are insufficient. 5.  Images dissipate and always have to be re­ created.
6. Images are actively created and are dependent on our will (Table
7.1). Functional imaging studies have demonstrated that the same
cortical areas are implicated in visual imagery and visual perception
(Kosslyn and Thompson, 2003), and transmagnetic resonance studies have
also shown that transmagnetic stimulation applied repeatedly to visual
areas reduces the capacity for visual imagery (Kosslyn et al., 1999).
Furthermore, behavioural experiments have shown that participants are
able to construct mental images that have perceptual qualities such as
colour, size, shape and orientation. These images are uneven, with the
level of detail depending on the degree of visual attention (Smith and
Kosslyn, 2007). The study of imagery remains a controversial area within
cognitive neuroscience. Theories of visual imagery have borrowed from
the language and model

Pathology of Perception

87

TABLE 7.1 Formal Characteristics of Normal Perception and Imagery Normal
Perception

Imagery

Perceptions are of concrete reality.

Images are figurative and have a character of subjectivity. Images
appear in inner subjective space. Images are incomplete and poorly
delineated. The sensory elements are relatively insufficient. Images
dissipate and have to be re-created. Images are dependent on our will.

Perceptions occur in external objective space. Perceptions are clearly
delineated. The sensory elements are full and fresh. Perceptions are
constant and remain unaltered. Perceptions are independent of our will.

After Jaspers, K., 1997. General Psychopathology (J. Hoenig, M.W.
Hamilton, Trans). The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.  

of the camera; this is referred to as the pictorial or depiction theory
of mental imagery. The foremost proponent of this approach is Kosslyn. A
detailed account of the theory and its difficulties is outside the scope
of this book (see Kosslyn, 2004; Pylyshyn, 2004). Kosslyn argues that a
mental image is figuratively accurate, as each point of the image
corresponds to each point on the represented object. This means that
there is a point-­ to-­ point representation such that performing
particular operations on the image takes as much time as it would take
to perform the same operation on the object. In other words, the time to
scan a mental image is the same as the time to scan the object.
Pylyshyn, on the other hand, argues that there are decisive differences
between retinal or cortical images and mental images. Imagery is
important for psychopathology because an understanding of the formal
characteristics or nature of imagery is required for examining the
nature of perceptions, hallucinations and pseudohallucinations.
Functional imaging studies and case reports have shown that the
mechanisms responsible for the visual perception of objects and those
responsible for imagery may be similar. In other words, the neural
substrates of perception and imagery at the very least overlap (Martin,
2006). Ultimately these investigations may shed light on the mechanisms
uniting

88

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

imagery and abnormal perceptions. In addition, there is an important
relationship between mental images and imagination, a relationship that
grounds mental operations such as perspective taking, 'as if' functions,
mutual understanding in human culture and the discontinuities between
fiction and reality in the capacity to have mental imagery (see Summa et
al., 2018, for a fuller description). FORM CONSTANTS, EXTENSION AND
SYNAESTHESIA Synaesthesia is a rare condition that is not regarded as an
example of abnormal experience but nonetheless provides some
understanding of elementary perceptual neural systems that may help to
clarify and illuminate the problem of abnormal perception. Synaesthesia
can be defined as the perception of an object presented in one sensory
modality and at the same time experienced in a different sensory
modality. This is best illustrated by giving an example of music to
colour synaesthesia: When I listen to music, I see the shapes on an
externalized area about 12 inches in front of my face and about one foot
high onto which the music is visually projected. Sounds are most easily
likened to oscilloscope configurations -- lines moving in colour, often
metallic, with height, width and, most importantly, depth. My favourite
music has lines that extend horizontally beyond the 'screen' area.
Cytowic and Eagleman, 2009

Various forms of synaesthesia have been reported including, most
commonly, graphene to colour, time unit to colour, musical sounds to
colour, general sounds to colour and phoneme to colour. Other forms are
sounds to taste, sound to touch, vision to taste, etc. Another example
of sound to colour synaesthesia: One of the things I love about my
husband are the colours of his voice and his laugh. It's a wonderful
golden brown, like crisp, buttery toast, which sounds very odd, I know,
but it is very real. Cytowic and Eagleman, 2009

These experiences seem to be spatially extended but different from
seeing or imagining. They are often experienced close to the body,
within reach of limbs,

and within 'peri-­personal space'. These experiences raise the question
of whether the extended space in synaesthesia is akin to the space in
which visual or auditory verbal hallucinations are experienced.
Furthermore, the synaesthetic experiences are consistent over time and
are elementary and specific in nature. The sensations do not evoke
elaborate or complex perceptions, but rather elementary colours, shapes,
bright-­ dark configurations and jagged-­ smooth sensations are provoked.
Indeed, there is evidence that the sensations are examples or
elaborations of form constants. Form constants in the visual domain are
variations of tunnels and cones, central radiations, gratings and
honeycombs and spirals. Variations in colour, brightness, symmetry,
replication, rotation and pulsation provide further gradations of the
subjective experience of these percepts. What is significant is that
these form constants seem to be a property of the visual cortex itself
and are more commonly experienced in the aura phase of migraine or in
periods of sensory deprivation (for a more detailed discussion, see
Cytowic and Eagleman, 2009). In summary, synaesthesia introduces the
possibility of understanding some abnormal perceptions as occurring
within peri-­personal space, which is neither like imagery nor a normal
percept. In other words, a 'third space' might exist in which some
experiences such as those in synaesthesia take place. A good way to
understand this is to recognize that normal perceptions are projected
into the objective shared space where they coincide with the material
world that is their source. In cases where no material objective origin
exists, the exact location of the perceived object becomes problematic.
In some people, it appears in objective and external space, but in
others the spatial configuration may be more ambiguous and indeterminate
and that might be best considered as a 'third space'. Additionally,
fundamental and elementary features of the neural underpinning of
perception might be involved in determining the form of abnormal
perception, that is, the nature and configuration of abnormal
perceptions are not randomly determined. PRIVATE SPEECH AND INNER SPEECH
In addition to understanding the nature of imagery, extended space and
form constants, there is a need to comprehend why auditory
hallucinations have the

7

syntactical structure that they have, namely, command format and
second-­and third-­person syntax. An approach is Vygotsky's (1896--1934)
developmental model of thought and speech. He proposed that inner speech
developed first from the internalisation of external dialogue into
private speech and finally into inner speech (Vygotsky, 1934/1987;
Fernyhough, 1996). For Vygotsky (1978) human forms of practical and
abstract intelligence develop when speech and practical activity, two
independent lines of development, converge. Egocentric or private speech
is, in Vygotsky's view, a transitional form between external and inner
speech. A child might, for example, be instructed by a parent to 'do
this or that', and the child internalizes this instruction into private
speech and later into inner speech. Or a child might use private speech
to accompany action, to reflect in real time how a problem is being
solved and ultimately the private speech becomes part of a planning
process that precedes action. In other words, private speech is an
overt, spoken language that is not aimed at communicating with others
but is linked with thinking and action. This transformation of dialogic,
external speech into inner speech may provide a basis for understanding
the ubiquity of 'command' auditory hallucinations---the grammatical
structure of private speech therefore serving as the template for the
structure of command hallucinations. The message here is that the
syntactical structure of auditory verbal hallucinations is not arbitrary
but may be tractable to earlier development forms anticipated by
language acquisition in childhood. A similar case may be made for
second-­and third-­person auditory hallucinations. Second-­person
hallucinations take a similar form to the structure of language used by
parents making evaluative statements about children's performance and
behaviours, for example, 'you're a good boy' or 'you're a naughty girl',
etc. Third-­person auditory verbal hallucinations also have the structure
of comments between parents about their children, for example, 'He's
been good today'. There are a number of things that stand out about
Vygotsky's claim: (1) he draws attention to the role of language
development as a separate entity that is linked to thought and action
and (2) that inner speech and thinking derive from private speech and
are built

Pathology of Perception

89

on fragmentary and condensed images. In my view this makes it possible
to start to interrogate the formal structure of verbal hallucinations
and to make sense of these. In his classic text, Phenomenology of
Perception, Merleau-­Ponty (1962) proposes that to perceive is to see
'standing forth from a cluster of data, an immanent significance'. For
Merleau-­ Ponty perception is irreducible to sensations, and the
perceived object is given directly and is already full of meaning, which
gives it a function in the world. In other words, the subject of
perception is not a mere spectator, and the perception is not a
spectacle. In Merleau-­Ponty's schema, attention is important to
perception because it creates a 'field' that can be surveyed. Objects of
perception already have value and significance by being perceived. These
ideas that are fundamental to Merleau-­Ponty's conception of perception
remind us that objects of perception are relevant to the individual who
perceives them. When we come to look at hallucinations and illusions, it
becomes even clearer that what is seen or heard is never neutral; it is
already full of significance and relevance for the person who perceives.
The perceived voice in verbal hallucination is not experienced as
eavesdropping on matters that concern others but rather as hearing
speech that has personal significance and importance.

Abnormal Perception We will now divide abnormal perception into sensory
distortions in which a real perceptual object is perceived in a
distorted way and false perceptions in which a new perception occurs
that may or may not be in response to an external stimulus. Illusions,
hallucinations and pseudohallucinations will be included under false
perceptions. The possibility of a neurologic deficit affecting
perception also needs to be considered. Subjectively, hallucination is
similar to sense perception: it is experienced as a normal perception.
In vivid imagery, the whole experience is imaginary. Pseudohallucination
has a close affinity to imagery but also has some aspects that are
characteristic of sense perception or hallucination: vividness,
definition, constancy and apparent independence from volition.

90

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

SENSORY DISTORTIONS Disturbance of the mental state, with or without
organic brain pathology, may cause sensory distortion. This distortion
may involve any of the components or elementary aspects of perception,
such as uniqueness, size, shape, colour, location, motion or general
quality. What is significant is that the perceived object is correctly
recognized and identified yet there is a deviation from its customary
appearance without prejudicing the knowledge of the kind of thing that
it is (Cutting, 1997). Elementary Aspects of Visual Perception

In visual perception, the recurrence or prolongation of a visual
phenomenon beyond the customary limits of the appearance of the real
event in the world is termed palinopsia (Cutting, 1997). Critchley
(1951) gave a number of examples: a cat noticed in the street one day
kept appearing at various times and various situations over the next few
days, and the words 'Pullman Springs' noticed on the back of a van kept
appearing on other vehicles over the next few months. The size of the
perception can be either larger (macropsia) or smaller (micropsia) than
expected. In some cases, there can be apparent reduction in one
hemifield of vision (hemimicropsia). These anomalies are common in
temporal lobe epilepsy. Alteration in the customary shape of the
perceived object is termed metamorphopsia. Usually, this may involve the
appearance of things taking on a different aspect: 'One woman saw people
upside down, on their heads' (Bleuler, 1950). This is an example of
inversion. When metamorphopsia affects faces, it is referred to as
paraprosopia. Typically, these perceptual distortions of faces are
rapidly fluctuant and dynamic. Schreber (1955) describes his experience
as follows: 'At the same time I repeatedly witnessed that \[some
patients\] changed heads during their stay in the common room; that is
to say without leaving the room and while I was observing them, they
suddenly ran about with a different head'. Bleuler (1950) also
describes, 'Wardmates change their faces the very moment that one looks
at them'. One of Cutting's patients (1997) said, 'Man behind a lorry was
pulling hideous faces'. Different aspects of colour perception can be
affected. The intensity of the colour (visual

hyperaesthesia), the actual hue and the quality of the colour can all be
affected. Cutting (1997) gives several examples: • 'colours are
brighter', 'colours more vivid---red, yellow, orange stood out'; •
'black looked brown sometimes', 'brown looked different; trouble with
pink as it comes across as green'; and • 'this colour looks like an old
blue---something horrible'. Bleuler (1950) describes 'one patient sees
everything as coloured red; another sees everything as white', and
Jaspers 'I only see black; even when the sun is shining, it is still all
black'. These perceptual distortions of colour occur in schizophrenia.
In organic conditions, achromatopsia, which is the complete absence of
colour, has been described after unilateral or bilateral occipital
lesions usually of the lingual and fusiform gyri. Dyschromatopsia refers
to the perversion of colour perception and occurs after unilateral
posterior lesions. The spatial location of a perceived object may be
distorted. Teleopsia involves the object appearing far away, and
pelopsia involves the object appearing nearer than it should.
Alloaesthesia is the term for when the perceived object is in a
different position from what is expected, so that the patient, for
example, experiences the transposition of objects from left to right.
Akinetopsia is the impairment of visual perception of motion in which
the individual is unable to perceive the motion of objects. It is very
rare and is said to follow bilateral posterior cortical damage. Zeki
(1993) quotes Zihl's case: She had difficulty, for example, in pouring
tea or coffee into a cup because the fluid appeared to be frozen, like a
glacier. In addition, she could not stop pouring at the right time since
she was unable to perceive the movement in the cup (or a pot) when the
fluid rose. The general quality of perception can be affected. This
usually involves an indefinable alteration in the visual appearance of
the perceived world so that everything seems different from what it used
to be: 'People \[look\] like toys---almost dead and lifeless, carrying
out automatic movements with special meaning' (Cutting, 1997); 'people
look dead, pale, cold' (Cutting, 1997);

7

'A factory-­ worker sees a grasshopper and becomes very disturbed and
excited at the sight of this very strange \[my emphasis\] and unknown
animal' (Bleuler, 1950). These experiences are examples of
derealisation. Normally, perception is accompanied by affect, which may
be a feeling of familiarity, of enjoyment, of dislike, of involvement,
of proximity and so on. This is usually appropriate and so ignored.
However, changes in these feelings may present as symptoms, for example,
'everything looks clear but it all looks miles away', 'I feel in
seclusion. It is like looking through the wrong end of a telescope'.
These and many other feelings are described under derealisation (Chapter
13). There is a feeling of unreality in the perceptual field, an
alteration in the feelings associated with the objects of perception,
but, significantly, the patient refers to these experiences with the
preface 'as if', indicating both the difficulty in describing and the
need to resort to analogous language. A patient who exemplified both the
loss of intensity of sensation and the change in feelings associated
with perception in the context of a depressive illness was a 23-­year-­old
Sri Lankan Buddhist priest. After a session of meditation, he became
frightened on waking up to discover that he had assaulted another priest
during the night. In the next few days, he felt that he had lost all
sensation. Things he saw and heard he could not understand properly. He
could see only the things that were nearby. He could not get any
sensations from his skin. He said that he could not read nor understand
nor feel sadness or happiness. He said that he could not feel anything:
'all is numbed, body and mind'. He admitted to feeling low, that life
was not worth living and that he had thought of ending his life. There
was no neurologic or other physical abnormality. Elementary Aspects of
Auditory Perception

The elementary elements of auditory perception that can be disturbed
include the uniqueness of the experience, the intensity of the
experience and the spatial position (Cutting, 1997). In palinacousis,
the uniqueness of a perceptual experience is disturbed and there is
persistence of sounds that are heard. A subject returned to answer the
door several times during a 30-­minute period after the doorbell had
actually rung (Jacobs et al., 1973). The intensity of auditory
perception may be altered so that it is either heightened or

Pathology of Perception

91

diminished. For example, heightening in the auditory modality is called
hyperacusis, a symptom in which the patient complains of everything
sounding abnormally loud, saying, 'I can't bear the noise'. Ordinary
conversation may sound intolerably noisy, and even whispering at a
distance may be found uncomfortable. There is, of course, no true
improvement of auditory perception but simply a lowering of the
threshold at which noise becomes unpleasant. The symptom occurs in
depression, migraine and some toxic states, for example, the hangover
after acute alcohol excess. The spatial position of a sound may be
disturbed so that the sound appears as if it was nearer, further away or
displaced in position. Elementary Aspects of Tactile Perception

Palinaptia is the experience of tactile sensation outlasting the
stimulus so that an object held in the hand continues to be perceived
well after it has been discarded. Stacy (1987) reports a case of a
patient with biparietal lesions who could feel her toothbrush in her
hand 15 minutes after putting it away. The palinaptic experience
occurred in the setting of astereognosis and palpatory apraxia. The
palinaptia can be conceived as a complex haptic hallucination.
Exosomesthesia is the 'displacement of cutaneous sensation into
extrapersonal space' (Shapiro and Fink, 1952; Shapiro et al., 1952).
This is a curious condition in which the individual experiences direct
cutaneous touch sensation when a distal object that is in the same room
is touched. If the palm of their hand was in contact with some object
(bed, table, book) and the dorsum of that pricked with a pin, the
patient insisted that the bed or table had been touched and not their
hand. This phenomenon could be elicited only from the hand and only when
the palm was in contact with some object. This unusual phenomenon can be
experimentally induced, and it has been suggested that the body image,
despite its appearance of durability and permanence, is a transitory
internal construct that can be altered by encountered stimulus
contingencies and correlations (Ramachandran and Hirstein, 1998). It is
even possible to 'project' tactile sensations onto inanimate objects
such as tables and shoes that do not resemble body parts. The subject is
asked to place their right hand underneath a table surface (or behind

92

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

a vertical screen) so that they cannot see it. The experimenter then
uses their right hand to randomly stroke and tap the subject's right
hand (under the table or behind the screen) and uses their left hand to
simultaneously stroke and tap the table in perfect synchrony. After 10
to 30 seconds, the subject starts developing the uncanny illusion that
the sensations are now coming from the table and that the table is now
part of their body. Alloaesthesia is a neurologic condition seen after
right-­sided vascular lesions of the putamen that is characterized by a
sensory stimulus on one side of the body being perceived on the
contralateral side. It can also occur after spinal cord lesions such as
cervical tumours, cervical disc herniation and multiple sclerosis
(Kawamura et al., 1987; Fukutake et al., 1993). Splitting of Perception

This rare phenomenon is described sometimes with organic states and also
with schizophrenia: the patient is unable to form the usual, assumed
links between two or more perceptions. A patient watching television
experienced a feeling of competition between the visual and auditory
perceptions. She felt that the two were not coming from the same source
but were competing for her attention and conveying opposite messages.
Splitting of perception occurs when the links between different sensory
modalities fail to be made, and so the sensations themselves, although
in fact associated, appear to be quite separate and even in conflict.
This anomaly reveals the underlying implicit nature and automaticity of
the binding of disparate elements of any perception, namely the binding
of colour, shape, texture, motion and position to form a coherent whole.
Also it demonstrates the important principle that anomalies can act to
reveal underlying mechanisms. FALSE PERCEPTION Now we turn from the
altered perception of real objects to consider the perception of objects
that are not there; these are new perceptions that include illusion,
hallucination and pseudohallucination. Illusions were separated
phenomenologically from hallucinations by Esquirol (1817) and later also
by Hagen, who introduced the term pseudohallucination (Berrios,

1996). Esquirol described illusions as transformations of perceptions
coming about by a mixing of the reproduced perceptions of the subject's
fantasy with natural perceptions. Illusion

In order to fully understand the nature of illusions, it is best to
briefly consider the contributions of Gestalt psychology to our
understanding of visual perception. Gestalt psychology emphasized that
we perceive entire patterns or configurations not merely individual
component parts. The aim of the project was to discover the principles
underlying how sensory information is interpreted, that is, how we come
to create, perceive and experience a coherent pattern that is more than
its parts. The proponents of Gestalt psychology, Wolfgang Kohler
(1887--1967) and Kurt Koffka (1886--1941), argued that there are regular
and predictable ways that we structure incoming sensory information and
these included processes such as proximity, similarity, continuity,
closure, part--whole relationship and common fate. Proximity refers to
how sensory elements that are close together in space or time come to be
perceived together. Similarity refers to how similar figures tend to be
grouped together. Continuity refers to the process by means of which
smooth and continuous patterns are perceived rather than discontinuous
ones. Closure is the tendency to perceive closed figures rather than
open or incomplete ones and this accompanied by the tendency to supply
missing information to close an incomplete figure. Part--Whole
Relationship refers to the fact that, irrespective of the elements that
make up the parts of a pattern, the pattern remains recognisable. This
explains our capacity to recognize a melody despite the fact that it is
played on differing instruments. And finally, Common Fate refers to the
tendency for elements that are seen to be moving together are perceived
as belonging together. For example, a group of people running in the
same direction are seen as belonging together, unified in their purpose.
A critique of Gestalt theory is outside the scope of this book.
Nonetheless, there are a number of problems with the theory, in
particular the degree to which it is capable of precise description and
measurement. Wagemans et al. (2012) examined the conceptual and
theoretical aspects of Gestalt theory after a century and attempted a
reformulation in terms of information-­ processing

7

Fig. 7.1 Illusion.

framework. This reformulation demonstrates that it is possible to
reconceptualize Gestalt theory without losing the essential elements of
its insights. In psychopathology three types of illusions are normally
described: completion illusion, affect illusion and pareidolic illusion.
Completion illusions depend on inattention for their occurrence. The
faded lettering of an advertisement outside a garage is represented in
Fig. 7.1. Being more interested in music than cars, this can be misread
this as 'Vivaldi'. We commonly miss the misprints in a newspaper because
we read the words as if they were written correctly. As soon as our
attention is drawn to the mistake, our perception alters. An incomplete
perception that is meaningless in itself is filled in by a process of
extrapolation from previous experience and prior expectation to produce
significance. Very clearly, completion illusion demonstrates the
principle of closure in Gestalt psychology. It is necessary for us to
make sense of our environment, so when the sensory cues are incomplete,
we fill in the gaps and a whole perceptual experience becomes
meaningful. When illusion arises through affect, the perception of
everyday objects is changed. The illusion can be understood only in the
context of the prevailing mood state. A child who is frightened of the
dark wakes up in the half-­light and mistakes a towel hanging by the wall
for a person moving. The influence of emotion on perceptual experience
derives from the relationship between emotion and meaning in determining
what a percept is. Even though this is not directly

Pathology of Perception

93

discussed in Gestalt theory, it is well recognized that form perception,
which refers to the separation of perceived objects (the figure) from
the surroundings (the ground), allows for the emergence of a meaningful
form from the ground. In situations of ambiguity, such as in
figure-­ground reversal, attentional shifts allow for reversal of the
figure and ground. In affect illusions, emotion determines the
identification of the perceived object, but focused attention clarifies
the error. Pareidolia occurs in a considerable proportion of normal
people. Pareidolia can also be provoked by psychomimetic drugs.
Typically, identifiable figures are seen in random or formless sensory
stimuli such as cloud formations or ambiguous reflections on polished
glass windows. Many of the Gestalt principles may be at play in
determining what is perceived, including such principles as ambiguity
between figure and ground, continuity, similarity, etc. Pareidolic
illusions are created out of structureless sensory stimuli. The percept
takes on a full and detailed appearance: 'A Victorian lady with a
crinoline and frilled bloomers'. The person experiencing it, like
someone seeing a photograph, knows that it is not truly there as an
object and that it is figurative. However, they cannot dismiss what they
see. Completion and affect illusions occur during inattention; they are
banished by attention, which will, on the other hand, increase the
intensity of pareidolic illusions as they become more intricate and
detailed. Pareidolic illusion occurs in children more than in adults. It
should be distinguished from the following conditions. • Perceptual
misinterpretation, that is, simply making a mistake as to the nature of
perception without that perception being particularly influenced by
emotion mixed with fantasy. • Functional hallucination, which occurs
when a certain percept is necessary for the production of a
hallucination, but the hallucination is not a transformation of that
perception. For example, the patient hears voices when the tap is turned
on; they hear voices in the running water, but the voices and the noise
of water are quite distinct and can be heard separately and
synchronously like any other voice that is heard against a background
noise. The perception of hearing running water is necessary to produce
the hallucination,

94

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

but the hallucination is not a transformation of that perception. •
Fantastic interpretations or elaborate daydreaming can be very similar
to pareidolic illusions and, as we have already discussed, there is a
large admixture of fantasy in such illusions.

Hallucination Hallucinations are the most significant type of false
perceptions. Here are five definitions of hallucination. • A perception
without an object (Esquirol, 1817). • Hallucinations proper are false
perceptions that are not in any way distortions of real perceptions but
spring up on their own as something quite new and occur simultaneously
with and alongside real perception (Jaspers, 1997). • A hallucination is
an exteroceptive or interoceptive percept that does not correspond to an
actual object (Smythies, 1956). • According to Slade (1976a), three
criteria are essential for an operational definition: (1) percept-­ like
experience in the absence of an external stimulus; (2) percept-­ like
experience that has the full force and impact of a real perception; and
(3) percept-­like experience that is unwilled, occurs spontaneously and
cannot be readily controlled by the percipient. This definition is
derived from Jasper's formal characteristics of a normal perception (see
Table 7.1). • A hallucination is a perception without an object (within
a realistic philosophic framework) or the appearance of an individual
thing in the world without any corresponding material event (within a
Kantian framework), according to Cutting (1997). One of the simplest
facts about hallucinations is often one of the most difficult to
comprehend: what the doctor calls a hallucination is a normal perceptual
experience to the patient. Although the standard definitions of
hallucination imply that, subjectively, a hallucination is
indistinguishable from a normal percept, some authors argue that
hallucinatory percepts may be distinct from normal percepts (as
discussed later). One of the clues that the sufferer uses to grasp the
fact that they might be hallucinating is that there is no corroborative
evidence for the percept in other modalities. A person hears voices
giving a commentary on their

activity: 'They are going to the sink. They are putting the coffee on'.
They see no one else in the room but recognize the voices of their
neighbours. They cannot understand how they can be hearing them, but
they are so convinced by the reality of the voices that they draw the
curtains and take the mirrors off the walls. There is some conflict in
their mind: they hear voices but can see no person to account for them.
However, they resolve this conflict in what is a rational way, assuming
that they believe implicitly in the genuineness of the perception:
'someone must have fixed a device or altered my sense of hearing'. What
is notable is that they do not doubt the reality of the percept.
Horowitz (1975) has investigated hallucinations using a cognitive
approach, looking at each of the following four constructs in terms of
coding, appraising and transforming information. Hallucinations are
mental images that (1) occur in the form of images, (2) are derived from
internal sources of information, (3) are appraised incorrectly as if
from external sources of information and (4) usually occur intrusively.
Each of these four constructs refers to a separate set of psychological
processes, although together they comprise a holistic experience. This
provides a conceptual framework for investigating the phenomena of
hallucination. This idea has been further developed by Bentall (1990),
who considers that hallucinations represent faulty judgements about the
origin of their perceptions, tending to attribute them to an external
source. The content of hallucination was thought to be explained, at
least in part, by the need to defend the individual's own self-­esteem.
Hallucinations may result from a failure of the metacognitive skills
involved in discriminating between self-­ generated and external sources
of information. This explanation was given further support by the
finding that hallucinators more often misattributed auditorily presented
answers to difficult clues from an experimenter than either a deluded
but not hallucinated group of patients or normal control subjects
(Bentall et al., 1991). The current, most influential, explanatory model
of verbal auditory hallucinations is the misattribution of inner speech
model. In this model, inner speech is assumed to be involved in
cognitive planning, self-­ monitoring and in reflecting on action.
Furthermore, there are possible roles for inner speech in regulating

7

emotions and behaviour. Although, in many respects, inner speech is akin
to spoken language, it can also be an abbreviated version of spoken
language, taking on a more condensed and telegraphic form. A full
description of the dialogic model of inner speech and its proposed
relationship to auditory verbal hallucination is outside the remit of
this book but can be found in Fernyhough's book, The Voices Within
(2016). The importance of this model is that it points to the ubiquity
of inner speech and lays the foundation for understanding the links
between inner speech and the obvious abnormalities demonstrated in
verbal hallucinations. Furthermore, it draws attention, implicitly, to
the distinctions that may exist between verbal hallucinations and
hallucinations in other modalities. Misattribution, in this model,
implies that there is impairment of self-­monitoring with the result that
patients are unaware that the perceived auditory verbal hallucinations
are indeed their own self-­generated thoughts/inner speech (Upthegrove et
al., 2015). Other theoretical explanations include alterations in the
mechanisms for language production, speech production and perception.
These mechanisms are implicated because of findings that demonstrate
activation of left superior temporal cortex during auditory verbal
hallucinations in patients with schizophrenia. Aberrant memory functions
may also be at play, especially in those patients whose auditory
hallucinations occur as a failure of inhibition of recall and unintended
memory activation. This mechanism is thought to be more likely in those
patients in whom auditory verbal hallucinations are best conceptualized
as intrusive memories that arise out of context and are linked to past
trauma. Finally, it is also possible that auditory verbal hallucinations
occur as a result of faulty auditory processing in which auditory
stimuli are misinterpreted as 'voices'. Attempts to explain
hallucinations by underlying neurochemistry and neuropathology have so
far not made much progress. An attempt has been made to incorporate
concepts of biological vulnerability and psychological influences in the
aetiology and clinical presentation of hallucinations, but research has
produced no single mechanism to account for them (Asaad and Shapiro,
1986). Hallucinations take place at the same time as normal sensory
stimuli are perceived. In this way, they are

Pathology of Perception

95

unlike dreams, which in fact have more of the characteristics of
illusions. Hallucinations are like normal percepts of which several can
be perceived simultaneously or in rapid succession. Thus the patient can
hear hallucinatory voices at the same time as they are seeing their
interviewer and listening to them speak. The sense of reality
experienced by patients when they hallucinate was studied by Aggernaes
(1972), developing the concepts of Rasmussen. He pointed out six
qualities of which normal people can be aware when they experience a
sensation, which also occurred in more than 90% of a series of
hallucinations. • With normal sensation, we are able to distinguish
perceiving with our sense organs from imagining the same objects;
hallucinations similarly are experienced as sensation and not as thought
or fantasy. •  When a subject experiences something, they realize its
possible relevance for their own emotions, needs or actions;
hallucinations also have this quality of behavioural relevance. • Normal
sensation has a quality of objectivity in that the experiencer feels
that, under favourable circumstances, they would be able to experience
the same something with another modality of sensation; this is also the
experience of the hallucinator. • An object is considered to exist if
the observer feels certain that it still exists even though nobody else
is experiencing it at that time; perceived objects and hallucinations
share this quality. • Experience of object perception and hallucination
is involuntary in that the experiencer feels that it is impossible or
extremely difficult to alter or dismiss the experience simply by wishing
to do so. • Normally, the experiencer is aware, or through simple
questioning becomes aware, that their experience is not simply the
result of being in an unusual mental state; this quality of independence
is present with normal perception and with hallucination. One further
quality of normal object perception was found to be absent more often
than not with hallucination. This is the quality of publicness in which
the experiencer would be aware that anybody else with normal sensory
faculties would be

96

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

able to perceive this something. Often, the hallucinator does not
believe that others could share their experience (delusional explanation
may be given for this). Clearly, cultural factors influence the manner
in which subjects describe their abnormal perceptions. It has been
claimed by Andrade (1988) that because patients in India were more
prepared to accept paranormal explanations for phenomena, false
perceptions or 'true hallucinations' are more likely to be ascribed with
objectivity and veridicality. Even if this is so and it is not proven,
the qualities described by Aggernaes would still be useful in
distinguishing hallucination from other abnormalities of perception.
Cutting (1997) has argued that hallucinatory experiences are hardly
plausible everyday occurrences and that therefore it is not that
hallucinatory percepts are indistinguishable from normal percepts, but
rather that they are taken for reality despite the fact that they are
distinct from everyday reality. He makes the point that, for example,
Lilliputian hallucinations in delirium and complex hallucinations
involving comic characters are obviously not plausible perceptions in
the real world yet they are taken as real. However, Cutting ignores the
fact that it is precisely because hallucinatory phenomena have the
quality of a normal experience that they are taken for reality despite
being, as he points out, implausible. Other authors, such as Spitzer
(1994), argue that hallucinations are not like normal perceptions, in
that patients can distinguish between real perceptual experiences and
their hallucinatory experiences. This is one reason why patients are
able to understand the reference to 'hearing voices' in interactions
with clinicians; both parties know what this way of speaking stands for.
Indeed, Wernicke (1906) had already drawn attention to when he pointed
out that the notion of 'hearing voices' was not invented by
psychiatrists but rather was used by patients to indicate that somehow
their experience was akin to hearing other people talk but also
different from this as well. Junginger and Frame (1985) showed that a
substantial proportion of patients (40%) rated the voices they heard as
more akin to inner speech than to external spoken or heard speech, thus
emphasizing that hallucinations may not always have the hallmark of
normal perception.

AUDITORY HALLUCINATION An additional video for this topic is available
online Hallucinations can occur in any of the areas of the five special
senses and also with somatic sensation. We will start by discussing
auditory hallucinations because they are most often of supreme
diagnostic significance. In acute organic states, the auditory
hallucinations are usually unstructured sounds---elementary
hallucinations; for example, the patient hears whirring noises or
rattles, whistling, machinery or music. Often the noise is experienced
as unpleasant and frightening. Of interest are musical hallucinations,
which tend to occur in older women with deafness or brain disease and no
history of psychiatric illness (Berrios, 1990). There are, therefore,
similarities with Charles Bonnet's syndrome, which is described later in
the section on visual hallucinations. Hearing voices is characteristic
of schizophrenia, but it also occurs occasionally in other conditions,
such as chronic alcoholic hallucinosis or affective psychoses. These
voices are sometimes called phonemes (confusion exists, unfortunately,
because the word is used with a totally different meaning in
linguistics, in which phonemes are the units of speech-­sound from which
words are made). Usually in organic states, the phonemes are simple
words or short sentences often spoken to the patient in the second
person as either peremptory orders or abusive remarks. These abusive or
imperative phonemes also occur in schizophrenia, but other more
complicated speech is also heard; the voices may be single or multiple,
male or female or both and from people known and recognized by the
patient or not known. They are experienced as coming from outside their
head or their self. The voice is clear, objective and definite and is
assumed by the patient to be a normal percept that, at the same time,
may be baffling and incomprehensible in its import. Particularly
characteristic of schizophrenia are voices that say the patient's own
thoughts out loud, which give a running commentary on the patient's
actions or voices, which argue or discuss vigorously with each other.
They refer to the patient in the third person (Schneider, 1959). In a
series of 100 current patients experiencing auditory verbal
hallucinations, all of whom were described as 'hearing voices', 61
suffered from schizophrenia and 78 from schizophrenia-­related conditions
(Nayani and

7

David, 1996). Fifty-­two percent of the patients had an experience of
sadness, and 45% experienced churning or butterfly sensations in the
stomach at or before onset. Most voices spoke in conversational tones,
but a few whispered and a few shouted; half of the sample heard their
voices through their ears as external stimuli. Most voices were male,
often a middle-­aged man, usually speaking in a different accent from the
patient, for example, 'an upper-­class voice'. Subjects heard a mean of
3.2 different voices and usually knew the identity of at least one; in
half of the subjects, the voices signified forces of Good or Evil. Half
of the subjects were able to exert some control over their voices, and
two-­thirds had developed coping mechanisms to deal with them; high
levels of distress were found among those with little control and few
means of coping. The majority of subjects ascribed reality
characteristics to their voices. A long history of auditory
hallucinations tended to be associated with more hallucinated words,
more voices, a greater range of emotional expression and grammatical
style and greater likelihood of delusional interpretations of the
voices. In a qualitative study of 25 subjects, Upthegrove et al. (2016)
reported that the research participants experienced the verbal
hallucinations as an entity that was able to socially interact with them
and had a well-­ developed character of its own. The experience was often
real in the sense that the participants found it difficult to
distinguish between their experiences and reality and were surprised
that other people could not hear the same 'voices'. The voices were
described as 'demanding' rather than 'commanding'. The voices could also
influence the participant's emotions by being threatening, blaming or
mocking and tricking or manipulating the participants. Participants
found the voices disruptive to the degree that their concentration was
affected and simple tasks became arduous. Auditory verbal hallucinations
in schizophrenia are generally private events, but several early writers
observed vocalizations that corresponded with the content of the voices
taking place at the same time as the hallucinations. Normal people
occasionally vocalize their own thoughts sotto voce; in the psychotic
equivalent of this, it seems that sometimes those with schizophrenia are
vocalizing their hallucinations at the same time as they experience
them. Green and Preston (1981) increased the audibility of the whispers
of

Pathology of Perception

97

such a patient to an intelligible level using auditory feedback.
Sometimes patients with schizophrenia describe abnormal perceptions in
both the visual and the auditory modalities. The examiner should be
careful not to assume that there are both auditory and visual
hallucinations present; there may be a different form, particularly for
the visual experience. A man aged 45 years described his experience as
follows: 'I hear my nephews talking \[about me\]. "He is a poofter
\[homosexual\] and a pervert" ... I see them as well. The curtains move
and I know that it is them moving them'. This is a description of a
persecutory auditory hallucination, but the visual experience is a
delusional interpretation of a normal perception, not a visual
hallucination. Patients' descriptions of their phonemes vary greatly.
Sometimes, patients talk openly and quite blandly about their 'voices'.
Not uncommonly, a patient may deny voices but assert that they hear
'spoken messages' or 'transmissions' or some other spoken sound, and it
may be difficult to decide whether this is a real perception or an
auditory hallucination. The phonemes may be so insistent, compelling and
interesting that ordinary conversation with the doctor is found boring
and even unreal in comparison. The voices may form an insistent
background to life that is so ensuring that a large part of the
patient's speech and behaviour is occupied in answering and obeying the
voices. Psychiatric nurses often observe that the auditory
hallucinations described by patients are as real to them as any other
remembered conversations, and both hallucinatory and real auditory
perceptions form the memories on which patients base their life and
behaviour in the present. Auditory hallucinations occur when there is a
combination of vivid mental imagery and poor reality testing in the
auditory modality (Slade, 1976b). This has been investigated using a
battery of tests including the verbal transformation effect. The word
tress was repeated on a tape recorder to the subjects for 10 minutes.
After a time, subjects began to hear other words and syllables. Normal
subjects and patients with schizophrenia who were not auditorily
hallucinated usually heard words that were phonetically linked to the
original monosyllable, but patients who experienced auditory
hallucinations heard words that were quite different phonetically as
often as those that were linked.

98

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

It appears that auditory hallucinations are dependent on the
meaningfulness of sensory input. When various types of auditory input
were presented to patients with schizophrenia who experienced
hallucinations, it was found that it was not the degree of external
stimulation that was required to diminish hallucinations but the nature
of the stimulus and the degree of attention it received. When the
subject was required to actively monitor the experimental material by
reading aloud a prose passage and deciding the content afterwards, this
produced a greater decrease of hallucinatory experience than any of the
conditions in which sounds were played to the subject through earphones
(Margo et al., 1981). Morley (1987) reported the psychological treatment
of a 30-­year-­old man with auditory hallucinations. Distraction by means
of music presented by a portable cassette produced a transient reduction
in the frequency and clarity of hallucinations. Subsequently, these
hallucinations were totally abolished by the unilateral placement of a
wax earplug: attention was considered more effective than distraction.
The patient located the hallucination 'about a foot away from my right
ear', and the plug was only effective in the right ear. Patients with
schizophrenia experiencing auditory hallucinations were found to be
impaired in cognitive processing in the aspects of tolerance of
ambiguity and availability of alternative meanings. Tolerance of
ambiguity was tested by asking the patient to recognize a spoken word,
which was obscured by a masking noise of people reading. The masking
noise was gradually reduced in volume until recognition occurred.
Alternative meanings tests the subject's knowledge of less familiar
meanings of words. These two processes reduced the quality of perception
(resulting in hallucination) by introducing errors of premature
judgement without the safeguard of subsequently considered alternatives
(Heilbrun and Blum, 1984). Some auditory hallucinations are considered
to be 'first rank symptoms of schizophrenia' (Schneider, 1959); these
are audible thoughts, voices heard arguing with each other and voices
commenting on the patient's behaviour. These three perceptual
disturbances, as other first rank symptoms, each represent a massive
interference with the boundaries of self-­image, the discrimination of
what is 'I' from what is 'not I' (Sims, 1991).

The mechanisms used by patients with chronic schizophrenia to cope with
persistent auditory hallucinations were discussed by Falloon and Talbot
(1981). The strategies used to cope with intrusive voices could be
classified as changes in behaviour, in sensory or affective state and in
cognition. Changes in behaviour included alteration of posture, such as
lying down, or seeking out the company of others. Physiologic arousal
was altered to cope with hallucinations through relaxation or physical
exercise such as jogging. Cognitive methods included control of
attention or active suppression of hallucinations. These authors believe
that the common sense application of strategies used by patients can be
beneficial in the control of these distressing symptoms. Finally, there
is a vigorous debate about the presence of auditory/verbal
hallucinations in disorders other than the psychoses such as borderline
personality disorders and also in normal populations (McCarthy-­ Jones,
2012). In a recent report from the Adult Psychiatric Morbidity survey,
it was reported that, overall, 12.6% of individuals with a mental
disorder reported hallucinations compared with 3.7% of individuals who
did not have a mental disorder. Surprisingly, hallucinations were
prevalent in agoraphobia, specific phobia, social phobia, obsessive c­
ompulsive disorder, panic disorder, depression, borderline personality
disorder and generalized anxiety disorder (Kelleher and DeVylder, 2017).
The question that remains to be answered is whether the form of these
verbal hallucinations is identical to the form of the verbal
hallucinations in schizophrenia, for example. Further, there is some
evidence derived from functional neuroimaging suggesting that the neural
underpinning of auditory verbal hallucinations in schizophrenia may
involve altered dopamine synthesis and reduced functional lateralisation
(Upthegrove et al., 2015). It is important to emphasise that not all
auditory hallucinations are verbal in nature. Musical hallucinations,
for example, are reported in individuals with deafness and are often
thought of as the auditory equivalence of Charles Bonnet syndrome, a
condition that is associated with visual hallucinations in the context
of visual impairment. Musical hallucinations often involve familiar
melodies such as ballads and hymns. The melodies can be repetitive
including a single line or verse and can be present in both ears.
Stewart

7

et al. (2006) make the point that the phenomenology of musical
hallucinations, especially the fact that the perceptions are of complex
patterned sequences that are in line with the previous musical listening
experience of the subject, suggests that there is amplification of
normal imagery that is usually suppressed by inputs from the external
sensory world that decrease in the context of deafness (Stewart et al.,
2006). The proposition is that the decreased signal-­to-­noise ratio in
auditory transmission in the deaf leads to inappropriate activation of
cortical networks usually involved in perception and imagery, and the
networks involved are also those involved during musical perception and
imagery in the absence of deafness. Furthermore, there is the claim that
the auditory perception in the context of deafness is not verbal in
nature because the fundamental aspects of music are more predictable and
repetitive compared to speech such that hearing a few notes of music is
sufficient to predict the coming notes. Hence, the tendency to hear
music rather than language in deafness is more likely. VISUAL
HALLUCINATION Visual hallucinations characteristically occur in organic
states rather than in the functional psychoses. A 69-­year-­old married
man was referred to the duty psychiatrist in a casualty department for
assessment. He said that his life was at an end and he deserved to die,
as he had been caught masturbating by his daughter-­ in-­ law and
grandchildren that afternoon. His wife said that this was not true; he
had become very agitated and distressed over 12 hours, and no one had
visited the house that day. During the interview, he was intensely
agitated and put his hands in front of his face. He claimed that he
could see clearly a sheet of glass half a metre in front of him, which
he attempted to move. Later, he described seeing dust falling down
everywhere and was trying to catch it. He manifested clouding of
consciousness. A diagnosis of viral encephalitis was made on the basis
of the history of persistent headache, the neurological signs and the
finding of lymphocytosis in the cerebrospinal fluid. It is often
difficult to decide whether the full criteria for the presence of a
hallucination have been fulfilled in the visual modality. Distortion of
visual percepts based on either sensation of external stimuli or
internal interference with the visual pathway may produce

Pathology of Perception

99

disturbances that are similar to those occurring with entirely new
perceptions. Sometimes the account of an experience given by the patient
may sound like a sensory transformation rather than a hallucination, but
the bizarre and complex nature of the experience can render the
description of the phenomena difficult. Visual hallucinations occur with
occipital lobe tumours involving the visual cortex, for example,
tuberculous granuloma in the left occipital lobe can cause a 'starburst'
effect in the right visual field (Werring and Marsden, 1999).
Hallucinations and other visual disturbances may occur with other
physical lesions, such as loss of colour vision, homonymous hemianopia
(loss of half of the field of vision, the same half in both eyes; Komel,
1985), dyslexia (inability to read at a level appropriate to the
individual's age and intelligence), alexia (word blindness) in a
dominant hemisphere lesion and cortical blindness (blindness due to a
lesion of the cortical visual centre). They may, as in delirium tremens,
be associated with an affect of terror or with an affect of hilarious
absurdity. Similar visual hallucinations, illusions and changes in mood
occur in other forms of delirium. Visual hallucinations also occur in
the post-­concussional state, in epileptic twilight states and in
metabolic disturbances, for example, hepatic failure. Visual
hallucinations have also been described in association with various
dementing processes, including Alzheimer's disease (Burns et al., 1990),
senile dementia (Haddad and Benbow, 1992), multi-­infarct dementia
(Cummings et al., 1987), Pick's disease (Ey, 1973), Lewy body dementia
(Donaghy and McKeith, 2014) and Huntington's chorea (Lishman, 1989).
Among referrals to a psychogeriatric service, visual perceptual
disturbance occurred in 30% of patients; there was a strong correlation
between the presence of visual hallucination and eye pathology (Berrios
and Brook, 1984). In fact, visual hallucinations are common in elderly
patients with a wide variety of medical conditions and often no
psychiatric history (Barodawala and Mulley, 1997). Hallucinations have
also been described by individuals after sniffing glue and petrol. The
drugs mescaline and lysergic acid diethylamide are potent causes of
visual perceptual change. Visual hallucinations are infinitely variable
in their content. They range from quite crudely formed flashes of light
or colour (elementary hallucinations), through more organized

100

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

patterns and shapes, to complex, full, visual perceptions of people and
scenes. Visual and auditory hallucinations may occur synchronously in
organic states. For example, in temporal lobe epilepsy a visual
hallucination of a human figure was also heard to speak. With
psychomimetic drugs, there are alterations in spatial perception, in the
perception of movement and in the appreciation of colour, and visual
illusions and hallucinations may occur. Visual hallucinations are very
uncommon in schizophrenia (although some of the earlier writers used the
term hallucination for other visual abnormalities that occurred).
Persaud and Cutting (1991) cautiously refer to 'anomalous perceptual
experiences in the visual modality' in schizophrenic patients, for
example, as in the patient who although still recognising a face
considers it to be distorted. These authors report four such cases of
perceptual disturbance in one visual field, always the left field.
Visual hallucinations are not reckoned to occur in uncomplicated
affective psychoses. It is common in schizophrenia for the patient to
describe auditory hallucinations associated with visual
pseudohallucinations. Although the phonemes are complete and appear to
have all the characteristics, subjectively, of a normal percept, the
visual experiences are often inferred on the basis of the auditory
hallucinations and of contemporaneous delusions. It is possible to see,
in most instances, how psychotically disordered fantasy accounts for the
content of the visual experiences. Vivid elaborate scenic hallucinations
have been described in oneiroid states of schizophrenia. In these
states, there is also an altered state of consciousness, and the patient
appears to lose contact with their environment and acts as if they were
dreaming. The elements of the hallucinations are said to have a
melodramatic quality including scenes of catastrophes, dangerous
adventures, and glimpses of heaven and hell. Sometimes, visual
hallucinations do not appear to be associated with any other psychiatric
abnormality. Charles Bonnet's syndrome (phantom visual images) is a
condition in which individuals experience complex visual hallucinations
in association with impaired vision without demonstrable psychopathology
or disturbance of normal consciousness (Schultz and Melzack, 1991).
Although more common in the elderly, it can occur at any age and is
usually associated with central or peripheral reduction in vision.
Episodes

may last from days to years, with images of people, animals, buildings
and scenery being most frequently reported, the images being static,
moving in the visual field or animated. Clearly, this condition is of
importance in the differential diagnosis. In most cases of Charles
Bonnet's syndrome and in musical hallucinosis in the deaf to which it
has been likened, there is no demonstrable brain pathology (Fuchs and
Lauter, 1992), although it has been reported in the context of central
neurophysiological disturbance such as bilateral occipital infractions
or in association with optic neuritis in multiple sclerosis. The
features of this syndrome have been considered by Podoll et al. (1990)
to be as follows: • Elderly persons with normal consciousness experience
visual hallucinations. •  None of the following are present: delirium,
dementia, organic affective or delusional syndromes, psychosis,
intoxication or neurological disorder with lesions of the central visual
cortex. • There is reduced vision resulting from eye disease in most
cases. Hallucinations in this condition are always located in external
space, are usually coloured and are much more vivid and distinct than
the patient's impaired vision would otherwise permit. The content is
elementary in about one-­third of cases, such as photisms or geometric
patterns. Complex objects are most often human figures, less often
animals, plants and inanimate objects; these objects may be fragmented
and may change over time---figures gliding through the room. The
percepts may be modifiable by voluntary control, for example, closing
the eyelids, and there is usually insight concerning their 'unreality'.
It is becoming clearer that Charles Bonnet syndrome results from reduced
visual sensory stimuli that leads to excessive excitability and
spontaneous neural activity that manifest as a visual hallucinatory
experience (ffytche, 2007). Furthermore, analysis of the visual percepts
shows that there are three main types including (1) extended landscape
scenes, (2) grotesque, disembodied and distorted faces with large
eyeballs and (3) visual perseverations such as palinopsia (ffytche and
Howard, 1999). These distinct types of perceptions typically arose from
predictable neural lesion sites: extended landscape scenes derived from
lesions in anterior temporal projections to the ventral

7

Fig. 7.2 The experience of delirium tremens.

visual pathways; distorted faces occurred from lesions in the superior
temporal sulcus; and visual perseverations occurred following lesions in
the visual parietal lobe. ffytche (2007) has argued that this
demonstrates the utility of neurophenomenology. The alcoholic withdrawal
syndrome of delirium tremens is a specific form of acute organic
syndrome and is characterized by gross changes in perception, mood and
consciousness state (see Chapter 3). Pareidolic, or affective, illusions
are often prodromal in delirium tremens, and these are followed by
visual and haptic Lilliputian hallucinations, which are often of little
animals or diminutive men. There is a bizarre intermingling of affect so
that the patient experiences stark terror and, at the same time, a
humorous response to absurd experiences especially common with these
disorders. The hallucinations in delirium tremens may change so rapidly
that the patient has difficulty describing them. A patient experiencing
such visual phenomena tried to portray this in Fig. 7.2. Illusions are
frequently associated with hallucinations, especially affective
illusions in which, through the predominant mood state of terror, cracks
in the wall of the ward or curtains moving in the breeze may be
misinterpreted in a frightening way. At the same time, such patients are
highly suggestible and can form abnormal visual experiences as a result
of suggestion. HALLUCINATION OF BODILY SENSATION It has been
convincingly argued by Berrios (1982) that diverse 'perceptions without
object' were brought together by Esquirol (1817) within the term

Pathology of Perception

101

hallucination, which was relevant for 'distance senses' such as vision,
hearing and, to a lesser extent, smell and taste but not really
applicable to touch. So-­called tactile hallucinations appear to be
different phenomenologically and to only superficially resemble
hallucinations of the distance senses. It would seem for tactile
hallucinations that the most important corroborating diagnostic factor
is the concurrence of a delusional component. Berrios concludes that the
concepts of hallucination and delusion may be closer to each other than
has often been considered, especially in British psychiatry.
Hallucinations of bodily sensation may be superficial, kinaesthetic or
visceral. Superficial hallucinations affecting skin sensation may be
thermic, an abnormal perception of heat and cold ('my feet on fire');
haptic, of touch ('a dead hand touched me'); or hygric, a perception of
fluid ('all my blood has dropped into my legs and I can feel a water
level in my chest'). Paraesthesiae is the term describing the sensation
of tingling or 'pins and needles'. These may be delusionally ascribed,
although of course they are often neurologically mediated, for example,
ulnar nerve compression causing pins and needles in the forearm.
Kinaesthetic hallucinations are those of muscle or joint sense. The
patient feels that their limbs are being bent or twisted or their
muscles squeezed. Such hallucinations in schizophrenia are often linked
with bizarre somatic delusions. A man suffering from schizophrenia
described the experience: 'I thought my life was outside my feet and
made them vibrate'---he experienced kinaesthetic hallucinations of
vibration. Kinaesthetic hallucinations may occur in organic states: 'a
feeling of being rocked about'. Abnormal kinaesthetic perceptions have
also been described in the withdrawal state from benzodiazepine drugs
(Schopf, 1983) or from alcohol intoxication. A man, after recovery,
described his episode of delirium tremens, saying, 'I felt as if I was
floating in the air about 50 feet above the ground'. He illustrated this
feeling with the picture in Fig. 7.2. Visceral hallucinations are false
perceptions of the inner organs. There is only a limited range of
possible visceral sensation, for example, pain, heaviness, stretching or
distension, palpitation and various combinations of these, such as
throbbing. However, the possible range of bizarre schizophrenic false

102

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

perceptions and interpretations is limitless. One man believed that he
could feel semen travelling up his vertebral column into his brain,
where it became laid out in sheets. Hallucinations of bodily sensation
are quite common in schizophrenia and are almost always delusionally
elaborated, often by delusions of control (Chapters 8 and 12). Haptic
hallucinations may be experienced as touch ('like a hand stroking me')
or painful ('knives stabbing my neck'). A patient believed that the
smoke sensor in the ward was an infrared camera, 'because I feel it warm
on my neck'. Another patient described a haptic hallucination in which
she experienced genital stimulation that she ascribed to having sexual
intercourse simultaneously with 'both Kennedy brothers all the time'. It
is important to realize that there is both a hallucinatory and a
delusional component in such experiences. One particularly unpleasant
form of haptic hallucination is called formication (Latin: formica,
'ant'), the sensation of little animals or insects crawling over the
body or just under the skin. This is especially associated with some
drug states and withdrawal symptoms, for example, cocaine addiction and
alcohol withdrawal. It is often associated with delusions of
infestation, but the latter may occur without hallucination. OLFACTORY
AND GUSTATORY HALLUCINATION Hallucinations of smell and of taste
frequently occur together, and it may be difficult or impossible to
distinguish them from each other. This is not surprising, as a lot of
what a layperson ascribes to taste is actually determined by smell: 'the
eucalyptus fragrance of this wine from the Barossa Valley'. Olfactory
Hallucinations

Olfactory sensation or memory is often associated with powerful
emotional resonances; it is not surprising, therefore, that
hallucinations are also invested with a strong affective component.
Olfactory hallucinations occur in schizophrenia, in epilepsy and in some
other organic states. The patient has a hallucination of smell. The
smell may or may not be unpleasant, but it usually has a special and
personal significance (Aggernaes' quality of relevance); for example, it
may be associated with the belief that people are pumping a poisonous or
an anaesthetic gas into the house, which the patient alone can smell.
Sometimes, patients have an olfactory

hallucination relating to themselves: 'I smell repulsive,
unbearable---like a corpse, like faeces'. This particular patient killed
himself. He felt that he created such a stench that he was intolerable
in any reasonable society. Sometimes patients misinterpret and overvalue
normal body odours. A delusion in which a patient believes themself to
smell malodorously without an accompanying olfactory hallucination is
quite common in schizophrenia and related paranoid states. A distinct
condition in which olfactory hallucinations also occur is olfactory
reference syndrome. It was originally codified by Pryse-­ Phillips in his
seminal paper published in 1971 (Pryse-­Phillips, 1971). He described 36
patients presenting with the belief that smells emanated from their
bodies without the intervention of any external agency, what
Pryse-­Phillips termed intrinsic hallucinations. This belief was
accompanied by a 'contrite' reaction manifest as a deep sense of shame,
embarrassment, self-­abasement and a sensitivity to the reaction of
people around them. There were also behavioural responses to this belief
including excessive washing, excessive changing of clothing and social
withdrawal. This condition was distinguished from olfactory
hallucinations in the context of schizophrenia, mood disorder and
epilepsy. Pryse-­Phillips makes the point that olfactory reference
syndrome has been previously described in the literature and given
different names including délire à bâse olfactive, parosmia and
bromidrosiphobia. What is significant is that in describing olfactory
reference syndrome, Pryse-­Phillips was focusing on olfactory
hallucinations as the presenting complaint in the absence of other
primary psychiatric or neurological condition. Current definitions of
olfactory reference syndrome concentrate on the following criteria: (1)
a persistent false belief that one emits a malodorous smell; this belief
may encompass a range of insight; (2) the belief causes clinically
significant distress and is time consuming or results in significant
impairment in social, occupational or other important areas of
functioning; and (3) the belief is not accounted for by another mental
disorder or a general medical condition (Begum & McKenna, 2011). In
other words, the role of hallucinatory experience has been de-­emphasized
in the definition of olfactory reference syndrome even though a
significant number of the reported patients make the claim that they can
smell the odour.

7

Olfactory hallucinations also occur in epilepsy, especially in
association with a temporal lobe focus, and commonly form the aura (or
earliest phase) of such fits. A patient described a smell of burning
rubber regularly just before he became unconscious. Visual, auditory,
gustatory and visceral hallucinations also occur in temporal lobe
epilepsy. Gustatory Hallucinations

Gustatory hallucinations occur in various conditions. In schizophrenia,
they sometimes occur with delusions of being poisoned. There may be a
persistent taste, for example, 'onions', 'a metallic taste' or some more
bizarre type of taste. In depression and in schizophrenia, the flavour
of food may disappear altogether or become unpleasant. Changes in
gustatory perception may occur with some organic states, such as
temporal lobe epilepsy, and also with some psychotropic drugs, for
example, lithium carbonate or disulfiram. A relatively common condition
is burning mouth syndrome. This is a condition that is seen in dentistry
and maxillofacial surgery. This condition presents with a burning
sensation on the tongue, palate, inner aspects of the cheeks and gums.
It is often associated with altered taste sensation. The patients report
metallic taste, viscid or gritty saliva or dryness of the mouth. It is
often difficult to describe how this disturbance of taste is mediated
and, therefore, whether it is hallucinatory. DIFFERENTIATION OF
HALLUCINATIONS Before deciding that a patient is hallucinated, the
possibility of other perceptual experiences must be considered. These
are not necessarily of pathologic significance. The differential
diagnosis of hallucination includes illusion, pseudohallucination,
hypnagogic and hypnopompic images and, of course, vivid imagery and
normal perception.

Pseudohallucinations Pseudohallucination is one of the least understood
phenomena in psychopathology. As Berrios (1996) remarks, 'it has been
used to refer to real perceptions perceived as "unreal", isolated
hallucinations which do not fit into favoured diagnoses, side effects of
drugs, withdrawal hallucinations, diabetic hallucinations, etc.' Berrios
goes on to say:

Pathology of Perception

103

Unrestrained, usage has strayed even wider, pseudohallucinations being
sometimes applied to (i) phenomena which meet criteria for
hallucinations or illusions, (ii) hallucinations in people without
mental illnesses (e.g., the bereaved), (iii) the false perceptions of
people recovering from psychotic illnesses, (iv) factitious
hallucinations in malingerers, and (v) occasionally, normal but unusual
perceptions which initially seem to be hallucinations (e.g., radio
reception in dental amalgam or intracranial shrapnel fragments).
Furthermore, part of the confusion over the meaning of the term
pseudohallucination has arisen because it is often used in two different
and mutually contradictory ways, according to Kräupl Taylor (1981). On
one hand it refers to hallucinations with insight (Hare, 1973), and on
the other hand it refers to vivid internal images. Hallucinations with
insight would be those hallucinatory experiences in which the subject is
aware that the hallucinatory percepts do not correspond to external
reality despite the perceptions being veridical and in external
objective space. Vivid internal images are those phenomena that have all
the clarity and vividness of a normal percept except that they occur in
inner subjective space. Jaspers (1997) identified pseudohallucination as
similar to normal perception except that it occurs in inner subjective
space. Pseudohallucination shares this characteristic with imagery. In
other words, for Jaspers, pseudohallucination is a perceptual experience
that is figurative and occurs in inner subjective space, not in external
objective space, but it has all the vividness and clarity of a normal
perception and can be retained unaltered. It occurs independently of the
subject's will and therefore cannot be deliberately evoked. Jaspers
derived this description of pseudohallucination from Kandinsky.
Kandinsky (1849--89) based his description of pseudohallucination on his
own personal experiences. He died by suicide at age 40 years while a
patient at St Nicholas Hospital, St Petersburg, where he had once been
medical superintendent (Lerner et al., 2001). In 1885 he described
pseudohallucination as a separate form of perception from true
hallucination and wrote, 'subjective perceptions which in vividness and
character are real hallucinations except that they do not have

104

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

objective reality' (quoted in Berrios, 1996). Pseudohallucinations can
be identified in the visual, auditory or tactile modalities. Hare (1973)
has given as an example of pseudohallucination the voice heard by an
obsessional or depressed person. It is described by the patient as a
voice but is actually recognized as their own thoughts.
Pseudohallucinations are not pathognomonic of any particular mental
illness. A patient with histrionic personality disorder saw a robed
figure at the foot of her bed lifting his index finger to his mouth to
caution her to silence. The image was sharp and vivid but was recognized
as being seen with the inner eye. The patient knew that the figure was
not at the foot of the bed and that other people in the room could not
see him. When she tried to relate the figure in space to the background
of her field of vision, in this case the walls and curtains of the room,
she realized that she could not do so; it had no definite location in
external space, that is, outside herself. To summarize, the significance
of hallucination is that it almost always denotes a morbid mental state.
The significance of pseudohallucination is in its differential diagnosis
from hallucination, as pseudohallucination is not necessarily
psychopathologic.

Other Abnormalities of Perception AUTOSCOPY Autoscopy is the experience
of seeing an image of oneself in external space and knowing that it is
oneself (see also visual hallucination). It is sometimes called the
phantom mirror image. It is one of the abnormalities of unity of self
described in Chapter 12. Like so many topics of considerable
phenomenological interest, the term autoscopy has been used with
different meanings and definitions since its first use by Féré in 1891.
The experience concerns how the individual regards the boundaries of
self and is discussed further with other disorders of self-­image. It has
been suggested that it is best to reserve the term autoscopy for
abnormalities of visual perception involving seeing oneself---'visual
experiences where subjects see an image of themselves in external space
viewed from within their own physical body' (Dening and Berrios, 1994).
However, it is also true that Brugger and colleagues (1997) describe the
phenomenology of five

main types of autoscopy, namely (1) autoscopic hallucination, (2)
heautoscopy proper, (3) feeling of presence, (4) out-­of-­body experience
and (5) negative autoscopy. Autoscopic hallucination involves the pure
visual experience of seeing one's own body or its upper parts as if
reflected in a mirror. In other words, in autoscopic hallucination, the
percept is often but not always a mirror image of the patient. The
hallucinatory experience is in natural colours and is usually of a
motionless perception or the percept may imitate the gestures, movements
or face expressions of the patient. Heautoscopy proper also involves
visualization of the double but in addition there may be other anomalous
experiences including a feeling of detachment, strangeness of one's body
as well as lightness and occasionally the experience of vertigo. The
double may appear transparent, grey or ghost-­like. The double may
imitate the patient's actions but may also act autonomously, not
necessarily mirroring the patient's actions or movements. The term
feeling of presence describes a feeling of the physical presence of
another person close to the patient who is not seen but appears to be
just out of sight. The patient may, in addition, experience altered or
anomalous phenomena regarding their body. Out-­of-­body experience
involves seeing one's body from an outside perspective. The core of this
experience is the separation of the body from the experiencing self.
Typically, the body is observed from a detached and an elevated spatial
position. The body is usually motionless during the observation. The
surrounding environment is also seen from an elevated perspective. There
is an associated strong emotional accompaniment and significance to the
experience and the emotions are more often positive except in cases
where the experience is a precursor to a seizure. Negative heautoscopy
refers to the failure to perceive one's own body in a mirror or when
looked at directly. It is often accompanied by depersonalisation and the
loss of awareness of one's own body, sometime termed aschematia.
Although this topic has been of considerable literary interest over the
years, clinical cases with definite perceptual abnormality are not
common. Dening and Berrios reviewed 56 cases, 53 from the literature and
3 of their own. Males predominated, with a ratio of two to one, and the
mean age of subjects was 40 years.

7

Both neurological and psychiatric disorder occurred in about 60% of
cases (different subjects), with epilepsy in approximately one-­third.
Decreased consciousness occurred in 45%, delirium in 18% and 9% of
subjects were dead within 1 year. Visual imagery or narcissism was
present in one-­third of subjects and depersonalisation in 18%. The
commonest psychiatric diagnosis was depression. Usually, autoscopic
episodes lasted for less than 30 minutes. Almost always, the subject saw
their own face; quite often, they were lying in bed at the time. The
experience often provoked distress, fear, anxiety and depression. This
subjective experience was complex, with different components and causes
rather than unitary. EXTRACAMPINE HALLUCINATION (CONCRETE AWARENESS) 'I
know that there is someone behind me on the right all the time; he moves
when I move', 'I keep on hearing them talking about my disease down in
the post office' (half a mile away)---these hallucinations are
experienced outside the limits of the sensory field, outside the visual
field or beyond the range of audibility. They are not of diagnostic
importance, as they occur in schizophrenia, epilepsy and other organic
states and as hypnagogic hallucinations in healthy people. The
phenomenon is quite definitely experienced as a perception by the
patient and not just as a belief or an idea. HYPNAGOGIC AND HYPNOPOMPIC
HALLUCINATION These are perceptions that occur while going to sleep
(hypnagogic) and on waking (hypnopompic). According to Zilboorg and
Henry (1941), hypnagogic hallucinations were first mentioned by
Aristotle. It is known that the consciousness level fluctuates
considerably in different stages of sleep, and both types of abnormal
perception probably occur in a phase of increasing drowsiness: the
structure of thought, feelings, perceptions, fantasies and, ultimately,
self-­awareness becomes blurred and merges into oblivion. These
experiences occur in many people in good health. They are also described
with narcolepsy, cataplexy and sleep paralysis to form a characteristic
tetrad of symptoms (see Narcolepsy for descriptions). Toxic states such
as glue sniffing, acute fevers (especially in children), postinfective
depressive states and phobic anxiety neuroses

Pathology of Perception

105

are other conditions that may be associated with these perceptions. The
perception may be visual, auditory or tactile. It is sudden in
occurrence, and the subject believes that it woke them up, for example,
a loud voice in the street below saying 'world war!', a feeling of
someone pushing them over the bed or seeing a man coming across the
bedroom. The importance of these phenomena in psychopathology is to
recognize their nature and realize that they are not necessarily
abnormal, even though they may be truly hallucinatory. FUNCTIONAL
HALLUCINATION This is the strange phenomenon in which an external
stimulus is necessary to provoke hallucination, but the normal
perception of the stimulus and the hallucination in the same modality
are experienced simultaneously. A schizophrenic patient heard
hallucinatory voices only when water was running through the pipes of
his ward. He heard no phonemes for most of the time, but when he heard
water rushing through the pipes along the wall, he became very
distressed by voices that told him to damage himself. He was terrified
of the content of these voices because he was afraid he might act on
them. He could readily separate the noise of water from the voices, and
the latter never occurred apart from the former, but both perceptions
were recognized as distinct and real. Another patient heard voices when
the radio or television was switched on, alongside the broadcast voices;
he had persecutory delusions that these activities were carried out
deliberately to upset him and he became very distressed, and at times
violent, as a result. REFLEX HALLUCINATION As a doctor was writing in
his case notes during his interview of a female patient, she said, 'I
can feel you writing in my stomach'. The patient saw and heard the act
of writing and was quite sure that it accounted for the tactile
sensation in her abdomen. A stimulus in one sensory modality producing a
hallucination in another is called a reflex hallucination. This is, in
fact, a hallucinatory form of synaesthesia, mentioned earlier as the
experience of a stimulus image in one sense modality simultaneously
producing an image in another, for example, the feeling of discomfort
caused by seeing and hearing somebody scratch a blackboard

106

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

with their fingernails. Another reflex hallucination occurred in a woman
who experienced pain whenever certain words were mentioned. Functional
and reflex hallucinations are not themselves of diagnostic or
theoretical significance, but they require mentioning for completeness
and recognition to identify other more important symptoms with
confidence. ABNORMAL IMAGERY Mental imagery tasks are designed to assess
a subject's capacity for mental representation of the perceived world.
In cases of hemineglect, there has been interest in whether the observed
deficits in imagery are due to inattention or to impairment of mental
imagery. Bisiach and Luzzatti (1978) described abnormalities in
individuals with hemineglect. Their patients were asked to describe the
Piazza del Duomo in Milan from two standpoints: facing the cathedral and
with their backs to the cathedral. From both standpoints, the subjects
were unable to describe the right side of the scene despite having
correctly described it from the previous standpoint. In other words,
even in imagination the mental representation of the piazza was
unilaterally deficient for the right side. In these cases, inattention
influenced the capacity for imagery. Guariglia et al. (1993) reported a
patient without hemineglect in whom impairment of imagery for objects in
the left visual field was demonstrated. For the first time, this showed
that without hemineglect, that is, visual inattention for space, failure
of imagery was still possible. SENSORY DEPRIVATION Continuing perception
is necessary for consciousness. The field of sensation varies all the
time as individual sensations in different modalities from the outside
world and from inside oneself compete for attention. Consciousness
consists of the integration of this changing field to form a composite
awareness of oneself in one's environment. The essential nature of
sensation has been explored by studying its absence, as revealed by
research on the effects of sensory deprivation (Zubek, 1969). This topic
is only given brief mention, as it is somewhat peripheral to psychiatry.

Sensory deprivation was studied using Canadian college students as
volunteers (Bexton et al., 1954). The subjects, wearing translucent
goggles and gloves with cardboard cuffs, lay on a bed in a light but
partially soundproof room; there was a continual background noise. This
experience was found to be extremely unpleasant and, despite being paid,
subjects were not prepared to remain in this state for more than 3 days.
This technique has been refined subsequently to blot out external
sensations more completely. Various perceptual abnormalities are
experienced. Visual hallucinations of varying complexity were described,
but further study of these perceptual changes resulted in their being
considered, more cautiously, to be 'reported visual sensations' and
'reported auditory sensations' (Zuckermann, 1969). These were classified
into 'meaningless sensations' and 'meaningful integrated sensations'.
Some of the latter are more like hallucinatory experiences. Depending on
the completeness of deprivation of other sensations, abnormal perception
occurs in modalities other than vision. Subjects show an altered
affective state: they become panicky, restless, irritable or,
alternatively, bored and apathetic. Despite considerable
neuropsychological research with valuable findings for investigating the
sensory environment in growth and development, developing brain
interconnections, neurochemistry and neurophysiology, the study of
sensory deprivation has not so far made as big an impact on descriptive
psychopathology as was initially expected. There are various
difficulties to be accounted for. What part of the effects of
deprivation is due to failure of development and what to loss of
behaviours already established? How can one use animal work to explore
subjective symptoms? How can one extrapolate from the experience of
normal individuals in a highly abnormal environment to those who are
psychiatrically ill? Many studies in sensory deprivation are described
by Riesen (1975), who links the experimental data to neurological
function and development. The distinction has been made between sensory
deprivation and perceptual deprivation. The latter is

7

achieved by rendering the sensations patternless and meaningless, rather
than by preventing sensations, by using such devices as translucent
goggles and continuous 'white' noise. The deleterious effects of sensory
deprivation have been considered by Slade (1984) as: • inability to
tolerate the situation, • perceptual changes, • intellectual and
cognitive impairments, • psychomotor effects, and •  physiologic changes
in electroencephalograph and galvanic skin response measures. Fantasy is
often used as a means of reducing the unpleasant affective component of
sensory deprivation. The subject may become disoriented and show
increasing difficulty with problem solving and concentration. For
perception and maintenance of the normal state of consciousness, it is
necessary to have a variety of sensory stimuli available and for these
stimuli to be changeable. If the objects of perception do not themselves
change, the observer will move their point of observation to create
change. REFERENCES Aggernaes, A., 1972. The experienced reality of
hallucinations and other psychological phenomena. Acta Psychiatr. Scand.
48, 220--238. Andrade, C., 1988. Free hallucinations as culturally
sanctioned experience. Br. J. Psychiatry. 152, 838--839. Asaad, G.,
Shapiro, B., 1986. Hallucinations: theoretical and clinical overview.
Am. J. Psychiatry. 143, 1088--1097. Barodawala, S., Mulley, G.P., 1997.
Visual hallucinations. J. R. Coll. Physicians Lond. 31, 42--48. Begum,
M., McKenna, P.J., 2011. Olfactory reference syndrome: a systematic
review of the world literature. Psychol. Medicine. 41, 453--461.
Bentall, R.P., 1990. The illusion of reality: a review and integration
of psychological research on hallucinations. Psychol. Bull. 107, 82--95.
Bentall, R.P., Baker, G.A., Havers, S., 1991. Reality monitoring and
psychotic hallucinations. Br. J. Clin. Psychol. 30, 213--222. Berrios,
G.E., 1982. Tactile hallucinations: conceptual and historical aspects.
J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 45, 285--293. Berrios, G.E., 1990.
Musical hallucinations: a historical and clinical study. Br. J.
Psychiatry. 156, 188--194. Berrios, G.E., 1996. The History of Mental
Symptoms: Descriptive Psychopathology since the Nineteenth Century.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Berrios, G.E., Brook, P., 1984.
Visual hallucinations and sensory delusions in the elderly. Br. J.
Psychiatry. 144, 662--664. Bexton, W.H., Heron, W., Scott, T.H., 1954.
Effects of decreased variation in the sensory environment. Can. J.
Psychol. 8, 70--76.

Pathology of Perception

107

Bisiach, E., Luzzatti, C., 1978. Unilateral neglect of representational
space. Cortex 14, 129--133. Bleuler, E., 1950. In: Zinkin, J., Trans
(Eds.), Dementia Praecox or the Group of Schizophrenias. International
University Press, New York. Brugger, P., Regard, M., Landis, T., 1997.
Illusory reduplication of one's own body: phenomenology and
classification of autoscopic phenomena. Cognit. Neuropsychiatry 2,
19--38. Burns, A., Jacoby, R., Levy, R., 1990. Psychiatric phenomena in
Alzheimer's disease 2. Disorders of perception. Br. J. Psychiatry. 157,
76--81. Critchley, M., 1951. Types of visual perseveration: 'palinopsia'
and 'illusory visual spread. Brain 74, 267--299. Cummings, J.L., Miller,
B., Hill, M.A., Neshkes, R., 1987. Neuropsychiatric aspects of
multi-­infarct dementia of the Alzheimer type. Arch. Neurol. 44,
389--393. Cutting, J., 1997. Principles of Psychopathology: Two Worlds
-- Two Minds -- Two Hemispheres. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Cytowic, R.E., Eagleman, D.M., 2009. Wednesday Is Indigo Blue:
Discovering the Brain of Synesthesia. The MIT Press, London. Dening,
T.R., Berrios, G.E., 1994. Autoscopic hallucinations: a clinical
analysis of 56 cases. Br. J. Psychiatry. 165, 808--817. Donaghy, P.C.,
McKeith, I.G., 2014. The clinical characteristics of dementia with Lewy
bodies and a consideration of prodromal diagnosis. Alzheimer Res. Ther.
6 (4), 46. https://doi. org/10.1186/1lzrt274. Esquirol, J.E.D., 1817.
Hallucinations (Reprinted in Des Maladies Mentales, 1938). Baillière,
Paris. Ey, H., 1973. Traité Des Hallucinations. Masson, Paris. Falloon,
I.R.H., Talbot, R.E., 1981. Persistent auditory hallucinations: coping
mechanisms and implications for management. Psychol. Med. 11, 329--340.
Féré, C., 1891. Note sur les hallucinations autoscopiques ou spéculaires
et sur les hallucinations altruistes. C. R. Seances Soc. Biol. Fil. 3,
451--453. Fernyhough, C., 1996. The dialogic: a dialogic approach to the
higher mental functions. New Ideas Psychol. 14, 47--62. Fernyhough, C.,
2016. The Voices within: The History and Science of How We Talk to
Ourselves. Profile Books Limited, London. ffytche, D.H., 2007. Visual
hallucinatory syndromes: past, present and future. Dialogues Clin.
Neurosci. 9 (2), 173--189. ffytche, D.H., Howard, R.J., 1999. The
personal consequences of visual loss: positive pathologies of vision.
Brain 122 (7), 1247-- 1260. Fuchs, T., Lauter, H., 1992. Charles Bonnet
syndrome and musical hallucinations in the elderly. In: Katona, C.,
Levy, R. (Eds.), Delusions and Hallucinations in Old Age. Gaskell,
London. Fukutake, T., Kawamura, M., Sakakibara, R., Hirayama, K., 1993.
Alloaesthesia without impairment of consciousness after right putaminal
small haemorrhage. Rinsho Shinkeigaku 33, 130-- 133. Green, P., Preston,
M., 1981. Reinforcement of vocal correlates of auditory hallucinations
by auditory feedback: a case study. Br. J. Psychiatry. 139, 204--208.
Gregory, R.L., 2004. Recovery from blindness. In: Gregory, R.L. (Ed.),
The Oxford Companion to the Mind, second ed. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. Guariglia, C., Padovani, A., Pantano, P., Pizzamiglio, L., 1993.
Unilateral neglect restricted to visual imagery. Nature 364, 235--237.

108

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Haddad, P.M., Benbow, S.M., 1992. Visual hallucinations as the
presenting symptom of senile dementia. Br. J. Psychiatry. 161, 263--265.
Hare, E.H., 1973. A short note on pseudohallucinations. Br. J.
Psychiatry. 122, 469--476. Heilbrun, A.B., Blum, N.A., 1984. Cognitive
vulnerability to auditory hallucinations: impaired perception of memory.
Br. J. Psychiatry. 144, 508--512. Horowitz, M.J., 1975. A cognitive
model of hallucinations. Am. J. Psychiatry. 132, 789--795. Jacobs, L.,
Feldman, M., Diamond, S.P., Bender, M.B., 1973. Palinacousis: persistent
or recurring auditory sensations. Cortex 9, 211--216. Jaspers, K., 1997.
In: Hoenig, J., Hamilton, M.W., Trans (Eds.), General Psychopathology.
The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. Junginger, J., Frame,
C.L., 1985. Self-­report of the frequency and phenomenology of verbal
hallucinations. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 173, 149--155. Kandinsky, V., 1885.
Kritische und klinische. Betrachtungen im Gebiete der Sinnestanschangen.
St. Petersburg. Kawamura, M., Hitayama, K., Shinohara, Y., Watanabe, Y.,
Sugishita, M., 1987. Alloaesthesia. Brain. 110, 225--236. Kelleher, I.,
DeVylder, J.E., 2017. Hallucinations in borderline personality disorder
and common mental disorders. Br. J. Psychiatry. 210, 1--2. Komel, H.W.,
1985. Complex visual hallucinations in the hemianopic field. J. Neurol.
Neurosurg. Psychiatry. 48, 29--38. Kosslyn, S.M., 2004. Mental imagery:
depictive accounts. In: Gregory, R.L. (Ed.), The Oxford Companion to the
Mind, second ed. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Kosslyn, S.M.,
Thompson, W.L., 2003. When is early visual cortex activated during
visual mental imagery? Psychol. Bull. 129, 723--846. Kosslyn, S.M.,
Pascual-­Leone, A., Felician, O., et al., 1999. The role of area 17 in
visual imagery: convergent evidence from PET and rTMS. Science 284,
167--170. Kräupl Taylor, F., 1981. On pseudohallucinations. Psychol.
Med. 11, 265--272. Lerner, V., Kapstan, A., Witztum, E., 2001. The
misidentification of Clerambault's and Kandinsky--Clerambault's
syndromes. Can. J. Psychiatry. 46, 441--443. Lishman, W.A., 1989.
Organic Psychiatry: The Psychological Consequences of Cerebral Disorder,
second ed. Blackwell Scientific, Oxford. Margo, A., Hemsley, D.R.,
Slade, P.D., 1981. The effects of varying auditory input on
schizophrenic hallucinations. Br. J. Psychiatry. 139, 122--127. Martin,
G.N., 2006. Human Neuropsychology. Pearson Education, Harlow.
McCarthy-­Jones, S., 2012. Hearing Voices: The Histories, Causes and
Meanings of Auditory Verbal Hallucinations. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge. Merleau-­Ponty, M., 1962. In: Smith, C., Trans (Eds.),
Phenomenology of Perception. Routledge, London. Morley, S., 1987.
Psychological modification of auditory hallucinations: distraction
versus attention. Behav. Psychother. 15, 240-- 251. Nayani, T.H., David,
A.S., 1996. The auditory hallucination: a phenomenological survey.
Psychol. Med. 26, 177--189. Persaud, R., Cutting, J., 1991. Lateralized
anomalous perceptual experiences in schizophrenia. Psychopathology 24,
365--368.

Podoll, K., Schwartz, M., Noth, J., 1990. Charles Bonnet-­Syndrom bei
einem Parkinson-­ Patientem mit beidseitigen Visusverlust. Nervenarzt 61,
52--56. Pryse-­Phillips, W., 1971. An olfactory reference syndrome. Acta
Psychiatr. Scand. 47, 484--509. Pylyshyn, Z.W., 2004. Mental imagery.
In: Gregory, R.L. (Ed.), The Oxford Companion to the Mind, second
ed. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Ramachandran, V.S., Hirstein, W.,
1998. The perception of phantom limbs: the D.O. Hebb lecture. Brain 121,
1603-- 1630. Riesen, A.H., 1975. The Developmental Neuropsychology of
Sensory Deprivation. Academic Press, New York. Sachs, O., 1995. An
Anthropologist on Mars. Picador, London. Schneider, K., 1959. In:
Hamilton, M.W., Trans (Eds.), Clinical Psychopathology, fifth ed. Grune
and Stratton, New York. Schopf, F., 1983. Withdrawal phenomena after
long-­term administration of benzodiazepines: a review of recent
investigations. Pharmacopsychiatry 16, 1--8. Schreber, D., 1955. In:
Macalpine, I., Hunter, R.A., Trans (Eds.), Memoirs of My Nervous
Illness. Dawson, London. Schultz, G., Melzack, R., 1991. The Charles
Bonnet syndrome: 'phantom visual' images. Perception 20, 809--825.
Shapiro, M.F., Fink, M., 1952. Exosomesthesia: the displacement of
cutaneous sensation to extrapersonal space. Trans. Am. Neurol. Assoc.
56, 260--262. Shapiro, M.F., Fink, M., Bender, M.B., 1952.
Exosomesthesia or displacement of cutaneous sensation into extrapersonal
space. Arch. Neurol. Psychiatry. 68, 481--496. Sims, A.C.P., 1991. An
overview of the psychopathology of perception: first rank symptoms as a
localizing sign in schizophrenia. Psychopathology 24, 369--374. Slade,
P.D., 1976a. Hallucinations. Psychol. Med. 6, 7--13. Slade, P.D., 1976b.
An investigation of psychological factors involved in the predisposition
to auditory hallucinations. Psychol. Med. 6, 123--132. Slade, P.D.,
1984. Sensory deprivation and clinical psychiatry. Br. J. Hosp. Med. 32,
256--260. Smith, E.E., Kosslyn, S.M., 2007. Cognitive Psychology: Mind
and Brain. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ. Smythies, J.R., 1956.
A logical and cultural analysis of hallucinatory sense-­experience. J.
Ment. Sci. 102, 336. Spitzer, M., 1994. The basis of psychiatric
diagnosis. In: Sadler, J.Z., Wiggins, O.P., Schwartz, M.A. (Eds.),
Philosophical Perspectives on Psychiatric Diagnostic Classification.
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. Stacy, C.B., 1987. Complex
haptic hallucination and palinaptia. Cortex 23, 337--340. Stewart, L.,
von Kriegstein, K., Warren, J.D., Griffiths, T.D., 2006. Music and the
brain: disorders of musical listening. Brain 129, 2533--2553. Summa, M.,
Fuchs, T., Vanzago, L., 2018. Imagination and Social Perspectives:
Approaches from Phenomenology and Psychopathology. Routledge, New York.
Upthegrove, R., Broome, M., Caldwell, K., Ives, J., Oyebode, F., Wood,
S., 2015. Understanding auditory verbal hallucinations: a systematic
review of current evidence. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 133, 352--367.
Upthegrove, R., Ives, J., Broome, M.R., Caldwell, K., Wood, S.J.,
Oyebode, F., 2016. Auditory verbal hallucinations in first-­episode
psychosis: a phenomenological investigation. Br. J. Psych. Open 2,
88--95.

7 Vygotsky, L.S., 1978. Mind in Society: The Development of Higher
Psychological Processes. In: Cole, M., John-Steiner, V., Scribner, S.,
Souberman, E. (Eds.), Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts. Vygotsky, L.S., 1934/1987. Thinking and Speech. The
Collected Works of LS Vygotsky, vol. 1. Plenum, New York. Wagemans, J.,
Feldman, J., Gepshtein, S., Kimchi, R., Pomerantz, J.R., van der Helm,
P.A., 2012. A century of Gestalt Psychology in visual perception II:
conceptual and theoretical foundations. Psychol. Bull. 138, 1172--1217.
Wernicke, C., 1906. Grundri Der Psychiatrie in Klinischen. Vorlesun
Gen. Thieme, Leipzig.

Pathology of Perception

109

Werring, D.J., Marsden, C.D., 1999. Visual hallucinations and palinopsia
due to an occipital lobe tuberculoma. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry.
66, 684. Zeki, S., 1993. A Vision of the Brain. Blackwell, Oxford.
Zilboorg, G., Henry, G.W., 1941. A History of Medical Psychology.
Norton, New York. Zubek, J.P., 1969. Sensory Deprivation: Fifteen Years
of Research. Appleton-­Century-­Crofts, New York. Zuckermann, M., 1969.
Variables affecting deprivation results. In: Zubek, J.P. (Ed.), Sensory
Deprivation: Fifteen Years of Research. Appleton-­Century-­Crofts, New
York, pp. 47--84.

This page intentionally left blank

     

Chapter 8

Delusions and Other Erroneous Ideas Chapter Outline Summary Ideas,
Beliefs and Delusions Meaning of Delusion Primary and Secondary
Delusions The Ultimately Un-Understandable How Ideas and Delusions Are
Initiated Secondary Delusions Types of Primary Delusion Autochthonous
Delusion (Delusional Intuition) Delusional Percept Delusional Atmosphere
Delusional Memory The Origins of Delusion Cognition and Reasoning in
Delusion Content of Delusions Delusions of Persecution Morbid Jealousy
and Delusion of Infidelity Delusions of Love Delusional
Misidentification Grandiose Delusions Religious Delusions Delusions of
Guilt and Unworthiness Delusions of Poverty and Nihilistic Delusions
Hypochondriacal Delusions Communicated Insanity Delusions of Control The
Reality of Delusions Erroneous Ideation Overvalued Idea Paranoid Ideas
and Syndromes

KEYWORDS Delusion Delusional misidentification syndrome Koro Overvalued
idea

Summary Delusions are false judgements that are held with extraordinary
conviction and incomparable subjective certainty and are impervious to
other experiences and to compelling counterargument. Usually delusions
are easily recognized when out of keeping with the individual's
educational and sociocultural background. Primary delusions have
diagnostic significance, whereas the content of secondary delusions may
signal the nature of the primary abnormal phenomenon from which they
derive. Overvalued ideas are comprehensible beliefs that arise from the
history and experiences of an individual. They are held with conviction
and motivate behaviour that may cause the patient harm and suffering. I
cannot pretend to agree with him, when I know that his mind is working
altogether under a delusion. Anthony Trollope (1869)

Anthony Trollope, in his novel He Knew He Was Right, describes not only
the totally destructive effect of delusional jealousy on the individual
but also the extraordinary dilemma this poses for other people who come
into contact with him: whether to humour the individual and risk
reinforcement or to confront him and risk violence. Fundamental to
clinical practice in psychiatry, using the phenomenological or empathic
method is obtaining a clear account of the ideas or notions that the
subject, the patient, actually holds. Although delusions are often
referred to as beliefs, there is a growing literature questioning
whether they are beliefs at all. There is a sense in which the term
belief is being used to distinguish the nature of delusions from that
111

112

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

of, for example, abnormal perceptions and other kinds of abnormal
phenomena. In other words, the varying terms such as judgement, beliefs,
ideas or notions that are used in connection with delusions are attempts
to categorize the phenomena of delusions and to distinguish it from
other abnormal phenomena. False beliefs include primary and secondary
delusions, overvalued ideas and sensitive ideas of reference.

Ideas, Beliefs and Delusions Rarely does anyone claim to be deluded, and
usually what a delusional patient thought was true does not prove to be
so. A delusion is a false, unshakeable idea or belief that is out of
keeping with the patient's educational, cultural and social background;
it is held with extraordinary conviction and subjective certainty.
Subjectively, or phenomenologically, it is indistinguishable from a true
belief. A man who is a bachelor of medicine of the University of London
holds a delusion that he is being used as 'an envoy from Mars'. He
believes that he is both a doctor and an envoy, and neither thought
seems to him to be delusional or imaginary. He likes to imagine himself
a rich man with an estate in Gloucestershire. He has not the slightest
difficulty in identifying this latter idea as fantasy. To the man
himself, a delusion is much closer to a true belief than imagination,
and the reasons enlisted to support its veracity are produced in the
same way that a person would prove any other notion on which he was
challenged. Normally, fantasy is easily distinguished from reality,
although the subject may show great reluctance in accepting his
aspirations as 'mere fantasy'. Similarly, there is usually little
difficulty for the external observer in deciding whether a false belief
is a misinterpretation of the facts based on false reasoning or a
delusion. MEANING OF DELUSION The English word delude comes from Latin
and implies playing or mocking, defrauding or cheating. The German
equivalent Wahn is a whim, false opinion or fancy and makes no more
comment than the English on the subjective experience. The French
equivalent, délire, is more empathic; it implies the ploughshare jumping
out of the furrow (lira), perhaps a similar metaphor to the ironical
'unhinged'. As Bayne and Fernandez (2009) say:

On the face of things, it seems obvious that delusions involve
departures -- typically, quite radical departures -- from the procedural
norms of human belief formation. Delusions stand out as exotic specimens
in the garden of belief, as examples of what happens precisely when the
mechanisms of belief formation break down. In this chapter, the
complexity of delusions as concepts, experienced symptoms, and abnormal
phenomena is explored, discussed and analysed. Definition of Delusion

An additional video for this topic is available online. There continues
to be much debate and controversy about the definition of delusions. The
standard approach is to follow Jaspers' (1997) claim that delusions are
manifest in judgements and arise in the process of thinking and judging.
For Jaspers, the characteristics of delusions are that: • they are false
judgements, • they are held with extraordinary conviction and
incomparable subjective certainty, • they are impervious to other
experiences and to compelling counterargument, and • their content is
impossible. Each of these criteria has been subjected to criticism.
Delusions may not be objectively false insofar as the content is
concerned. This is best exemplified in delusional jealousy, whereby the
belief may correspond to objective truth and is therefore not false.
Delusions may not be held with extraordinary conviction but, equally,
normal beliefs may be held with extraordinary conviction such that
intensity of conviction cannot distinguish between normal and abnormal
beliefs. Delusional beliefs may also be amenable to counterargument,
although it is rare that this by itself will alter the belief. Finally,
delusional content need not be impossible. There is a growing body of
opinion that delusions are not beliefs at all. Spitzer (1994), for
example, argues this case. He makes the distinction between 'to know
that' and 'to believe that'. In Spitzer's view, delusions make knowledge
claims rather than belief claims. In other words, patients are asserting
that they 'know such and such' rather than they 'believe such and such',
which is why delusional statements are expressed with

8 Delusions and Other Erroneous Ideas

conviction and certainty and not subject to discussion and inquiry.
Berrios (1996) comes to the same conclusions. He states that 'delusions
are empty speech acts which assert themselves as beliefs'. Furthermore,
he makes the point that the content of delusions is incidental to the
fact of the phenomenon being a delusion. In Berrios' view, the content
of delusions is randomly chosen; the content merely reflects whatever is
in the environment at the time the delusion is formed. The content is
lacking in informational quality and is not a 'symbolic expression of
anything'. These critiques of the current definitions and understanding
of delusions underline the complexity of the conceptual status of
delusions and show that there is still fruitful theoretical work to be
done in psychopathology. It is important to emphasize that the tradition
that locates delusions within the domain of thinking and judging derives
very simply from the need to distinguish hallucinations (abnormalities
of perception) from delusions (abnormalities of thinking and judging).
In any case, arguing that delusions are not abnormalities of belief is
like arguing that chorea (an involuntary movement) is not an abnormality
of movement because the observed movements are not purposeful or
intentional. Bortolotti (2010) has critically examined the arguments
against the idea that delusions are beliefs and concluded that these
arguments that she classed as procedural, epistemic and agential apply
equally to normal beliefs. She therefore concluded that there is little
reason to treat delusions as anything other than beliefs. With this in
mind, it is profitable to continue to classify delusions as abnormal
beliefs. The decision to call a belief or judgement delusional is not
made by the person holding the belief but by an external observer. There
can be no phenomenological definition of delusion because the patient is
likely to hold this belief with the same conviction and intensity as
they hold other nondelusional beliefs about themself or as anyone else
holds intensely personal nondelusional beliefs. In this respect,
delusions are to ideation what hallucinations are to perception.
Subjectively, a delusion is simply a belief, a notion or an idea.
Stoddart's (1908) definition of a delusion---'a judgement which cannot
be accepted by people of the same class, education, race and period of
life as the person who experiences it'---has some advantages. However,

113

it could include as delusional falling in love with a person others
regard as unsuitable, having a minority religious belief or holding any
unusual idea without acknowledging reasonable argument to the contrary.
Hamilton (1978) defined delusion as 'a false unshakeable belief which
arises from internal morbid processes. It is easily recognizable when it
is out of keeping with the person's educational and cultural
background'. This definition makes the point that a belief can be a
delusion even when it is not out of keeping with the patient's
educational and cultural background. Rather than suggest a unitary
definition for delusion, Kendler et al. (1983) have proposed several
poorly correlated dimensions or vectors of delusional severity: •
Conviction: the degree to which the patient is convinced of the reality
of the delusional beliefs. • Extension: the degree to which the
delusional belief involves areas of the patient's life. • Bizarreness:
the degree to which the delusional beliefs depart from culturally
determined consensual reality. • Disorganization: the degree to which
the delusional beliefs are internally consistent, logical and
systematized. • Pressure: the degree to which the patient is preoccupied
and concerned with the expressed delusional beliefs. Two other
dimensions that might also be considered are as follows: •  Affective
response: the degree to which the patient's emotions are involved with
such beliefs. •  Deviant behaviour resulting from delusions: patients
sometimes, but not always, act on their delusions. It is clear that no
single definition of the term delusion is without problems. It may be
that in clinical practice a pragmatic approach is employed that includes
the probability that the statement is true and, plausibility of what the
patient says. In addition, the manner of presenting the belief also
matters. Parnas (2013) expresses this approach best when he writes:
'Something more global may be at stake, e.g. something that transpires
through the patient's way of arguing. This gestalt-­like whole comprises
a fabric of branching, interconnected beliefs, attitudes,

114

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

background assumptions, which ultimately inhere in the overall structure
of consciousness and experiencing. It is these contextual aspects,
surrounding the focal propositional content, which help the clinician to
classify a given statement as an instance of delusion'. This approach
will not satisfy anyone who seeks a simplistic definition, but
nonetheless it captures the complexity of clinical judgements in the
real world and concedes that the subjectivity of the clinician too is
involved in decision-­making.

Primary and Secondary Delusions The confusing subject of primary and
secondary delusions requires some explanation. It is probably most
meaningful to use the term primary to imply that delusion is not
occurring in response to another psychopathologic form such as mood
disorder. Secondary delusion is used in the sense that the false belief
is understandable in present circumstances because of the pervasive mood
state or because of the cultural content. It is usual to consider
delusions as secondary to another abnormal phenomenon. Gruhle (1915)
considered that a primary delusion was a disturbance of symbolic
meaning, not an alteration in sensory perception, apperception or
intelligence. Primary delusions occur in schizophrenia and not in other
conditions; they include both delusional perception and delusional
intuition (Cutting, 1985). However, delusional intuitions, notions or
ideas are not pathognomonic of schizophrenia, because in any individual
case there is too much scope for arguing whether this delusion is indeed
primary, that is, ultimately un-­ understandable, or secondary in nature.
Secondary delusions occur in many conditions other than schizophrenia
and can sometimes be understood in relation to the person's background
culture or emotional state. Wernicke (1906) formulated the concept of an
autochthonous idea, an idea that is 'native to the soil', aboriginal,
arising without external cause. The trouble with finding supposed
autochthonous or primary delusions is that it can be disputed whether
they are truly autochthonous. For this reason, they are not considered
of first rank in Schneider's (1957) classification of symptoms. It is
too difficult to decide in many cases whether a delusion is
autochthonous. Several writers

have claimed that all delusions are understandable if one knows enough
about the patient. THE ULTIMATELY UN-­UNDERSTANDABLE Jaspers' detailed
exposition of delusion has been carefully reviewed by Walker (1991).
Jaspers' concepts of the un-­understandable, and of meaningful
connections, are relevant here. If we ask an offender to describe the
psychic world in which he lives---his attitudes, his feelings and how
these developed through his childhood until now---we may be able to
understand his sexual cruelty, which at first seemed quite
incomprehensible: the behaviour becomes meaningful in the context of
abuse by his stepfather and surviving as an adolescent in a harsh urban
subculture with violence, humiliation and frustration. However, when we
consider the middle-­aged woman living on her own with a history of
schizophrenia who believes that men unlock the door of her flat,
anaesthetize her and interfere with her sexually, we find an experience
that is ultimately not understandable. We can understand, on obtaining
more details of the history, how her disturbance centres on sexual
experience, why she should be distrustful of men, her doubts about her
femininity and her feelings of social isolation. However, the delusion,
her absolute conviction that these things really are happening to her,
that they are true, is not understandable. The best we can do is to try
to understand externally, without really being able to feel ourselves
into her position (genetic empathy, see Chapter 1), what she is thinking
and how she experiences it. We cannot understand how such a notion could
have developed. This is the core of the primary or autochthonous
delusion: it is ultimately un-­understandable. The patient described
above also believed the police were using rays to observe her. One does
not have to try to find which delusion came first, the anaesthesia or
the observation by rays, to decide which is primary; primary is not
dependent on temporal relationships. In that both delusions are not
ultimately understandable, they are both primary delusions. A delusion
can still be primary in Jaspers' sense, although it arises on the basis
of a memory, an atmosphere or a perception. The protagonist in Gogol's
(1809--52) Diary of a Madman (Gogol, 1972) says, 'There is a King of
Spain. He has been found at last. That king is me. I only discovered
this today.' This sudden and inexplicable belief arose

8 Delusions and Other Erroneous Ideas

autonomously and unpremeditated. Thereafter, it dictated the
protagonist's every behaviour and influenced his view of the world. HOW
IDEAS AND DELUSIONS ARE INITIATED A delusion is a belief, an idea, a
thought, a notion or an intuition, and it arises in the same type of
setting as any other idea---in the context of a perception, a memory or
an atmosphere---or it may be autochthonous, appearing to occur
spontaneously. Ideas are initiated in the following ways: • An example
of an idea occurring on the basis of a percept: I smell food cooking and
then form the idea that I will go and eat. • Ideas may follow memory: I
remember listening to a string quartet and form the idea of playing a
compact disc. • Ideas may arise out of an atmosphere or a mood state: I
already feel irritable, and when I collect my car from the garage and it
makes an unexplained noise, I become unreasonably angry and blame the
mechanic for not repairing it satisfactorily. • An idea may be
autochthonous. I visit a ward of the hospital on an afternoon when I
never normally go there. Although I accept that all behaviour has an
explanation for its occurrence, I do not know why on this particular
occasion I did this. Theoretical explanations may be given as to where
such ideas come from, for example, the unconscious, but subjectively
they seem to have occurred de novo. Delusions occur in similar settings
on the basis of percept, memory, atmosphere or de novo---'out of the
blue'. In our discussion of primary delusions, we will see how the same
four situations also account for the onset of delusions: percept,
memory, mood or autochthonous. In this sense, delusion is an idea.
SECONDARY DELUSIONS Primary delusions differ from secondary delusions in
that the former are ultimately not understandable. Secondary delusions
are understandable in the context of other abnormal phenomena such as
abnormal mood, abnormal perception or indeed of a primary abnormal
belief. A manic patient claimed to be Mary, Queen of Scots. She accepted
that the queen in question lived and died centuries ago but claimed
descent from her

115

and felt fully entitled to say that she was Mary, Queen of Scots. The
belief could be understood in relation to her elated and expansive mood
and disappeared as her affective state subsided. A depressed patient
believed that they had committed the 'unforgivable sin'. Discussion and
persuasion, even with a person whose religious views they respected, was
of no avail in giving them relief. The belief could be seen as an
integral part of their depressed mood. Depressive delusions may remain
after treatment has resulted in improvement from retardation, and they
account for suicide occasionally occurring in the recovery phase of
depression. It has been suggested that there may be a decline in the
prevalence of delusion occurring with depressive illness, but Eagles
(1983), studying admissions to hospital in Edinburgh from 1892 to 1982,
considered there to be no genuine reduction. Secondary delusions can be
distinguished from overvalued ideas (discussed later). Whereas secondary
delusions are derived from another abnormal phenomenon, overvalued ideas
are comprehensible in the light of the patient's personal history or
some identifiable historical event whose value has become heightened for
some reason. No prior abnormal phenomenon explains the presence of an
overvalued idea.

Types of Primary Delusion Kurt Schneider (1957) discusses the dilemma of
primary symptoms in schizophrenia extremely lucidly by giving six
different possible meanings for the term primary, but he still leaves us
in doubt as to whether the belief is primary or not. He makes it clear,
however, that primary symptoms are not the same as first-­rank symptoms
of schizophrenia. Primary symptoms are those that arise without
understandable cause in the context of the psychotic illness. They are
therefore the necessary manifestations of the underlying psychopathology
in the same way that swelling and redness are a necessary consequence of
physical trauma. First-­ rank symptoms, on the other hand, are, according
to Schneider, simply a useful empirical list of symptoms that are found
commonly in schizophrenia and not in other conditions. Describing their
presence makes no claim as to how they arose. True delusions, or
delusions proper, are distinguished by Jaspers from delusion-­ like
ideas. True

116

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

delusions therefore become synonymous with primary delusions, and
delusion-­ like ideas with secondary delusions. Delusion-­like ideas can
be seen to emerge understandably from the patient's internal and
external environment, especially from their mood state. True delusions
cannot be so explained; they are psychologically irreducible. They have,
according to Jaspers, the following types: • autochthonous delusion
(delusional intuition), • delusional percept, • delusional atmosphere,
and • delusional memory. AUTOCHTHONOUS DELUSION (DELUSIONAL INTUITION)
These are delusions that appear to arise suddenly 'out of the blue';
they are phenomenologically indistinguishable from the sudden arrival of
a normal idea. The patient gropes for explanations for the occurrence of
their delusion in answering the interviewer's question in the same way
that a healthy person would find it difficult to account for the arrival
of any idea if they were asked to explain it. The difference lies in the
ability of the observer to empathize with--- to understand---a
nondelusional idea even though it may be bizarre and destructive, but
they cannot understand how a person can have come to believe their
delusion. Schneider regarded the term delusional idea as based on
outmoded psychology, and he felt it should therefore be abandoned. It is
often confused with delusion-­like idea, even in some textbooks, and this
is another good reason for abandoning it. Delusional intuition is
perhaps the most satisfactory translation of the German Wahneinfall.
Delusional intuition occurs as a single stage, unlike delusional
perception, which occurs in two stages: perception and then false
interpretation. Like delusional perceptions, delusional intuitions are
self-­referent and usually of momentous import to the patient. DELUSIONAL
PERCEPT This is present when the patient receives a normal perception
that is then interpreted with delusional meaning and has immense
personal significance. It is a first-­rank symptom of schizophrenia.
Jaspers delineated the concept of delusional percept, and Gruhle (1915)

used this description to cover almost all delusions--- he minimized the
importance of delusional intuition. Schneider (1949) considered the
essence of delusional perception to be the abnormal significance
attached to a real percept without any cause that is understandable in
rational or emotional terms; it is self-­referent, momentous, urgent, of
overwhelming personal significance and, of course, false. It is often
difficult to decide whether a delusion is truly a delusional percept or
is being used to explain the significance of certain objects of
perception within a delusional system. A woman said, 'every night blood
is being injected out of my arms \[sic\]'. When asked for her evidence,
she explained that she had little brown spots on her arms and therefore
knew that she was being injected. The interviewer looked at the spots on
her arms, rolled up his sleeve and showed her spots identical in
appearance on his own arm. He said that they had been on his arm as long
as he could remember and were called freckles. She agreed that both sets
of spots looked similar and accepted his explanation of his own spots,
but she still insisted that her freckles proved that she was being
injected in her sleep. This was a delusional percept. Another example of
what was probably a delusional percept caused considerable problems in
surgical management, ultimately resulting in the death of the patient
(Porter and Williams, 1997). A 65-­year-­old woman had flooded her house
by leaving all the taps on. On admission she was unkempt with unwashed
hair, wearing a dirty dress and vest. She was bringing up bile-­stained
vomit and was reluctant to be interviewed. She expressed delusional
beliefs that her stomach had been blown up with ether over several weeks
and that it was liable to burst as a result of a Citizens' Band (CB)
radio that was located in her stomach. She believed that the IRA had
been after her for years and experienced auditory hallucinations of
voices, which she identified as coming from the CB receiver. One 'voice'
told her not to let anyone examine her. There was no evidence of an
acute confusional state, and the diagnosis was consistent with a
long-­term paranoid psychosis. On physical examination her abdomen was
soft but distended with a hard, craggy, immobile, central mass. The
liver and spleen were of normal size, and

8 Delusions and Other Erroneous Ideas

the kidneys were not palpable. Bowel sounds were loud. A diagnosis of
possible intra-abdominal malignancy was made. She refused any
investigation or treatment. She developed acute renal failure and
ultimately died; ascitic fluid revealed adenocarcinomatous cells
probably of ovarian origin. Another patient, who had other delusional
symptoms, believed that many of the patients in the hospital were
well-­known citizens cunningly disguised with wigs, makeup and false
beards. She recognized that they did not look like the people whom she
presumed them to be but considered this to be part of a gigantic hoax in
which she was herself involved to 'help people spiritually'. Although
her percepts were normal and her interpretations delusional, this was
not considered to be a delusional percept but a misinterpretation. All
the circumstances in her life were explained by an immensely complicated
delusional system, and these perceptions had no immediate personal
significance beyond the significance that she found in all the objects
and events around her. In a delusional percept, there is a direct
experience of meaning for this particular normal percept; it is not
simply an interpretation of this percept to fit in with other
established delusional beliefs. Delusional perception is therefore a
direct experience of meaning that the patient did not have previously.
Objects or persons take on new personal significance that is delusional
in nature, even though the perception itself remains unchanged. This is
different from a delusional misinterpretation in which the delusional
system affects all aspects of the patient's life, and so every event or
perception is interpreted as being involved with that delusion. A
patient sees that a doorknob is missing; this is not the precipitant of
immediate new personal significance of a delusional nature, but rather,
it further confirms the belief they already held that people are trying
to trap them and subject them to vivisection. Perception, when
considering delusional percept, can be understood in quite a wide sense.
There is no difference in subjective experience between perceiving an
object by means of a sense organ and perceiving or understanding the
sense of written or spoken messages, although the perceptual routes are
different. Thus delusional perception includes delusional significance
attached to words and sentences as well as

117

to purely sensory objects. For example, an inpatient at Rubery Hill
Hospital walked to an entrance of the hospital and saw a dilapidated
notice: 'RUBE ... ILL'. She suddenly realized that this was a concealed
message just for her---'Are you be(ing) ill?', that people were
concerned to help her and that she would get better. The delusional
interpretation was attached to the meaning of the letters of the notice.
There are two distinct stages in delusional perception: 1. The object
becomes meaningful within a field of sensations and is perceived; this
is usually visual perception (Mellor, 1991). 2. That object becomes
invested with delusional significance. These two stages need not be
simultaneous for the experience to be a delusional percept. On
occasions, they have been separated by an interval of years. A patient
believed that his mind was being jammed by an electronic device. He
claimed that this had started when, 5 years before, he had lifted the
telephone receiver and heard an unusual clicking noise. The delusional
belief he had held for only a few months. DELUSIONAL ATMOSPHERE For the
patient experiencing delusional atmosphere, their world has been subtly
altered: 'Something funny is going on', 'I have been offered a whole
world of new meanings'. They experience everything around them as
sinister, portentous, uncanny and peculiar in an indefinable way. They
know that they personally are involved but cannot tell how. They have a
feeling of anticipation, sometimes even of excitement, that soon all the
separate parts of their experience will fit together to reveal something
immensely significant. This is, in fact, what usually happens, as
delusional atmosphere is part of the underlying process, and often, the
first symptom of schizophrenia and the context in which a fully formed
delusional percept or intuition arises. The mood of the atmosphere is
important, and this experience is often referred to as delusional mood.
The patient feels profoundly uncomfortable, often extremely perplexed
and apprehensive. When the delusion becomes fully formed, resolving the
inchoate nature of the delusional atmosphere, they often appear to
accept it with a feeling of relief from the previous unbearable tension
of the atmosphere.

118

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

In Gogol's Diary of Madman, the sudden and inexplicable delusional
belief was expressed as follows: 'Today is a day of great triumph. There
is a king of Spain. He has been found at last. That king is me. I only
discovered this today. Frankly, it all came to me in a flash. I cannot
understand how I could even think or imagine for one moment I was only a
titular counsellor. I can't explain how such a ridiculous idea ever
entered my head. Anyway, I'm rather pleased no one thought of having me
put away yet. The path ahead is clear: everything is as bright as
daylight'. It was preceded by a delusional atmosphere descried by the
protagonist as follows: 'I don't really understand why, but before this
revelation everything was enveloped in a kind of mist. And the whole
reason for this, as I see it, is that people are under the
misapprehension that the human brain is situated in the head: nothing
could be further from the truth. It is carried by the wind from the
Caspian Sea' (Gogol, 1972). In a real-­ life example, a middle-­ aged man
presented initially as a psychiatric outpatient with apparent
obsessional symptoms. He kept checking that his neighbours could not
hear what he was saying in his home. He had resigned from several jobs
because he believed that his employers would not accept his religious
beliefs. He felt that people around him were hostile and implacably
opposed to him, although he could not define quite how---he just 'felt
it'. He kept moving house, but the feeling stayed with him. This
continued for several years, and he then arrived at a casualty
department claiming that his neighbours were talking about his actions
and controlling his thoughts. The atmosphere had developed insidiously
over years, and eventually he manifested auditory hallucinations and
passivity of thought (see Chapter 9). German psychopathologists never
used the term delusional atmosphere but always referred to delusional
mood, according to Berner (1991), but he considers that atmosphere is to
be preferred because it allows the distinction to be made between a
cognitive, perceptual disturbance provoking an emotional response and a
modification of mood causing a changed perception of the outside world.
It is considered that delusional atmosphere is a common end state
resulting from different pathways: vulnerability to cognitive
disturbance, as in 'Bleulerian' schizophrenia; dynamic derailment, as in
affective disorders such as puerperal

depression or psychogenic vulnerability; or without either of the other
two, with stressful life events. Berner considers that this state is not
restricted to sufferers of schizophrenia. The prodromal phases of
schizophrenic illnesses are very variable in nature, and often another
diagnosis has been given before the definitive symptomatology becomes
established. In an instructive review of the literature on the
simulation of psychosis and a study of six patients who were thought to
be feigning a schizophrenic psychosis, Hay (1983) commented on the
nature of feigned psychosis. In his opinion, simulation of schizophrenia
is generally a prodromal phase of a schizophrenic psychosis occurring in
people with extremely deviant premorbid personalities. All but one of
his patients were found to be suffering from schizophrenia at the time
of follow-­up. DELUSIONAL MEMORY In much the same way that delusional
percept is a delusional interpretation of a normal percept, delusional
memory is the delusional interpretation of a normal memory. These are
sometimes called retrospective delusions. An event that occurred in the
past is explained in a delusional way. A man aged 50 whose mental
illness had lasted for about 2 years claimed that his health had been
permanently affected since age 16, when he had had 'an operation to
remove his appendix'. He now believed that the operation had been an
excuse to 'implant a golden convolvulus' in his bowels. If delusional
meaning is attached to a normal percept that is remembered, this then
becomes a delusional percept. It has the two components that were
described as being necessary for delusional percept: the image of the
remembered percept and the attachment to this percept of delusional
significance. A married woman remembered years previously seeing a man
standing in a pub 'with a sad look on his face'. She 'realized', at the
start of her schizophrenic illness 2 weeks before admission to the
hospital, that he had been in love with her then, and she tried to
locate his name in the telephone directory and make contact again,
feeling that they were involved in a special relationship. Of course, it
is a mistake to expect phenomenological symptoms to reveal themselves
tidily from the patient's conversation. There is no absolute demarcation
between delusional memory and delusional

8 Delusions and Other Erroneous Ideas

percept or intuition. The patient describes a delusion. Did this occur 1
hour, 1 week or 10 years ago? At what point will this be delusional
memory, not delusional intuition? Similarly, there is no absolute
distinction between a normal event, perception or idea that occurred in
the past and is remembered with a delusional interpretation and a
delusional event, perception or idea that occurred in the past and is
also remembered with a delusional interpretation. In other words, there
are two senses to the term delusional memory. There is the sense in
which a normal memory is misinterpreted in the present, and another
sense in which the actual memory is itself a false memory that is imbued
with delusional interpretation. Both of these are delusional memories,
and it is not always possible to know how much of the event was factual
and how much was delusional. A woman with schizophrenia, aged 34,
described 12 years ago picking up a telephone to ring a man she liked
very much: 'God moved my arm and made me put the telephone back'. It was
not possible to decide exactly what part of this experience was factual
and what was delusional and at what time the delusion occurred. Fine
distinctions are sometimes imposed on the classification of primary
delusions but are more collector's items than features of useful
clinical significance. Delusional awareness is an experience that is not
sensory in nature in which ideas or events take on an extreme vividness
as if they had additional reality. Delusional significance is the second
stage of the occurrence of delusional perception. Objects and persons
are perceived normally but take on a special significance that cannot be
rationally explained by the patient.

The Origins of Delusion What is the origin of delusions? This question
drives at how far delusions are, by definition, different from normal
beliefs, and, if they are different from normal beliefs, what mechanisms
are involved in their development and manifestation. Jaspers' (1997) own
view was that delusion was a primary phenomenon and that it implies a
transformation in the total awareness of reality. This means that a
delusional belief involves and implicates practical activity, behaviour,
the meanings that are immanent in objects and radically transforms

119

BOX 8.1 FACTORS INVOLVED IN THE GERMINATION OF DELUSIONS • Disorder of
brain functioning • Background influences of temperament and personality
• Maintenance of self-­esteem • The role of affect • As a response to
perceptual disturbance • As a response to depersonalization • Associated
with cognitive overload

the basic experience of the world. A person who is deluded that they are
loved by a celebrity approaches the world with this certainty and
knowledge and acts accordingly by writing to, telephoning or attempting
to visit the celebrity. This erroneous belief invests the patient's
world with new meanings. In these terms, reality lies in the
interpretation of or the significance attached to events that occur
interpreted in the light of the primary erroneous belief. An
understanding of how delusions radically alter the patient's world as
described does not help us to explain how delusions form in the first
place. The factors involved in delusion formation have been summarized
by Brockington (1991); see Box 8.1. Fish (1967) developed a useful
précis of the earlier German theories of the origins of delusion. Conrad
proposed five stages in the development of delusional psychosis: 1. 
Trema: delusional mood representing a total change in perception of the
world 2.  Apophany: a search for, and the finding of, new meaning for
psychological events 3.  Anastrophy: heightening of the psychosis 4. 
Consolidation: forming of a new world or psychological set based on new
meanings 5.  Residuum: eventual autistic state Gruhle (1915) considered
delusional perception to be the most significant form of delusion, a
normal percept taking on a new meaning. This results in a disturbed
relationship of the understanding of events. Matussek (1953) considered
that with delusional perception there is a change either in the
significance of the words used or in the actual nature of the perception
itself. These writers and Schneider regard delusional perception as the
key to understanding the nature of delusional experience.

120

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Hagen (1870) regarded delusional atmosphere as primary, arising for
reasons unknown and resulting in a rearrangement of meanings in the
world around the patient who gropes for an answer to this problem of
understanding and finds it by creating a delusion. It is easier to bear
the certainty of a delusion than the uncertain foreboding of the
atmosphere. Jaspers considered that there is a subtle change of
personality due to the illness itself, and this creates the condition
for the development of the delusional atmosphere in which the delusional
intuition arises. All these theories assume that the delusion is primary
and ultimately not understandable in the same sense that Jaspers
considers the experience of reality to be primary. Experience holds a
symbolic implication beyond the fact of the event itself; for example
the doctor writing a prescription for their patient in the consulting
room means much more to the latter than if the doctor were doodling on
their prescription block. (A patient in North Africa in the 19th century
ate the written prescription his doctor gave him, so great was his
confidence in, and veneration for, the doctor; Sims, 1972.) It seems
that the symbolic belief attached to events and perceptions is altered
in delusion, and this is why the patient does not necessarily act on
their delusions. The delusional atmosphere is not an essential
prerequisite for a delusional intuition, as the latter may occur
apparently de novo. Some writers have not tried to explain delusions
because they find them totally incomprehensible and consider that they
are directly due to an abnormality of the brain (Schneider, 1949).
Bleuler concentrated on the alteration in affect as primary rather than
delusional atmosphere or perception. He considered that heightened
affect loosens the capacity to form associations and thus facilitates
the arrival of a delusion. At the beginning of a schizophrenic illness,
there is extreme affect, perhaps in the form of anxiety or ambivalence,
which the patient cannot express. Kretschmer (1927) stressed the
importance of the underlying personality. He described the sensitive
premorbid personality occurring in a person who retains affect-­laden
complexes and has a limited capacity for emotional self-­ expression.
Such a person is driven painfully by, for example, powerful sexual
feelings, but they have great difficulty in communicating their passion
and relating to other people. They are very much

aware of social constraints and are rigidly controlled by their
superego. Such a person, somewhat rigid, narrow-­minded and suspicious in
their views, readily forms sensitive ideas of reference. A key
experience may occur in their life circumstances, and quite suddenly
these ideas become structured as delusions of reference. A girl was
always shy, reticent and sensitive at school. Quite often, she was
reluctant to go to school. She was meticulous in her attention to
personal neatness and cleanliness. After leaving school, she remembered
vividly several occasions as a child when she had felt humiliated. At
age 18, when she was working in a factory, she was in the women's
cloakroom brooding because her boyfriend had told her that he was
leaving her for someone else. She heard one of the other women say,
'Ugh, doesn't she smell?' Immediately, she applied the statement to
herself and to explain her boyfriend's behaviour. From then onwards, she
was convinced that she smelt unpleasant all the time, although she could
smell nothing herself. This delusion dominated her life, prevented her
mixing and caused her great distress. This development of a delusion
(Sensitiver Beziehungswahn) from sensitive ideas of reference, as the
sequel to a key experience, is sometimes seen at the onset of
schizophrenia but is not common. The key experience, as demonstrated in
this case, has two important qualities. First, it has particular
appropriateness to the patient's areas of conflict as sensitive ideas of
reference. Second, it occurs at a time of marked emotional turmoil and
distress so that the psychic ground is prepared for a catastrophic
event. Attempts have been made to find all delusions understandable in
relation to the person's internal experience or social background.
Westphal considered that if one knew all about the patient, the change
in their view of themself and the belief that they had become noticeable
in some way would explain the delusion (Fish, 1967). Freud's (1907)
theories on the development of delusions also attempted to make them
ultimately understandable through the mechanisms of denial, projection
and so on. Other authors have claimed that delusions are understandable
in a social context. Laing (1961) considered the flight into madness as
a necessary defence against a highly destructive family---not only
understandable, but admirable, and even worth emulating.

8 Delusions and Other Erroneous Ideas

When four psychological theories were appraised to explain paranoid
phenomena, a basis of shame-­ humiliation was found to be the most
consistent (Colby, 1977). Winters and Neale (1983) consider that
existing theories of delusional thinking develop two main themes:
motivational and defect. The motivational theme explains the arrival of
a delusion to explain unusual perceptual experience or to reduce
uncomfortable psychic states. Defect implies some fundamental
cognitive-­attentional deficit resulting in delusion. The variety and
range of explanations adduced as the origin of delusions attest the
extent of our ignorance about the ultimate nature, structure and
derivation of delusions. It is probably wise to regard delusion as a
term describing a multitude of abnormalities of thinking that have
merely a superficial familial relationship. To employ an analogy,
delusion is like the term ataxia, a term that describes several
abnormalities of movement with differing underlying lesions and
mechanisms. The term delusion is not a description of a unitary,
homogenous abnormality of thinking; it is most likely an umbrella term
for a collection of disparate abnormalities of thinking. COGNITION AND
REASONING IN DELUSION In trying to understand the role of cognition and
reason in delusion formation, it is probably useful to think of the
formation, elaboration and persistence of delusional beliefs as an
expression of numerous causal influences converging; each exerts a
different influence in the evolution of the belief (Roberts, 1992). The
process of reasoning in order to come to conclusions about one's
situation in the outside environment appears to be altered in those
experiencing delusions. A 'jump-­to-­ conclusions style' has been
demonstrated in deluded subjects when asked to perform a probabilistic
reasoning task (Huq et al., 1988). This was confirmed by Garety et
al. (1991) in showing that 41% of deluded subjects but only 4% of
controls reached a conclusion on the basis of only one item of
information. A common cause in abnormality of information processing has
been proposed for those subjects with abnormal reasoning and abnormal
perception; failure to make use of previously acquired knowledge of
regularities in the world, resulting in overreliance on information
immediately present, may be a factor in delusion

121

formation (Garety, 1991). This model emphasizes the deviant nature of
the thinking process that is associated with delusions in patients with
schizophrenia. In Garety's model, judgemental processes involved in
delusion formation include: 1. prior expectation that may be modified by
emotion; 2. current information that we have at our disposal, such as
the information reaching us by way of our perceptions; and 3. the nature
of our information processing bias or style. In this model, if
perceptual abnormalities predominate the role of deviant information,
then processing mechanisms will be underemphasized. In other words, when
delusions are secondary to hallucinations, reasoning should remain
intact. The advantage of this model is that it highlights the varying
routes to delusion formation. Attribution in Delusion

An alternative psychological explanation for delusion comes from social
attribution theory. Kaney and Bentall (1989, 1992) found that deluded
patients made excessively external, stable and global attributions for
negative events ('The fact that I broke my leg proves yet again that the
Wetherby freemasons are getting at me') and excessively internal, stable
and global attributions for positive events ('Everyone smiles and nods
when they see me because I have been sent by God to communicate with
people about evil and I have a letter from the Pope as proof'). Deluded
subjects were unwilling to attribute negative events of which they were
the victim to their own cause; also, in judging the behaviour of other
people they were reluctant to attribute negative events to the victims
themselves. These and other studies suggest that persecutory delusions
have a function in protecting the individual from low self-­esteem
(Bentall, 1993). Deluded subjects were considered to evaluate their own
causal statements in a distinctive manner, and this difference from
depressed subjects was greater than the differences in the causal
statements themselves; that is, the difference between deluded and other
subjects in internality for positive and negative events does not
reflect differences in the causal statements of these subjects but
rather differences in their

122

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

attributions (Kinderman et al., 1992). Once again, delusions are linked
both to personal meaning and to boundaries of self. This investigation
of attributional style was further extended using obvious and opaque
tests of attributional style. Deluded subjects attributed negative
outcomes to external causes in the obvious or transparent tests but a
more covert testing to internal causes; this further supported the
hypothesis that persecutory delusions function as a defence against
underlying feelings of low self-­esteem (Lyon et al., 1994). This
psychological exploration is further supported by the clinical study
that follows. Delusion and Meaning in Life

Roberts (1991) has developed the thesis that delusions, in the context
of schizophrenic illness, may not themselves be an affliction or illness
but an adaptive response to whatever initiates the psychotic break. A
group of chronically deluded subjects was compared with previously
deluded patients now in remission and with two nonpatient groups.
Persecutory delusions were common in both patient groups, but grandiose
and erotic delusions and delusions of special knowledge were mostly
found in the currently deluded group. The chronically deluded group
scored much higher than the remitted patients for positive meaning in
life and much lower for depression and suicidal intention. They had a
very high level of perceived purpose and meaning in life. It is
considered that, for some, the formation of delusions is adaptive in
combating purposelessness, loneliness, sense of inferiority,
hopelessness, isolation and painful awareness of broken relationships
and provides a new sense of identity, a clearer sense of duty and
responsibility, an experience of freedom, protection from past hurts and
a change from fear, worry, depression and boredom towards feeling
lively, enthusiastic, interested and peaceful. One patient described
this: 'I've had a great time. I've got this one great thought in my mind
that I am Jesus---that's enough ... nothing hurts me now, I need nothing
now.'

Content of Delusions Delusions are, of course, infinitely variable in
their content, but certain general characteristics commonly occur.
Unlike the form, which is dictated by the type

of illness, the content is determined by the emotional, social, cultural
and biographical background of the patient: Napoleons are now rare in
mental hospitals; schizophrenia sufferers from traditional societies may
describe their thoughts as being interfered with by the spirits of their
ancestors rather than by television. As computers and the Internet
increasingly affect all aspects of our lives, we are beginning to have
described by those with mental illness delusions of control concerning
the Internet (Catalano et al., 1991). DELUSIONS OF PERSECUTION This is
the most frequent content of delusion. It was distinguished from other
types of delusion and from other forms of melancholia by Lasègue (1852).
People who believe delusionally that their lives are being interfered
with from outside more often feel this to be harmful than beneficial. A
variant on the usual beliefs of persecution or malevolent intent are
delusions of prejudice: the patient or victim believes that they are
being slighted, overlooked or passed over in favour of someone else. The
interfering agent in delusions of persecution may be animate or
inanimate, other people or machines; it may be systems, organizations or
institutions rather than individuals. Sometimes the patient experiences
persecution as a vague influence without knowing who is responsible.
Persecutory delusions occur in many conditions: in schizophrenia, in
affective psychoses of manic and depressive type and in organic states,
both acute and chronic. The affect associated with the belief of
persecution may vary from an inappropriate indifference and apathy in
schizophrenia to stark terror, as commonly seen in delirium tremens.
Manic patients with persecutory delusions show gross overactivity and
flight of ideas in attempting to express and deal with their beliefs. In
depression, the persecutory delusions take on the characteristic
colouring of the dominant mood state. Persecutory overvalued ideas are a
prominent facet of the litigious type of paranoid personality disorder.
MORBID JEALOUSY AND DELUSION OF INFIDELITY Morbid jealousy, a disorder
of content described by Ey (1950), may be manifested in various forms,
for example, as delusion, overvalued idea, or part of depressive affect
or anxiety state. The feeling of jealousy, coupled

8 Delusions and Other Erroneous Ideas

with a sense that the loved object 'belongs to me' and therefore 'I
belong to the other' is part of normal human experience; it is of social
value in marital relationships for preserving the family. Various terms
have been used to describe abnormal, morbid or malignant jealousy.
Kraepelin (1905) used the term sexual jealousy. Enoch and Trethowan
(1979) have considered it important to distinguish psychotic jealousy
from other types, and this is dependent on the demonstration of a
delusion of infidelity. It is sometimes difficult to distinguish
understandable jealousy from that which is delusional. Mullen (1997)
classified morbid jealousy with disorders of passion in which there is
an overwhelming sense of entitlement and a conviction that others are
abrogating the subject's rights: 'The morbidly jealous believe that they
are the victims of an infidelity that has deprived them of the fealty
which is their due and they are driven to expose this disloyalty,
reassert their control and punish the transgression'. The other two
categories are the querulent, who are indignant at infringements of
rights, and the erotomanic, who are driven to assert their rights of
love. Delusion of infidelity, that is, when the subject unreasonably
believes themself to be the victim of their partner's unfaithfulness,
may occur without other psychotic symptoms. It has been described by
Todd and Dewhurst (1955) and by Mullen (1990). This is identifiably
delusional when the belief of the spouse is based on delusional
evidence. Such delusions are resistant to treatment and do not change
with time. A patient was very concerned that his wife was being
unfaithful with numerous people, including his boss, her general
practitioner and others. Four years later, despite various treatments,
his belief was unchanged, but he said, 'I don't blame her now. She is
much younger than I am and everyone does that sort of thing'. Delusions
of jealousy are common with alcohol abuse; for instance, Shrestha et
al. (1985) found sexual jealousy to be present in 35% of men and 31% of
women who abused alcohol or had alcohol dependence syndrome. As jealousy
appeared to be justified in some cases, morbid jealousy was considered
to be present in 27% of men and 15% of women. Delusional jealousy, often
associated with impotence, also occurs in some organic states, for
example, the punch-­ drunk syndrome of boxers after multiple contrecoup
contusions. Quite

123

frequently, the spouse, wearied by continued accusations of infidelity,
does form another sexual involvement, which may result in an acute
exacerbation in the mental state of the patient and further marital
conflict. The sexual content of the delusion is obvious; however, Enoch
(1991) regards the nature of the relationship between the two partners
as the key aspect of the condition. Jealousy is directed towards the
sexual partner. The deluded person is very attached to, and often
emotionally utterly dependent on, the other; they may have a misplaced
sense of owning them completely. The victim is often much more sexually
attractive than the deluded partner, for instance, a young wife or a
sociable and popular husband. The deluded person may have been
promiscuous in the past and therefore resignedly expects their spouse to
show similar behaviour. A male partner may have become impotent and
projected the blame for his failure onto his wife. He may have
homosexual fantasies directed towards the men with whom he claims his
wife is consorting. Morbid jealousy arises with the belief that there is
a threat to the exclusive possession of his wife, but this is just as
likely to occur from conflicts inside himself, his own inability to love
or his sexual interest directed towards someone else as from changing
circumstances in his environment or his wife's behaviour. The jealous
feeling is associated with intense feelings of anger, fear, sadness,
envy and sometimes with sexual arousal. Checking behaviours that
accompany jealousy can be engrossing and exhausting. The jealous partner
checks for seminal stain, examining bedsheets or clothing for telltale
signs of secret sexual liaisons. Husbands or wives may show sexual
jealousy, as may cohabitees and homosexual couples. Crimes of violence
are notoriously associated with morbid jealousy; violence is more often
vented on the partner than on the supposed rival, most often by men on
women. Morbid jealousy makes a major contribution to the frequency of
wife battering and is one of the commonest motivations for homicide
(Mullen, 1990). Daly et al., (1982) show from their examination of
homicide data from Detroit in 1972 that a substantial number of
homicides resulting from social conflict were ultimately motivated by
sexual jealousy. The risk factors predicting lethal violence in spousal
homicide include a history of previous domestic violence, cohabiting,
childhood victim of family violence, large

124

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

characterized by delusions ... the patient's love is of the sentimental
kind, he is wholly occupied by the object of his adoration, whom, if he
approaches, it is with respect ... the fixed and permanent delusions
attending erotomania sometimes prompt those labouring under it to
destroy themselves or others, for although in general tranquil and
peaceful, the patient sometimes becomes irritable, passionate and
jealous.

higher social status than she is in love with her. The victim has
usually done nothing to deserve her attention and may be quite unaware
of her existence; sometimes he is a well-­known public figure quite
remote from the patient. In a case of the author's, the victim was a
previous employer of the patient. She believed that he was the father of
her child (although at another time she agreed that there had been no
sexual relationship with her employer). She also believed that he was
sending her money, and she would write letters thanking him for his
generosity and affirming her gratitude for the evidence of his love
(Sims and White, 1973). Ellis and Mellsop (1985) proposed operational
criteria for erotomania derived from Clérambault and these are (1)
delusional conviction of amorous communication, (2) a love object of
higher rank, (3) the love object being the first to fall in, (4) the
love object being the first to make advances, (5) sudden onset within a
7-­day period, (6) the love object remains unchanged and if other love
objects occur they are only of transitory significance, (7) the patient
rationalizes the paradoxical behaviour of the love object, (8) there is
a chronic course and (9) there is an absence of hallucinations. In a
series of 16 erotomanic cases, Mullen and Pathé (1994) tried to
distinguish between those cases in which there is a morbid belief in
being loved and those with morbid infatuation. They found that in most
cases both notions were described: a mixture of being loved and loving
in return. It is notable that erotomania is associated with stalking
behaviour including cyberstalking and violence.

Erotomania is commoner in women than in men, and a variety was called
old maids insanity by Hart (1921) in which persecutory delusions often
develop. These have sometimes been classified as paranoia rather than
paranoid schizophrenia; these delusional symptoms sometimes occur in the
context of manic-­depressive psychosis (Guirguis, 1981). Trethowan (1967)
demonstrated the social characteristics of erotomania, relating the
patient's previous difficulties in parental relationships to the present
erotomania. A variation of erotomania was described by, and retains the
name of, de Clérambault (1942). Typically, a woman believes a man who is
older and of

DELUSIONAL MISIDENTIFICATION Delusional misidentification syndromes
include a number of discrete but related syndromes that have in common
the concept of the double. These syndromes include Capgras' syndrome
(Capgras and Reboul-­Lachaux, 1923), Frégoli's syndrome (Courbon and
Fail, 1927), the syndrome of intermetamorphosis (Courbon and Tusques,
1932) and the syndrome of subjective doubles (Christodoulou, 1978).
Capgras' syndrome is regarded by Enoch and Trethowan (1979) as 'a rare,
colourful syndrome in which the person believes that a person, usually
closely related to them, has been replaced by an exact double'. It is a
specific delusional misidentification of a person

age disparity, drug and alcohol misuse, sexual jealousy, threats of
separation by the female spouse, and personality disorder (Aldridge and
Browne, 2003). DELUSIONS OF LOVE The delusions associated with loving
and being loved are quite different from the behavioural and affective
abnormalities of nymphomania, the situation of a woman characterized by
morbid or uncontrolled sexual desire, and satyriasis, the male
equivalent of excessive sexual activity. Both these latter conditions
exist initially in the opinion of an external commentator---the doctor.
Approximately twice as many schizophrenic patients had sexual
preoccupations in the mid-­20th century compared with in the mid-­19th
century (Klaf and Hamilton, 1961). The term erotomania has a long
pedigree. It was first used by Jacques Ferrand (1640) in the title of
his book Erotomania or Treatise Discoursing of the Essence, Causes,
Symptoms, Prognosticks and Cure of Love or Erotic Melancholy (Hunter and
MacAlpine, 1970). Erotomania was described by Sir Alexander Morrison
(1848) as being:

8 Delusions and Other Erroneous Ideas

with whom the subject usually has close emotional ties and towards whom
there is a feeling of ambivalence at the time of onset. The belief in
Capgras' syndrome has the full characteristics of delusion (Enoch and
Trethowan, 1979). The basic concept of this syndrome is prominent in all
cultures, hence the delusion is universal (Christodoulou, 1991). Like
other delusions, delusion describes the form; the explanatory content is
culture-­dependent. A recent patient believed his mother had been
replaced by an impostor after falling through a time warp to a parallel
universe, and this explained the horrible things that had happened in
the past 3 weeks. Frégoli's syndrome is the delusional misidentification
of an unfamiliar person as a familiar one, even though there is no
physical resemblance. The syndrome of intermetamorphosis is the
delusional belief that others undergo radical changes in physical and
psychological identity, culminating in a different person altogether.
The syndrome of subjective doubles is the delusional belief in the
existence of physical duplicates of the self, and these duplicates are
usually thought to have different psychological identities (for review,
see Moselhy and Oyebode, 1997). In a series of cases reviewed by Berson
(1983), 55% (70 patients) were unquestionably diagnosed as suffering
from schizophrenia, and a further 8 patients (totalling 61%) were
probably suffering from schizophrenia; 13% were suffering from bipolar
mood disorder and 24% were considered to have an organic diagnosis. Of
133 patients, 57% were female; the age range was from 12 to 78 with a
mean of 42.8 years. Majority opinion would not favour denoting this as a
separate disease but rather as a symptom that colours the clinical state
and dominates the symptomatology. The four varieties of delusional
misidentification have in common psychopathologically the form of a
delusion. Capgras' syndrome, when it occurs in schizophrenia, can be
based on a delusional percept (Sims, 1986) but the fundamental problem
is misidentification of a familiar person as a double. In Capgras'
syndrome, there is no outward change in the appearance of the object,
and there is no false perception, for the patient often admits that the
double exactly resembles the original (Enoch and Trethowan, 1979), but
careful questioning usually reveals that there are distinguishing
stigmata. Sometimes patients will say, 'I know that

125

it is not my mother because she would never stand like that' or 'this
person moves too slowly to be my father'. The ambivalence towards the
object of misidentification may be expressed in the history, with a
clear account of both negative emotions, such as hostility, fear or
contempt, and affection and dependence. On those few occasions when an
object, rather than a person, is wrongly identified, that object has
important emotional connotations for the patient, for example home or a
letter from a relative. The subjects of misidentification in Berson's
(1983) review of 133 patients comprised 60 spouses and 2 lovers; on 29
occasions, a child or children; 40 parents; 24 siblings; 13 therapists;
four grandparents; three in-­ laws; two neighbours; two domestics; and
one each of fiancé, cousin, stepson, employer and priest. On eight
occasions, the self was misidentified either solely or with other
evidence of the syndrome; on two occasions, animals, and eight times
inanimate objects were misidentified. Thus in 31% of occasions, the
delusional misidentification refers to a marital partner, and in 46% to
a first-­ degree relative; in only 4% was the misidentification of the
patient themself. There is growing evidence that delusional
misidentification syndromes are associated with organic disorders,
including dementia, acquired brain injury, epilepsy and cerebrovascular
accidents in 25% to 40% of cases, and neuroimaging studies reveal
association with right hemisphere abnormalities, particularly in the
frontal and temporal regions (Edelstyn et al., 1999). Furthermore,
neuropsychological investigations have consistently shown impairments of
face processing in delusional misidentification syndromes (Ellis et al.,
1993; Edelstyn et al., 1996; Oyebode et al., 1996). These findings
underpin the assumption of right hemisphere abnormalities in delusional
misidentification syndromes, because the right hemisphere is implicated
in face processing and recognition. GRANDIOSE DELUSIONS Primary
grandiose delusions occur in schizophrenia. The patient may believe
themself to be a famous celebrity or to have supernatural powers. They
may believe themself to be involved in some special and secret mission
about which they have not yet been fully briefed but in anticipation of
which they are waiting with excitement for the dénouement. Beliefs of
this sort are

126

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

sometimes called delusions of special purpose and are of the form of
delusional intuition. Expansive or grandiose delusional beliefs may
extend to objects. Sometimes a psychotic patient demonstrates delusions
of invention in which, for example, they build a machine that they
believe to have special capabilities, considering themself to be a
creative prodigy. Secondary grandiose delusions, or delusion-­like ideas,
occur in manic states. A patient said that there was no life on Mars
because 'if there had been I would have been able to get in touch by
telepathy using my great genius'. He showed no evidence of true
passivity experiences. A manic patient, mentioned earlier, believed that
she was descended from the royal Stuart line and therefore was actually
in some way Mary, Queen of Scots. She invited the queen and the prime
minister to a party in her student flat because she thought they would
be honoured to be invited: 'It is only fair that they should have an
invitation.' The expansive affect of mania can be clearly seen to render
this delusion understandable. RELIGIOUS DELUSIONS Religious delusions
are common. However, they formed a higher proportion of all delusions in
the 19th century than in the 20th century: three times as many patients
with schizophrenia of both sexes had religious preoccupation in the 19th
century (Klaf and Hamilton, 1961). Decision as to whether beliefs are
delusional must rest on the principles described earlier---that is, on
the way the belief is held and the evidence produced in its support.
Because a religious belief is bizarre and at variance with those held by
the interviewer does not necessarily make it a delusion. Religious
delusions may be grandiose in nature, for example, a patient in the
United Kingdom who believed that she was an emissary of God to the
Birmingham Housing Department. They may also be secondary to depressive
mood, as in the patient of Emil Kraepelin (1905) quoted at the beginning
of Chapter 16: 'I cannot live and I cannot die, because I have failed so
much, I shall bring my husband and children to hell'. The religious
nature of the delusion is seen as a disorder of content dependent on the
patient's social background, interests and peer group. The form of the
delusion is dictated by the nature of the illness.

So religious delusions are not caused by excessive religious belief or
by the wrongdoing that the patient attributes as cause, but they simply
accentuate that, when a person becomes mentally ill, their delusions
reflect, in their content, their predominant interests and concerns.
Sometimes, it can be difficult to make the distinction between religious
delusion and the experience of an unusual religious belief or practice.
Psychiatric morbidity would be suggested by the following (Sims, 1992):
• Both the subjective experience and the observed behaviour conform with
psychiatric symptoms, that is, the self-­ description of this particular
experience is recognizable as being the symptomatology of a known
psychiatric illness---it has the form of delusion. • There are other
recognizable symptoms of mental illness in other areas of life: other
delusions, hallucinations, disturbance of mood, thought disorder and so
on. • The lifestyle, behaviour and direction of personal goals of the
individual subsequent to the event or religious experience are
consistent with the natural history of mental disorder rather than with
a personally enriching life experience, compatible with the conditions
in which delusions occur. DELUSIONS OF GUILT AND UNWORTHINESS Such
delusions are common in depressive illness. They often lead to suicide
and, rarely, to homicide, when the killing of a close relative may be
followed by the patient's suicide. Affective illness may be followed by
the killing of children by depressed mothers or the killing of their
wife or sometimes also children by husbands; suicide may follow
immediately or later (Higgins, 1990). The beliefs about guilt may
totally dominate the patient's thinking. An elderly woman spent the day
rushing round the house wringing her hands and telling her worried
family that she was wretched, worthless and only deserved to die. She
told her married daughters that they were illegitimate and that the
house she lived in was not hers but stolen, and she told her husband of
30 years' standing that they were not legally married. When it was
suggested to her that she come into hospital, she assumed that she would

8 Delusions and Other Erroneous Ideas

be killed on arrival, and she asked whether this could take place there
and then so that she could receive her just desserts. DELUSIONS OF
POVERTY AND NIHILISTIC DELUSIONS Delusions of poverty are common in
depression; an elderly patient believed that 'the nurses' had been
systematically raiding her purse and that she was destitute. Cotard's
syndrome contains features typical of psychotic depression in the
elderly: nihilistic and hypochondriacal delusions that are often
bizarre, dramatic and tinged with grandiosity; depressed mood with
either agitation or retardation and a completely negative attitude.
According to Griesinger (1845), 'the patient confuses the subjective
change in his own attitude to outside things ... the real world seems to
the patient to have disappeared completely, or to be dead'. This was
graphically depicted by Cotard (1882): I would tentatively suggest the
name 'nihilistic delusions' (délire de negations) to describe the
condition of the patients to whom Griesinger was referring, in whom the
tendency towards negation is carried to its extreme. If they are asked
their name or age, they have neither -- where were they born? They were
not born. Who were their father and mother? They have no father, mother,
wife or children. Have they a headache or pain in the stomach, or any
other part of the body? They have no head or stomach and some even have
no body. If one shows them an object, a rose or some other flower they
answer, 'that is not a rose, not a flower at all'. In some cases
negation is total. Nothing exists any longer, not even themselves. The
central character in Patrick McGrath's novel, Spider, said, 'I was
contaminated by it, it shrivelled me, it killed something inside me,
made me a ghost, a dead thing, in short it turned me bad'. Elsewhere,
the same character says, 'a single pipe takes water from my stomach ...
and this pipe alone drops through the void and connects to the thing
between my legs that hardly resembles a formed male organ at all
anymore' (McGrath, 1990). Nihilistic delusions are the reverse of
grandiose delusions in which oneself, objects or situations are

127

expansive and enriched; there is also a perverse grandiosity about the
nihilistic delusions themselves. Feelings of guilt and hypochondriacal
ideas are developed to their most extreme, depressive form in nihilistic
delusions. HYPOCHONDRIACAL DELUSIONS A very depressed man said that he
was full of water, that there was nothing else inside him, and that he
could not pass water but that if he did, that would be the end of him.
He could not drink or the water would flood the room. Other less
striking hypochondriacal beliefs and delusions occur in depression, and
Schneider (1920) has considered that locating the experience of
depression as a sensation in a bodily organ is equivalent to a
'first-­rank symptom' of depressive psychosis (see Chapter 16). An
elderly woman with depression who had had a mitral valve replacement for
rheumatic heart disease said that she felt worthless and hopeless and
described her physical functions as 'nothing is working'.
Hypochondriacal delusions may also occur in schizophrenia and have the
characteristics of other schizophrenic ideas. They are more likely to be
given a persecutory than a nihilistic explanation. Thus a patient
believed that his bodily functions were being interfered with by rays
emitted from a planet and that this was part of a plot to control his
thoughts and behaviour. Hypochondriacal delusions are discussed further
in association with hypochondriasis in Chapter 14; however, other
features of hypochondriasis, such as bodily preoccupation, disease
phobia and conviction of the presence of disease with nonresponse to
reassurance, are in fact more common than delusion (Pilowsky, 1967).
Facial pain is described in Chapter 15 and other delusion-­like ideas and
overvalued ideas of the body in Chapter 14. Delusions concerning the
patient's origins are sometimes described and have some affinity to
hypochondriacal delusion. The patient believes, on delusional evidence,
that they are not their parent's child, or perhaps that they are of
royal birth, part animal or supernatural. Alternatively, they may
believe that they do not exist and were never born. Hypochondriacal
delusions are commonly associated with delusional disorder in the
International Classification of Diseases, 10th revision (previously
known

128

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

as paranoia; World Health Organization, 1992). Munro (1988) has
described delusional disorder as an encapsulated monodelusional disorder
with several subtypes, such as erotomanic, grandiose, jealous,
persecutory, somatic and unspecified; the concept has developed from the
older term paranoia (Munro, 1997). He has described the somatic type as
monosymptomatic hypochondriacal psychosis and, of 50 cases, the three
main groups were: 1. delusions of body odour and halitosis; 2.
infestation delusion (insects, burrowing worms or foreign bodies under
the skin); and 3. delusions of ugliness or misshapenness (dysmorphic
delusions). In a factor analysis of the features of delusional disorder,
four independent factors were identified, suggesting considerable
heterogeneity of the condition (Serretti et al., 1999). The first factor
incorporated core depressive symptoms, which may be either a depressive
syndrome reactive to stresses deriving from delusional ideation, a
comorbid mood disorder or both. Other factors were hallucinations,
delusions and symptoms of irritability. The complaint was always
presented with great intensity, and patients were utterly convinced of
the physical nature of the disorder. Hypochondriacal delusions may also
occur with administration of drugs, both prescribed and those of abuse.
Koro (Lapierre, 1972) is an unusual condition that has been described as
an example of hypochondriacal delusion. This view is probably incorrect.
The features of koro include: • the belief that the penis is shrinking
into the abdomen; • the belief that when the penis disappears into the
abdomen, death will ensue; and • extreme anxiety accompanying this
belief. Yap (1965) describes this as a culture-­bound depersonalization
syndrome and considers it to be a manifestation of acute anxiety
associated with folk beliefs concerning sexual exhaustion. It has
occurred in epidemic proportions among Malays in Singapore (Gwee, 1963)
but has also been described in individual cases in a French Canadian
(Lapierre, 1972), in a West Indian, in a Greek Cypriot (Ang and Weller,
1984) and in an Englishman (Berrios and Morley, 1984). Oyebode et
al. (1986) have shown in a single case study that

this belief is accompanied by real penile shrinkage as measured by
plethysmography. This suggests that the belief is based on physiologic
changes that are likely to be due to anxiety. In essence, the penile
change is similar to tachycardia, hyperhidrosis or other features of
sympathetic arousal associated with anxiety. A group of patients who, in
some respects, are intermediate between those suffering from somatic
delusions and delusions of infestation are those who were described by
Videbech (1966) as suffering from chronic olfactory paranoid syndromes;
these have also been referred to as having olfactory reference syndrome
(Pryse-­Phillips, 1971). Characteristically, these patients have a fixed
and unalterable belief that they smell but do not have hallucinations or
other olfactory experience. It is usually seen in the context of
sensitive, paranoid personality development. There is a severe phobic
reaction, with the behaviour of other people interpreted as finding
their smell offensive and aversive. Delusions of Infestation

Delusions of infestation have been described by Hopkinson (1970) and by
Reilly (1988). In Ekbom's syndrome (Ekbom, 1938), the patient believes
that they are infested with small but macroscopic organisms. Freudenmann
and Lepping (2009) describe the nature of the imaginary pathogens
reported by patients as including vermin, insects, parasites, 'small
animals'. Often the nature of the infestation is surmised from an itch
that is ascribed to mites, scabies, lice, worms, bugs, fleas, flies,
ticks or spiders. Sometimes, microscopic pathogens such as bacteria or
viruses are identified as the cause of the patient's problems. In the
Mogellons phenomenon, inanimate materials such as filaments, threads,
fibres and pigments may be identified as responsible for the sensory
experiences. The most common sources of the imagined infestation are
other human beings, plants, animals, pets and parts of the home. The
identified affected sites on the body include the skin of the hands,
arms, feet, lower legs, scalp, the upper back and the breast and
genitals. Bodily orifices including the nose, ears, mouth, anus, urethra
and the gastrointestinal tract have all been identified as locations of
infestation. There are a number of behaviours associated with delusional
infestation. These include attempts to remove the identified

8 Delusions and Other Erroneous Ideas

pathogen or object by digging into the skin, producing excoriations or
lacerations. Sometimes patients will self-­mutilate using tweezers,
knives or other sharp instruments. The patient's experience may take the
form of a tactile hallucinatory state, a delusion or an overvalued idea.
The aetiology is also variable. It is probably most common as a symptom
of circumscribed hypochondriasis in affective psychosis, along with
other depressive symptoms, but it also occurs in paranoid schizophrenia,
in monosymptomatic hypochondriacal psychosis (delusional disorder), in
organic brain syndromes or with neurotically determined conditions. This
topic is reviewed by Berrios (1985) and by Morris (1991). Patients have
believed that they had a spider in their hair, worms and lice beneath
the skin or infestation with various insects. The delusion may be
accompanied by other depressive delusions or overvalued ideas of being
dirty, guilty, unworthy or ill. These delusions may also occur in
schizophrenia, in which condition they characteristically take on a
bizarre character and are accompanied by other schizophrenic symptoms. A
49-­year-­old mother of four children, one of whose sons had developed a
schizophrenic illness, complained of recurrent pain in her vagina that
she explained as being caused by a parasite that had migrated from her
stomach, where it had been responsible for epigastric pain diagnosed
earlier as hiatus hernia (McLaughlin and Sims, 1984). She described the
parasite as wandering through her bloodstream and as having been
responsible for various aches and pains she had experienced in the past.
She related having passed multiple small red worms and worm casts in her
faeces and, on one occasion, a two-­inch green frog. Delusions of
infestation may occur in organic states with tactile hallucinations, in
delirium tremens during alcohol withdrawal and in cocaine addiction.
They may be described in cerebrovascular disease, in senile dementia and
in other brain disease, and they have been ascribed to disorder of the
thalamus. Overvalued ideas and delusion-­like ideas of infestation
sometimes occur in people with personality disorder of anankastic or
paranoid type with no psychotic illness. Characteristically, these ideas
occur in patients older than 50 years. Typically, those with delusions
of infestation have always had a particular concern

129

for personal cleanliness. Sometimes, the condition is precipitated by a
skin disease and becomes a delusional elaboration of existing tactile
symptoms. It has been suggested that the symptom develops in stages:
first, abnormal cutaneous sensation; then an illusion develops; and
finally, the fully formed delusion of infestation occurs. As mentioned
earlier, delusional infestation is now viewed as one form of delusional
disorder, in particular being a subtype of monosymptomatic
hypochondriacal psychosis. COMMUNICATED INSANITY Laségue and Falret
(1877) described la folie à deux (or folie communiquée). Occasionally, a
delusion (delusional intuition) is transferred from a psychotic person
to one or more others with whom they have been in close association so
that the recipient shares the false belief: the principal acquires the
delusion first and is dominant, the associate becomes deluded through
association with the principal. This situation in which partners accept,
support and share each other's beliefs has been called the psychosis of
association. The associate is usually socially deprived or
disadvantaged, mentally or physically. Gralnick (1942), in a review of
the English literature on folie à deux, subdivided the condition into
four possible relationships between principal and associate. 1. In folie
imposée the delusions of a mentally ill person are transferred to
someone who was not previously mentally ill, although characteristically
the victim has some social or psychological disadvantage. Separation of
the pair is often followed by remission of symptoms in the associate. 2.
Folie communiquée occurs when a normal person suffers a contagion of
their ideas after resisting them for a long time. Once they acquire
these beliefs, they maintain them despite separation. 3. In folie
induite a person who is already psychotic adds the delusions of a
closely associated person to his own. 4.  Folie simultanée describes a
situation in which two or more people become psychotic and share the
same delusional system simultaneously. It has been considered that the
principal is always psychotic (Soni and Rockley, 1974), but the
associate may or may not be psychotic.

130

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

However, the validity of this classification has been questioned. It is
also not of any particular clinical value, and the psychopathological
differences are questionable (Hughes and Sims, 1997). In a case report
of a family affected with folie à quatre (Sims et al., 1977), the
initially referred patient believed that a large industrial concern had
put 'bugging' devices in the walls of his brother's house. He claimed
that employees of the firm had been following him everywhere and
interfering with his own house. His wife believed this story initially
and produced supposedly corroborative evidence. A year later, following
his inpatient treatment, she no longer accepted the plot and she
believed her husband to be mentally ill. She was a very anxious person
who had previously received psychiatric treatment and came from a family
in which three members had suffered from Huntington's chorea. When the
patient's brother was visited at home, it was found that he, and the
sister who lived with him, both believed in the plot and were both
currently receiving treatment for a schizophrenic illness in which
first-­rank symptoms were present. Folie à deux demonstrates how the
content of belief is dictated by social and environmental circumstances,
but the precise form of the symptoms varies according to the nature of
the illness. Thus the nonpsychotic victim of folie imposée will show
delusion-­like ideas, overvalued ideas or misinterpretations but will not
show 'true' delusions or delusional percept. An interesting variation on
folie imposée was described by Aldridge and Tagg (1998). This was the
case of a 7-­year-­old boy who had presented with spurious psychotic
symptoms induced by living in isolation with his mother, who suffered
from schizophrenia. Initially, he was withdrawn, uncommunicative and
ritualistic, with delayed development. At school, he was fearful of toys
and teachers, crouching under a table, and was ritualistic concerning
timekeeping and toileting, during which he would remove all his clothing
and walk backwards into the toilet. His only speech was to repeat the
clock time in a ritualistic way. Foster placement was made with a single
mature woman, experienced with children, and after a year, this abnormal
behaviour had disappeared, and he had made progress consistent with his
mild degree of learning disability.

Folie à deux presents most often in married couples, in sister-­sister
dyads, in mother-­daughter dyads and in twins. It can form the basis of
suicide pacts, even though these are rare. It is not well recognized
enough that it can underpin violence and homicide within families.
DELUSIONS OF CONTROL These delusions, otherwise known as passivity or
made experiences, are discussed with disorder of thinking in Chapter 9.

The Reality of Delusions The degree to which delusions influence the
reality of the world inhabited by a patient is most probably best judged
by how far patients act on their beliefs. Patients with schizophrenia do
not always act on their delusions, but quite frequently they do. A man
who believed that American battleships were sailing down the main street
of Birmingham, United Kingdom (which is 100 miles from the sea) had the
refined social conscience to report this to the police. Persons holding
delusions of morbid jealousy are potentially very dangerous: extreme
physical violence and murder not uncommonly occur in this context. The
patient with depressive delusions of guilt and unworthiness may well act
on them by killing themself. Although there is a growing literature
casting doubt on whether delusions are false beliefs (as discussed
earlier in the chapter), what is inescapable is that patients do often
act on the content of these beliefs. For practical purposes, the content
of a delusion is important because it yields information about the
likely behaviour of a patient. In other words, the content of delusions
acts to motivate behaviour, to give reason to action and to justify
conduct; that is, it has predictive power. For this reason alone, the
content of delusion is relevant to clinical practice. Hemsley and Garety
(1986) have commented on 'the lack of action consequent with apparently
sincerely held beliefs', whereas, paradoxically, forensic psychiatric
studies have generally found that psychotic symptoms, especially
delusions, are frequently a major factor resulting in the offence
(Taylor, 1985). Buchanan (1993) has reviewed the descriptions of
situations in which patients act on their delusions. He considers

8 Delusions and Other Erroneous Ideas

that for affective illnesses, both delusional belief and action may be
consequent on the abnormal mood state. In other circumstances, action
can be seen as being caused by a combination of 'belief' and 'desire'
triggered by factors such as 'noticings': belief clearly is influenced
by occurrence of delusion; desire corresponds to concepts such as
motivation, drive and inclination; noticing is influenced by the
perceptual and cognitive changes of the psychotic state. For an
investigation into violence in a high-­security hospital population,
Taylor et al. (1998) concluded, 'as symptoms were usually a factor
driving the index offence, treatment appears as important for public
safety as for personal health'. The conclusion here is that delusions,
like normal beliefs, do not necessarily result in action. They may be
expressed yet not influence behaviour in any discernible way. However,
like normal beliefs, they may motivate behaviour in a way that is
comprehensible given the content of the belief. In general, violent
behaviour in response to delusions is not common; however, in a sample
of 83 consecutively admitted deluded subjects, some aspect of the
actions of half of them was congruent with the content of their
delusions (Wessely et al., 1993). When acting on the delusions was
described by the subjects themselves, it was associated with being aware
of evidence that supported their belief and with having actively sought
out such evidence; with a tendency to reduce the conviction with which a
belief was held when that belief was challenged; and with feeling sad,
frightened or anxious as a consequence of the delusion (Buchanan et al.,
1993).

Erroneous Ideation OVERVALUED IDEA An overvalued idea is an acceptable,
comprehensible idea pursued by the patient beyond the bounds of reason.
It is usually associated with abnormal personality. Disorders associated
with overvalued ideas have been reviewed by McKenna (1984), whose
definition of overvalued idea 'refers to a solitary, abnormal belief
that is neither delusional nor obsessional in nature, but which is
preoccupying to the extent of dominating the sufferer's life'. It is
overvalued in the sense that it causes disturbed functioning or
suffering to the person themself or to others. The background on which
an

131

overvalued idea is held is not necessarily unreasonable or false. It
becomes so dominant that all other ideas are secondary and relate to it:
the patient's whole life comes to revolve around this one idea. It is
usually associated with very strong affect that the person, because of
his temperament, has great difficulty in expressing. According to
McKenna, the term was introduced by Wernicke (1906), who distinguished
it from obsession, in that it was not experienced subjectively as
'senseless', and from delusion. Jaspers considered that delusion is
qualitatively different from normal belief, with a radical
transformation of the meaning attached to events and incorrigible to an
extent quite unlike normal belief. An overvalued idea, on the contrary,
is an isolated notion associated with strong affect and abnormal
personality and similar in quality to passionate political, religious or
ethical conviction. For Jaspers (1959), then, overvalued ideas are
'convictions that are strongly toned by affect which is understandable
in terms of the personality and its history'. Furthermore, Jaspers says,
'they are isolated notions that develop comprehensibly out of a given
personality and situation'. Fish (1967) considered there was frequently
a discrepancy between the degree of conviction and the extent to which
the belief directed action. However, the patient with an overvalued idea
invariably acted on it, determinedly and repeatedly; it is almost
carried out with the drive of an instinct, like nest building. In many
respects, these definitions attempt to locate overvalued ideas somewhere
between normal beliefs and delusions. Overvalued ideas differ from
delusions in that they arise comprehensibly from what we know about the
person and his situation. They are more like passionate political,
religious or ethical convictions than normal beliefs. This suggests that
there is something about the tenacity of the conviction that
distinguishes these overvalued ideas from normal beliefs, yet the degree
of conviction and incorrigibility is thought to be less than that of
delusions. It is obvious, however, that the degree of conviction is not
a safe basis for distinguishing between delusions and overvalued ideas.
A safer approach is to regard overvalued as comprehensible in the
context of the patient's history and life. McKenna lists the disorders
of content commonly associated with the form of overvalued idea. These

132

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

TABLE 8.1 Disorders with Overvalued Ideas Content of Disorder Paranoid
state: querulous or litigious type Morbid jealousy Hypochondriasis
Dysmorphophobia Parasitophobia ( Ekbom's syndrome) Anorexia nervosa
Transsexualism

Abnormality of Personality

Reference(s) Jaspers (1997), Kraeprlin (1905)

Abnormality of personality is usually present with overvalued ideas in
all these conditions

Ey (1954), Shepherd (1961) Merskey (1979), Pilowsky (1970) Hay (1970),
Munro (1980) Hopkinson (1973) Crisp (1980), Dally (1969) Huxley et
al. (1981)

After McKenna, 1984, with permission.   

are represented in Table 8.1. The psychopathology is not an overvalued
idea in all cases of each of these conditions; for instance, morbid
jealousy may be delusional and hypochondriasis may occur secondary to
depressed mood. However, when an overvalued idea is found, it is usually
associated with abnormal personality. Morbid jealousy is often
manifested as an overvalued idea. A husband was terrified that his wife
was being unfaithful to him because of her casually flirtatious conduct.
He checked on her every movement, interrogated her repeatedly, examined
her underwear, employed detectives to follow her and misinterpreted any
innocent contact she had with other men. On examination, he was not
deluded, but the importance he attached to investigating and maintaining
his wife's fidelity and the time taken to do this was so excessive that
it destroyed his family life and lost him his job. The form of the
abnormal idea in many of the disturbances of body image, for example,
dysmorphophobia, is usually an overvalued idea. A person with paranoid
personality disorder became involved in a protracted lawsuit because a
farmer ploughed across a public right of way. It is reasonable that
hikers get annoyed when a footpath is destroyed, but this person took
reasonable irritation to extreme lengths and constructed a mantrap to
eliminate the farmer. His enthusiasm for footpaths had become an
overvalued idea. PARANOID IDEAS AND SYNDROMES In psychiatry, the word
paranoid is taken to mean 'self-­ referent' and is not limited to
persecutory delusions; all delusions are delusions of reference in that
they relate

to the patient themself. A person will not form a delusional belief
concerning 6-­inch men on Mars unless they themself are significantly
implicated in some way. So a paranoid delusion is a delusion of
self-­reference, not necessarily persecutory in nature. A paranoid
personality disorder is that type of abnormal personality in which the
person's reaction to other people is unduly self-­ referent; a paranoid
state (see Chapter 19) includes those mental states in which
self-­referent phenomena are conspicuous, that is, delusion-­like ideas of
reference or overvalued ideas predominate. A patient, all of whose
delusions are grandiose in nature and none of them persecutory, may
still be suffering from paranoid schizophrenia. Although primary
delusions are characteristic of schizophrenia, secondary delusions
(delusion-­ like ideas) occur in a number of conditions, for example,
bipolar mood disorder in both manic and depressive phases, epilepsy and
other organic psychosyndromes, acute drug intoxication, various
alcoholic states and, of course, schizophrenia. The term paranoid
originally was synonymous with delusional insanity. Kraepelin (1905)
used the term more specifically to describe the condition in which there
are delusions but no hallucinations. The personality, mood state and
volition of the patient, in Kraepelin's description, are well preserved.
REFERENCES Aldridge, M.L., Browne, K.D., 2003. Perpetrators of spousal
homicide: a review. Trauma Violence Abuse 4 (3), 265--276. Aldridge, S.,
Tagg, G., 1998. Spurious childhood psychosis induced by schizophrenia in
the parent. Adv. Psychiatr. Treat. 4, 39--43. Ang, P.C., Weller, M.P.I.,
1984. Koro and psychosis. Br. J. Psychiatry 145, 335. Bayne, T.,
Fernandez, J., 2009. Delusion and self-­deception: mapping the terrain.
In: Bayne, T., Fernandez, J. (Eds.), Delusion and

8 Delusions and Other Erroneous Ideas Self-­Deception: Affective and
Motivational Influences on Belief Formation. Psychology Press, New York.
Bentall, R.P., 1993. Cognitive biases and abnormal beliefs: towards a
model of persecutory delusions. In: David, A.S., Cutting, J.C. (Eds.),
The Neuropsychology of Schizophrenia. Lawrence Erlbaum, Hove. Berner,
P., 1991. Delusional atmosphere. Br. J. Psychiatry 159, 88--93. Berrios,
G.E., 1985. Delusional parasitosis and physical disease. Compr.
Psychiatry 26, 395--403. Berrios, G.E., 1996. The History of Mental
Symptoms: Descriptive Psychopathology since the Nineteenth Century.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Berrios, G.E., Morley, S.J.,
1984. Koro-­like symptoms in a non-­ Chinese subject. Br. J. Psychiatry
145, 331--334. Berson, R.J., 1983. Capgras' syndrome. Am. J. Psychiatry
140, 969--978. Bortolotti, L., 2010. Delusions and Other Irrational
Beliefs. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Brockington, I., 1991. Factors
involved in delusion formation. Br. J. Psychiatry 159, 42--45. Buchanan,
A., 1993. Acting on delusion: a review. Psychol. Med. 23, 123--134.
Buchanan, A., Reed, A., Wessely, S., et al., 1993. Acting on delusions
II: the phenomenological correlates of acting on delusions. Br. J.
Psychiatry 163, 77--81. Capgras, J., Reboul-­Lachaux, J., 1923.
L'illusion des sosies dans un délire systematique chronique. Bulletin de
la Société Clinique de Médecine Mentale 11, 6--16. Catalano, G.,
Catalano, M.C., Embi, C.S., Frantel, R.L., 1991. Delusions about the
Internet. South. Med. J. 92, 609--610. Christodoulou, G.N., 1978.
Syndrome of subjective doubles. Am. J. Psychiatry 135, 249--251.
Christodoulou, G.N., 1991. The delusional misidentification syndromes.
Br. J. Psychiatry 159, 65--69. Colby, K.M., 1977. Appraisal of four
psychological theories of paranoid phenomena. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 86,
54--59. Conrad, K., 1958. Die Beginnende Schizophrenie. Thieme Verlag,
Stuttgart. Cotard, J., 1882. Nihilistic delusions. In: Hirsch, S.R.,
Shepherd, M. (Eds.), 1974. Themes and Variations in European Psychiatry.
(M. Rohde, Trans). John Wright, Bristol, pp. 353--374. Courbon, P.,
Fail, G., 1927. Syndrome d'illusion de Frégoli et schizophrenie.
Bulletin de la Société Clinique de Médecine Mentale 15, 121--124.
Courbon, P., Tusques, J., 1932. Illusion d'intermétamorphose et de
charme. Ann. Med.-­Psychol. (Paris) 90, 401--405. Crisp, A.H., 1980.
Anorexia Nervosa: Let Me Be. Academic Press, London. Cutting, J., 1985.
The Psychology of Schizophrenia. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh.
Dally, P., 1969. Anorexia Nervosa. Heinemann, London. Daly, M., Wilson,
M., Weghorst, S.J., 1982. Male sexual jealousy. Ethol. Sociobiol. 3 (1),
11--27. de Clérambault, G.G., 1942. Les psychoses passionelles. In:
Fretet, J. (Ed.), Oeuvre Psychiatrique. Presses Universitaire, Paris.
Eagles, J.M., 1983. Delusional depressive in-­patients, 1892--1982. Br.
J. Psychiatry 143, 558--563. Edelstyn, N.M.J., Riddoch, M.J., Oyebode,
F., 1999. A review of the phenomenology and cognitive neuropsychological
origins of the Capgras syndrome. Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 14, 48--59.
Edelstyn, N.M.J., Riddoch, M.J., Oyebode, F., Humphreys, G.W., Forde,
E., 1996. Visual processing in patients with Frégoli syndrome. Cognit.
Neuropsychiatry 1, 103--124.

133

Ekbom, K., 1938. Praeseniler Dermat-­zooenwahn. Acta Psychiatr. Scand.
13, 227--259. Ellis, H.D., de Pauw, K.W., Christodoulou, G.N.,
Papageorgiou, L., Milne, A.B., Joseph, A.B., 1993. Responses to facial
and non-­ facial stimuli presented tachistoscopically in either or both
visual fields by patients with the Capgras delusion and paranoid
schizophrenics. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 56, 215--219. Ellis,
P., Mellsop, G., 1985. De Clérambault's syndrome---a nosological entity.
Br. J. Psychiatry 146 (1), 90--93. Enoch, D., 1991. Delusional jealousy
and awareness of reality. Br. J. Psychiatry 159, 52--56. Enoch, M.D.,
Trethowan, W.H., 1979. Uncommon Psychiatric Syndromes, second ed. John
Wright, Bristol. Ey, H., 1950. Jalousie morbide. In: Etudes
Psychiatriques, vol. II. de Bronwen, Paris. Ey, H., 1954. Etudes
Psychiatriques, vol. II. Desclée, Paris. Fish, F., 1967. Clinical
Psychopathology. John Wright, Bristol. Freud, S., 1907. Delusions and
dreams in Jensen's gravida. In: Standard Edition of the Complete
Psychological Works, vol. IX (J. Strachey, Trans, 1959). Hogarth Press,
London. Freudenmann, R.W., Lepping, P., 2009. Delusional infestation.
Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 22 (4), 690--732. Garety, P., 1991. Reasoning and
delusions. Br. J. Psychiatry 159, 14--18. Garety, P., Helmsley, D.R.,
Wessely, S., 1991. Reasoning in deluded schizophrenic and paranoid
subjects: biases in performance on a probabilistic inference task. J.
Nerv. Ment. Dis. 179, 194--201. Gogol, N., 1972. Diary of a Madman and
Other Stories (R. Wilks, Trans). Penguin, London. Gralnick, A., 1942.
Folie à deux: the psychosis of association. A review of 103 cases and
the entire English literature. Psychiatr. Q. 16, 230--263. Griesinger,
W., 1845. Mental Pathology and Therapeutics. (C.L. Robertson, J.
Rutherford, Trans, 1882). William Wood and Co, New York. Gruhle, H.W.,
1915. Self-­description and empathy. Zeitschrift fuer Gesundheitswesen
Neurologie und Psychiatrie 28, 148. Guirguis, W.R., 1981. Pure
erotomania in manic-­depressive psychosis. Br. J. Psychiatry 138,
139--140. Gwee, A.L., 1963. Koro -- a cultural disease. Singapore Med.
J. 4, 119--122. Hagen, F.W., 1870. Studien auf dem Geblete der
arztlichen seelenhelikunde. Bersold, Erlagen, Germany. Hamilton, M.,
1978. Fish's Outline of Psychiatry, third ed. John Wright, Bristol.
Hart, B., 1921. The Psychology of Insanity. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge. Hay, G.G., 1970. Dysmorphophobia. Br. J. Psychiatry 116,
399--406. Hay, G.G., 1983. Feigned psychosis -- a review of the
simulation of mental illness. Br. J. Psychiatry 143, 8--10. Hemsley,
D.R., Garety, P.A., 1986. The formation and maintenance of delusions: a
Bayesian analysis. Br. J. Psychiatry 149, 51--56. Higgins, J., 1990.
Affective psychoses. In: Bluglass, R., Bowden, P. (Eds.), Principles and
Practice of Forensic Psychiatry. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh.
Hopkinson, G., 1970. Delusions of infestation. Acta Psychiatr. Scand.
46, 111--119. Hopkinson, G., 1973. The psychiatric syndrome of
infestation. Psychiatrica Clinica 6, 330--345. Hughes, T.A., Sims,
A.C.P., 1997. Folie à deux. In: Bhugra, D., Munro, A. (Eds.),
Troublesome Disguises: Underdiagnosed Psychiatric Syndromes. Blackwell
Scientific, Oxford.

134

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Hunter, R., MacAlpine, I., 1970. Three Hundred Years of Psychiatry
1535-­1860. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Huq, S.F., Garety, P.A.,
Hemsley, D.R., 1988. Probabilistic judgements in deluded and non-­deluded
subjects. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. (Hove) 40A, 801--812. Huxley, P.J., Kenna,
J.C., Brandon, S.C., 1981. Partnership in transsexualism, part II. The
nature of the partnership. Arch. Sex. Behav. 10, 143--160. Jaspers, K.,
1997. General Psychopathology (J. Hoenig, M.W. Hamilton, Trans). The
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. Kaney, S., Bentall, R.P.,
1989. Persecutory delusions and attributional style. Br. J. Med.
Psychol. 62, 191--198. Kaney, S., Bentall, R.P., 1992. Persecutory
delusions and the self-­ serving bias: evidence from a continuing
judgement task. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 180, 773--780. Kendler, K.S.,
Glaser, W.M., Morgenstern, H., 1983. Dimensions of delusional
experience. Am. J. Psychiatry 140, 466--469. Kinderman, P., Kaney, S.,
Morley, S., Bentall, R.P., 1992. Paranoia and the defensive
attributional style: deluded and depressed patients' attribution about
their own attributions. Br. J. Med. Psychol. 65, 371--383. Klaf, F.S.,
Hamilton, J.G., 1961. Schizophrenia: a hundred years ago and today. J.
Ment. Sci. 107, 819--827. Kraepelin, E., 1905. Lectures on Clinical
Psychiatry, third ed. (T. Johnstone, Trans, 1917). W. Wood, New York.
Kretschmer, E., 1927. The sensitive delusion of reference. In: Hirsch,
S.R., Shepherd, M. (Eds.), 1974. Themes and Variations in European
Psychiatry. (J. Candy, Trans). John Wright, Bristol. Laing, R.D., 1961.
The Self and Others. Tavistock, London. Lapierre, Y.D., 1972. Koro in a
French Canadian. Can. Psychiatr. Assoc. J. 17, 333--334. Lasègue, C.,
1852. Cited by Cotard, J., 1882. Du délire des négations. Archives de
Neurologie 4 (152--170), 282--296. Laségue, C., Falret, J., 1877. La
folie à deux (ou folie communiquée). Ann. Med. Psychol. (Paris) 18, 321
(R. Michaud, Trans, 1964), supplement to Am. J. Psychiatr. 121, 4. Lyon,
H.M., Kaney, S., Bentall, R.P., 1994. The defensive function of
persecutory delusions: evidence from attribution tasks. Br. J.
Psychiatry 164, 637--646. Matussek, P., 1953. Untersuchungen uber die
Wahnwahrnehmung. 2. Mitteilung. Schwizer. Arch Neurol Psychiatry 71,
189--210. McGrath, P., 1990. Spider. Penguin, London. McKenna, P.J.,
1984. Disorders with overvalued ideas. Br. J. Psychiatry 145, 579--585.
McLaughlin, J.A., Sims, A.C.P., 1984. Co-­existence of Capgras and Ekbom
syndromes. Br. J. Psychiatry 145, 439--441. Mellor, C.S., 1991.
Delusional perception. Br. J. Psychiatry 159, 104--107. Merskey, H.,
1979. The Analysis of Hysteria. Baillière Tindall, London. Morris, M.,
1991. Delusional infestation. Br. J. Psychiatry 159, 83--87. Morrison,
A., 1848. Cases of Mental Disease. Longman and S. Highley, London.
Moselhy, H., Oyebode, F., 1997. Delusional misidentification syndromes:
a review of the Anglophone literature. Neurol. Psychiatry Brain Res. 5,
21--26. Mullen, P., 1990. Morbid jealousy and the delusion of
infidelity. In: Bluglass, R., Bowden, P. (Eds.), Principles and Practice
of Forensic Psychiatry. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh. Mullen, P.E.,
1997. Disorders of passion. In: Bhugra, D., Munro, A. (Eds.),
Troublesome Disguises: Underdiagnosed Psychiatric Syndromes. Blackwell
Scientific, Oxford.

Mullen, P.E., Pathé, M., 1994. The pathological extensions of love. Br.
J. Psychiatry 165, 614--623. Munro, A., 1980. Monosymptomatic
hypochondriacal psychosis. Br. J. Hosp. Med. 24, 34--38. Munro, A.,
1988. Monosymptomatic hypochondriacal psychosis. Br. J. Psychiatry 153,
37--40. Munro, A., 1997. Paranoia or delusional disorder. In: Bhugra,
D., Munro, A. (Eds.), Troublesome Disguises: Underdiagnosed Psychiatric
Syndromes. Blackwell Scientific, Oxford. Oyebode, F., Edelstyn, N.M.J.,
Patel, A., Riddoch, M.J., Humphreys, G.W., 1996. Capgras syndrome in
vascular dementia: recognition memory and visual processing. Int. J.
Geriatr. Psychiatry 11, 71--73. Oyebode, F., Jamieson, R., Mullaney, J.,
Davison, K., 1986. Koro -- a psychophysiological dysfunction? Br. J.
Psychiatry 148, 212--214. Parnas, J., 2013. On psychosis: Karl Jaspers
and beyond. In: Stangehellini, G., Fuchs, T. (Eds.), One Century of Karl
Jaspers' General Psychopathology. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Pilowsky, I., 1967. Dimensions of hypochondriasis. Br. J. Psychiatry
113, 89--93. Pilowsky, I., 1970. Primary and secondary hypochondriasis.
Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 46, 273--285. Porter, S., Williams, C., 1997.
Psychiatric dilemmas -- surgery and the mental health act (1983). J. R.
Soc. Med. 90, 327--330. Pryse-­Phillips, W., 1971. An olfactory reference
syndrome. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 47, 485--509. Reilly, T.M., 1988.
Delusional infestation. Br. J. Psychiatry 153, 44--46. Roberts, G.,
1991. Delusional belief systems and meaning in life: a preferred
reality. Br. J. Psychiatry 159, 19--28. Roberts, G., 1992. The origins
of delusion. Br. J. Psychiatry 161, 298--308. Schneider, K., 1920. The
stratification of emotional life as the structure of the depressive
states. Zentralblatt fuer die Gesamte Neurologie und Psychiatrie 59,
281. Schneider, K., 1949. The concept of delusion 'Zum Begriff des
Wahns'. Fortschritte der Neurologie-­Psychiatrie 17, 26--31. In: Hirsch,
S.R., Shepherd, M. (Eds.), 1974. Themes and Variations in European
Psychiatry (H. Marshall, Trans). John Wright, Bristol. Schneider, K.,
1957. Primary and secondary symptoms in schizophrenia. Fortschritte der
Neurologie-­Psychiatrie 25. In: Hirsch, S.R., Shepherd, M. (Eds.), 1974.
Themes and Variations in European Psychiatry (H. Marshall, Trans). John
Wright, Bristol, pp. 487--490. Serretti, A., Lattuada, E., Cusin, C.,
Smeraldi, E., 1999. Factor analysis of delusional disorder
symptomatology. Compr. Psychiatry 40, 143--147. Shepherd, M., 1961.
Morbid jealousy: some clinical and social aspects of a psychiatric
symptom. J. Ment. Sci. 107, 687--753. Shrestha, K., Rees, D.W., Rix,
K.J.B., Hore, B.D., Faraghere, B., 1985. Sexual jealousy in alcoholics.
Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 72, 283--290. Sims, A.C.P., 1972. The English
hospital, Tangier 1883--1908. Med. Hist. 16, 285--290. Sims, A.C.P.,
1986. The psychopathology of schizophrenia with special reference to
delusional misidentification. In: Christodoulou, G.M. (Ed.), The
Delusional Misidentification Syndromes. Karger, Basel. Sims, A.C.P.,
1992. Symptoms and beliefs. J. R. Soc. Health 112, 42--46. Sims, A.C.P.,
White, A.C., 1973. Co-­existence of the Capgras and de Clerambault
syndromes -- a case history. Br. J. Psychiatry 123, 635--663.

8 Delusions and Other Erroneous Ideas Sims, A.C.P., Salmons, P.H.,
Humphreys, P., 1977. Folie à quatre. Br. J. Psychiatry 130, 134--138.
Soni, S.D., Rockley, G.J., 1974. Socio-­clinical substrates of folie à
deux. Br. J. Psychiatry 125, 230--235. Spitzer, M., 1994. The basis of
psychiatric diagnosis. In: Sadler, J.Z., Wiggins, O.P., Schwartz,
M.A. (Eds.), Philosophical Perspectives on Psychiatric Diagnostic
Classification. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. Stoddart,
W.H.B., 1908. Mind and its Disorders. Lewis, London. Taylor, P.J., 1985.
Motives for offending among violent and psychiatric men. Br. J.
Psychiatry 147, 491--498. Taylor, P.J., Leese, M., Williams, D.,
Butwell, M., Daly, R., Larkin, E., 1998. Mental disorder and violence.
Br. J. Psychiatry 172, 218--226. Todd, J., Dewhurst, K., 1955. The
Othello syndrome. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 122, 367--374. Trethowan, W.H.,
1967. Erotomania -- an old disorder reconsidered. Alta 2, 79--86.

135

Trollope, A., 1869. He Knew He Was Right. Strahan, London. Videbech, T.,
1966. Chronic olfactory paranoid syndromes. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 42,
183--212. Walker, C., 1991. Delusion: what did Jaspers really say? Br.
J. Psychiatry 159, 94--103. Wernicke, C., 1906. Fundamentals of
Psychiatry. Thieme, Leipzig. Wessely, S., Buchanan, A., Reed, A., et
al., 1993. Acting on delusion 1: prevalence. Br. J. Psychiatry 163,
69--76. Winters, K.L., Neale, J.M., 1983. Delusions and delusional
thinking in psychotics: a review of the literature. Clin. Psychol. Rev.
3, 227--253. World Health Organization, 1992. The ICD-­1 0 Classification
of Mental and Behavioral Disorders: Clinical Description and Diagnostic
Guidelines. World Health Organization, Geneva. Yap, P.M., 1965. Koro --
a culture-­bound depersonalization syndrome. Br. J. Psychiatry 3, 43--50.

This page intentionally left blank

     

Chapter 9

Disorder of the Thinking Process Chapter Outline Summary Types of
Thinking Fantasy Thinking Imaginative Thinking Rational or Conceptual
Thinking Heuristics and Decision-­Making The Processes of Disordered
Thinking A Model of Associations Based on Jaspers Acceleration of
Thinking Retardation Circumstantial Thinking Interruption to the Flow of
Thought Changes in the Flow of Thinking Disturbance of Judgement
Disturbance of Judgement and Delusion Concrete Thinking Psychological
Theories of Thinking in Schizophrenia Disorder of Control of Thinking
Delusions of the Control of Thought

KEYWORDS Formal thought disorder Circumstantiality Concrete thinking
Passivity experience

Summary Thinking and its processes are little understood. This means
that abnormalities of thinking cannot be easily related to any clearly
described, already established notion of what normal processes are and
how abnormal processes depart from these normal processes. In this
chapter, fantasy thinking, imaginative thinking and conceptual thinking
are described. Against this background, a model of thinking depending on
the association of ideas and governed by a determining principle is
described. This then provides the basis for a discussion of
abnormalities of the form of thinking, a particularly complex area of
psychopathology, as it requires the ability both to follow closely what
someone is saying and to conclude that the sequence of ideas or the
association of ideas may be awry. In the final section, Schneider's
first-­rank symptoms are described with examples: With time and years the
individual becomes so lazy in public life that he is not even capable of
writing any more. On such a sheet of paper, one can squeeze many letters
if one is careful not to transgress by one 'square shore'. In such fine
weather one should be able to take a walk in the woods. Naturally, not
alone, but with a girl. At the end of the year one always renders the
annual accounting. The sun is now in the sky yet it is not yet ten
o'clock. Eugene Bleuler (1857--1939)

This chapter is concerned with disorder of thinking and the next chapter
with disorders of language. Thinking and thought processes are little
understood. Although there is increasing interest in the subject by
cognitive neuroscientists, their primary focus of 137

138

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

study misses what is of interest to the clinical psychopathologist,
namely, the subjective experience of thinking, particularly as it
relates to abnormalities of thinking. Cognitive neuroscientists are
interested in the nature of problem-­solving; in the various kinds of
reasoning, including analogic, inductive and deductive; in the nature of
logic and belief formation; and in understanding decision-­making. These
are important subjects and can be impaired in psychiatric disorders.
However, the process that makes these aspects of thinking possible; the
unique relationship of the subject to their own thoughts, the experience
of thoughts flowing coherently and the effortless yet goal-­driven
dimension of thinking thoughts that underpin problem-­solving and
reasoning is poorly understood and researched. Admittedly, it is
difficult to study the subjective aspects of thinking, and mostly one is
concerned with objective phenomena of psychic life--- what Jaspers
(1997) calls performance. There are two distinct aspects in studying
disorder of thinking: the patient's subjective awareness of their own
disturbed thinking patterns and the manifestation of abnormal thinking
they betray in their speech (see Chapter 10). This latter is the
expression of thought and determines what the observer may deduce about
the patient's thinking. We need to enquire also about the experience of
thinking in the patient's description of their subjective psychological
processes. Formal thought disorder from the subjective, phenomenological
standpoint is abnormality in the mechanism of thinking described by the
patient introspecting into their own processes of thought; that is, the
patient describes in their own words a process of thinking that is
clearly abnormal to the outside observer.

Types of Thinking The process of thinking was divided by Fish (1967)
into the following three types: • undirected fantasy (dereistic) or
autistic thinking; • imaginative thinking; and • rational or conceptual
thinking. These three types have slightly different implications for
psychopathology, the description and categorization of morbid processes.
They can be considered as functions of thinking; that is, they are the
necessary mechanisms for thinking to take place but are not

themselves manifest in the phenomena. We can contrast those phenomena,
which are the products of the performance of thinking, the percept or
the idea, with the functions that do not become explicit. FANTASY
THINKING This may be of short duration, for example, the daydream before
going to sleep, or it may become an established way of life. Jaspers
quotes Montaigne: 'Plutarch says of people who waste their feelings on
guinea-­pigs and pet dogs, that the love element in all of us, if
deprived of any adequate object, will seek out something trivial and
false rather than let itself stay unengaged. So the psyche in its
passions prefers to deceive itself, or even in spite of itself invent
some nonsensical object rather than give up all drive or aim'. Fantasy
has an important function in the way we all carry out our everyday
activities; for instance, we model our speech and behaviour in
imagination before an important encounter or event, and afterwards we
rehearse our performance in fantasy to evaluate it and assess whether we
could have done better (see Imaginative Thinking later in the chapter).
To be able to harness our imagination constructively, we require the
capacity for undirected fantasy and the learned skill to structure
thoughts. Fantasy also allows a person to escape from or deny reality,
or alternatively to convert reality into something more tolerable and
less requiring of corrective action. A 20-­year-­old young woman, who had
a very deprived childhood and walked the city streets at night as a
prostitute, listened to a vicar broadcasting on local radio. She started
to send him and his wife flowers and cards, made contact with them and
began to call them 'Mum' and 'Dad'. When questioned by the police one
night, she gave their names as next of kin and said they really were her
parents. Shy, reserved people, not suffering from mental illness, may
use dereistic thinking to compensate for the disappointments of life.
Bleuler (1911) saw this isolation from the real world into autistic
thinking as characteristic of schizophrenia: 'The very common
preoccupation of young hebephrenics with "the deepest questions" is
nothing but an autistic manifestation'. Fantasy, especially in some with
neurotic traits, may develop from the stage of being deliberate and
sporadic into an established mode; the person comes to believe the
contents of their fantasy, which become

9

subjectively real and accepted as fact. Freud, in his later writings,
considered that this was so in some of the accounts he received from
women of an incestuous relationship with their father during childhood
(Jones, 1962). However, in his early writings he had considered that
they had experienced actual sexual assault but had used unconscious
mechanisms to repress this knowledge (Isräels and Schatzman, 1993;
Webster, 1995). Various types of experience come into the category of
acting out fantasy, such as pathologic lying (pseudologia fantastica)
and factitious disorders. Fantasy is usually understood to be the
creation of images or ideas that have no external reality. However,
fantasy thinking may also reveal itself in the denial of external
events. The observations for which the psychodynamic explanation of ego
defence mechanisms has been described are relevant in this context. The
slip of the tongue or the 'forgetting' of the emotionally laden word is
not accidental; it is a form of self-­ deception. The obvious,
significant, but unpleasant object of perception may be 'overlooked',
and this often reveals fantasy denial. Fantasy thinking denies
unpleasant reality, even though the fantasy itself may also be
unpleasant. This rearranging or transformation of reality is shown by
neurotic patients habitually and all people occasionally. Jonathan Swift
commented on it: 'When man's fancy gets astride of his reason; when
imagination is at cuffs with the senses; and common understanding, as
well as common sense, is kicked out of doors, the first proselyte he
makes is himself' (Swift, 1667--1745). IMAGINATIVE THINKING The term
imagination covers psychological states such as fantasy (as just
described), the generation of novel ideas and the creative outputs that
constitute art or discoveries in science. There are at least three
components of imagination: mental imagery, counterfactual thinking and
symbolic representation. Mental imagery refers to the ability to create
image-­based mental representations of the world. Counterfactual thinking
refers to the capacity to disengage from reality to think of events and
experiences that have not occurred and may never occur. Symbolic
representation is the use of concepts or images to represent real-­world
objects or entities (Roth, 2004). This is, of course, the basis of
language, art and mathematics.

Disorder of the Thinking Process

139

A facet of this type of thinking that comes from a psychoanalytic
theoretical stance is the concept of maternal reverie (Bion, 1962). The
mother, while in the situation, both physical and mental, of 'holding
the baby' (Winnicott, 1957), has a capacity for reverie or daydreaming
on the baby's behalf; this usually concerns the future happiness and
achievements of the baby. Wilfred Bion (1897--1979) would regard this as
a necessary factor in the healthy development of the self-­sensation of
the baby; when maternal reverie breaks down---for example, in puerperal
depression--- the baby experiences this as distress. The process of
maternal reverie is clearly analogous in some ways to the prayers of a
religious person on another's behalf. There is a role for imagination in
perspective taking. Phrases such as 'putting oneself in someone else's
shoes' show how the capacity for imaginative thinking allows us to shift
perspective and to free ourselves from the compelling constraints of the
immediate and the personal in order to grasp the position and experience
of the other person. This skill is essential to clinical practice in
psychiatry and of course also to interacting with other people in
general. Thomas Fuchs (2018) makes the point that the 'as if' function
is fundamental to our capacity to suspend the force of immediate
experience and to enter a virtual or fictional world, one that makes
metaphor, symbolic expressions and map-­making possible. RATIONAL OR
CONCEPTUAL THINKING Problem-­solving and reasoning are two key aspects of
rational thinking. Problem-­solving is defined as the set of cognitive
processes that we apply to reach a goal when we must overcome obstacles
to reach that goal, and reasoning is the cognitive process that we use
to make inferences from knowledge and to draw conclusions. These aspects
of thinking are distinct but related, so that reasoning can be involved
in problem-­solving (Smith and Kosslyn, 2007). Strategies for problems
involve the use of heuristics, that is, rules of thumb that usually give
the correct answer. Typically, reasoning involves analogies, induction
or deduction. Analogic reasoning involves the application of solutions
to already known problems to new problems with similar characteristics.
For example, if you lose the keys to your locked briefcase, you can
apply the knowledge to this new problem that sharp-­ended implements can
be

140

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

used to open padlocks. Inductive reasoning depends on the use of
specific known instances to draw an inference about unknown instances.
Commonly, this is formulated as generalizing from a single instance to
all instances or from some members of a category known to have a given
property to other instances of that category. This is known as
category-­based induction. An example is 'my cat has four legs',
therefore 'all cats have four legs'. Deductive reasoning involves an
argument in which if the premises are true, the conclusion cannot be
false. This is usually studied by way of syllogism: (1) all Martians are
green, (2) my father is a Martian and (3) my father is green. Problem-­
solving and reasoning both require the capacity to form concepts. This
is the capacity for abstraction---the ability to theorize about the
world--- and it includes the categorization of objects or events in the
world and the clarification of the concepts that determine the category
or class under investigation. HEURISTICS AND DECISION-­MAKING There is
emerging and robust evidence about the systems underlying decision-­
making processes. Super­ ficially, these systems do not seem relevant to
our understanding of the kinds of problems that are demonstrated in
abnormalities of thinking but closer examination shows that they are
likely to be important and relevant as they come under scrutiny in
psychiatric disorders. Kahneman (2011) summarizes the evidence for the
involvement of two cognitive systems in decision-­ making: System 1,
which operates automatically and quickly with little or no effort and no
sense of voluntary control; and System 2, which allocates attention to
the effortful mental activities that demand it, including complex
computations. The operations of System 2 are said to be associated with
subjective experience of agency, choice and concentration. In an earlier
paper, Tversky and Kahneman (1974) argued that, in situations where a
judgement is made under conditions of uncertainty, certain heuristics
are at play and often lead to errors of judgement. These are the
representativeness heuristic, the availability heuristic and the
adjustment and anchoring heuristic. Representativeness, for example,
refers to how similarity to a class of objects or events, in the absence
of additional information, biases judgements and hence

resulting in errors of judgement. Availability refers to the degree to
which the probability of an event occurring is determined by the ease
with which instances or occurrences can be brought to mind. The risk of
heart attacks in middle-­aged men might be determined by how many
instances can be readily brought to mind, a bias that is determined by
the ease of retrievability of instances. Finally, adjustment and
anchoring refer to the manner in which initial values are adjusted to
yield final answers; the best example of this is our differing responses
to terms such as 90% fat free and 10% fat. It is obvious that
abnormalities in the use of these heuristics probably have a role either
in the development of delusions or the maintenance of abnormal beliefs.
Kahneman (2011) concludes, 'The attentive System 2 is who we think we
are. System 2 articulates judgements and makes choices, but it often
endorses or rationalizes ideas and feelings that were generated by
System 1. You may not know that you are optimistic about a project
because something about its leader reminds you of your beloved sister or
that you dislike a person who looks vaguely like your dentist. If asked
for an explanation, however, you will search your memory for presentable
reasons and will certainly find some. Moreover, you will believe the
story you make up.'

The Processes of Disordered Thinking A MODEL OF ASSOCIATIONS BASED ON
JASPERS In this model of thinking (psychological performance), thoughts
(psychological events) can be seen to flow in an uninterrupted sequence
so that one or more associations, with resulting further psychological
events, may arise from each thought. The sequence of thoughts, with the
associations linking them, forms the framework of this model, which is
represented diagrammatically in Fig. 9.1. The mass of possible
associations resulting from a psychic event is called a constellation.
There are an enormous number of possible associations but thinking
usually proceeds in a definite direction for various immediate and
compelling reasons. This consistent flow of thinking towards its goal is
ascribed to the determining tendency (Jaspers). The idea of associations
is not intended to imply that one psychological event evokes another by
an automatic, unintelligent, nonverbal reflex but that the thought,
which may be

9

Associations

Thought

Associations

Disorder of the Thinking Process

141

Associations

Possible thought

Possible thought

Actual thought

Possible thought

Possible thought

Possible thought

Possible thought

Actual thought

Determining tendency

Goal

Constellation

Thinks as he sits in a room

must talk to A

there is a draught

I feel cold

perhaps I'm developing flu

uncomfortable chair

put on a pullover

sort out accounts

I can hear a drip in the roof

Get a ladder and take a bucket

Fig. 9.1 Model of association.

expressed verbally or not, is a concept that results in the formation of
a number of other concepts, one of which is given prominence by
operation of the determining tendency. This model is conjectural but has
some value in allowing description of the abnormalities of thinking and
speech that occur in mental illness. In addition to Jaspers' description
of his model of associations, a description that has face validity given
the cases seen in psychiatry, there are other models. For example,
Kahneman's (2011) in which the subject's world is constructed by
associations that link ideas of circumstances, events, actions, and
outcomes that co-­occur with some regularity, either at the same time or
within a relatively short interval. As these links

are formed and strengthened, the pattern of associated ideas comes to
represent the structure of events in a subject's life and also
determines the way in which a subject interprets the present and
predicts the future. In other words, the association of ideas is not
random but is built on past experiences and is determined by memory
functions. The foregoing discussion about Jaspers' model of association
is built on observations of patients' presentations. Russell Hurlburt
(2011) investigations of what he terms pristine inner experience, in
contrast, is an assiduous empirical study of actual inner subjective
experience. By inner experience he means thoughts, feelings and
sensations that momentarily appear in

142

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

thought I was in the pantry at home ... Peekaboo ... there's a magic
box. Poor darling Catherine, you know, Catherine the Great, the fire
grate, I'm always up the chimney. I want to scream with joy ...
Hallelujah!' Discussing the transcript of this conversation when her
mental state had improved, the patient found it quite easy to point out
the logical bridges in her thinking between each pair of statements, but
there was no sense of building up an argument from the first to the
final statement. Markedly different from the manic flight of ideas with
pressure of speech and multiple but linked association is the confusion
psychosis described by Fish (1962). In this, thinking is disordered but
mood and psychomotor activity are unimpaired. In the excited form of
this, incoherent pressure of speech is prominent, the context of which
is out of keeping with the situation. There may be transient, almost
playful, misidentifications of people; fleeting ideas of reference; and
auditory hallucinations. In the inhibited state of confusion psychosis,
there is poverty of speech, almost mutism. There may also be perplexity,
ideas of reference, ideas of significance, illusions and
hallucinations---auditory, visual or somatic. This is usually a cycloid
psychosis in its presentation, and other features of manic-­depressive
psychosis may be present.

conscious awareness. These pristine experiences are unscripted,
unedited, naturally occurring moments that are usually concealed from
view but revealed by use of Descriptive Experience Sampling, a method
developed by Hurlburt. Inner experience is shown to be fractionated,
multiple momentary events that appear as if unified in a stream.
Furthermore, Hurlburt shows that the phenomena of inner experience
include unsymbolized thinking, sensory awareness, inner speech and
visual perception. Hurlburt's method takes inner experience seriously,
avoids presuppositions about the nature of inner experience and
documents the actual content of inner experience at the time of
recording. We are subjectively aware of our thought process being a
stream or a flow. To develop the metaphor, thoughts are capable of
acceleration and slowing, of eddies and calms, of precipitous falls, of
increased volume of flow, of blockages. This analogy should not be taken
too far because it is without neurophysiologic basis, but it is useful
for examining certain abnormalities and is based on subjective
experience. ACCELERATION OF THINKING Acceleration of flow of thinking
occurs as flight of ideas. In this, there is a logical connection
between each of two sequential ideas expressed. However, the goal of
thinking is not maintained for long. It is continuously changing because
of the effect of frivolous affect and a very high degree of
distractibility. The determining tendency is weakened, but associations
are still formed normally. The speed of forming such associations and
therefore of the pattern of thought is grossly accelerated. This is
demonstrated in Fig. 9.2. Here is an example of such flight of ideas
from a female patient, aged 45, with mania. She said: 'They

RETARDATION In retardation (such as occurs in depression), thinking,
although goal directed, proceeds so slowly with such morbid
preoccupation and with gloomy thoughts that the person may fail to
achieve those goals. The patient is likely to show little initiative and
to begin neither planning nor spontaneous activity. When asked a
question, they will ponder it, but as no thought comes to them, they
make no response. Eventually, after

X X

X

X X

X

Fig. 9.2 Abnormal flow of thinking: flight of ideas.

9

Disorder of the Thinking Process

143

X X X Fig. 9.3 Retardation.

considerable delay, the answer usually comes. They have difficulty
making decisions and concentrating; there is loss of clarity of thought
and poor registration of those events they need to remember. In terms of
the model of the flow of thinking, in retardation there is both poverty
and slowness in the formation and progression of associations (Fig.
9.3). Depression, although usually associated with retardation of
thought, may occur with agitation; there may be a complex situation with
impaired concentration from retardation and a subjective experience of
restless, anxious thoughts. Thus Sutherland (1976), a middle-­aged
psychologist describing his own mental illness, said: I contemplated
throwing myself off the cross-­Channel ferry ... We arrived in Naples ...
and my friends ... were upset by my condition while feeling powerless to
help... whilst the others sat at the table I rolled around moaning in
the dust. I revisited many of the places I had once loved: the Museo
Nazionale with its magnificent mosaics pillaged from Pompeii, Pompeii
itself and Capri. None of them evoked a spark of interest -- I stared
listlessly and uncomprehendingly at the pictures in the museum with
harrowing thoughts still racing in my mind. I could not guide the
children round Pompeii, since I could not concentrate sufficiently to
follow the plan. Capri had lost its beauty and charm. I could not even
giggle at the vulgarity of the interior of Axel Munthe's villa, though
the beauty of the formal garden and the magnificent view of the island
and the sea from the belvedere evoked a slight response. The phrase 'see
Naples and die' echoed through my mind: I was convinced I would never
return alive to England, let alone ever revisit Naples. This possible
combination of depressed affect and accelerated activity can be seen to
conform quite readily with Kraepelin's (1904) description of mixed
affective states.

CIRCUMSTANTIAL THINKING In both flight of ideas and retardation, affect
influences the speed of thinking: it dictates which idea takes
precedence and can also distort judgement. In circumstantial thinking,
the slow stream of thought is not impeded by affect but by a defect of
intellectual grasp, a failure of differentiation of the figure from
ground. Characteristically, this occurs in patients with epilepsy, and
it is seen in other organic states and in learning disability. A
somewhat similar process occurs with obsessional personality, but here
the excess of detail is introduced anxiously to avoid any possible
omissions: i's are dotted, t's crossed to such an extent that the
process of reaching a goal is substantially impaired. On being asked a
question, circumstantial thought is shown by the patient in a reply that
contains a great welter of unnecessary detail, obscuring and impeding
the answer to the question. All sorts of unnecessary associations are
explored exhaustively before the person returns to the point. Their
whole conversation becomes a mass of parentheses and subsidiary clauses.
They even have to explain and apologize for these digressions before
they can get back to moving towards the goal. However, the determining
tendency remains, and they do eventually answer the question. This is a
case of not being able to see the wood for the trees. Circumstantial
thinking is represented diagrammatically in Fig. 9.4. INTERRUPTION TO
THE FLOW OF THOUGHT There are many ways in which the continuity of flow
of thinking may be disturbed. Carl Schneider (1930) has described some
of these abnormalities: verschmelzung (fusion, literally 'melting'),
faseln (muddling), entgleiten (snapping off) and entgleisen
(derailment). These processes (and others) occur together to give the
patient a feeling of confusion and bewilderment. They are likely to
complain of feeling bemused, to be lacking in

144

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

X X

X X X

X X

X X

X X

X X

X X X

Fig. 9.4 Model of circumstantial thinking.

X

X X

X

X

Fig. 9.5 Model of derailment.

concentration and to be slightly apprehensive of they know not what.
They cannot precisely describe their altered thinking and consequent
changes in speech. In derailment (Fig. 9.5), there is a breakdown in
association so that there appears to be an interpolation of thoughts
bearing no understandable connection with the chain of thoughts: 'The
traffic is rumbling along the main road. They are going to the north.
Why do girls always play pantomime heroes?' Such an excerpt from the
speech of a patient with schizophrenia contains no meaningful
connections, even to the patient themself. With derailment, the subject
is unable to link the ideas and describes a change in their direction of
thinking.

With fusion, there is some preservation of the normal chain of
associations, but there is a bringing together of heterogeneous
elements. These form links that cannot be seen as a logical progression
from their constituent origins towards the goal of thought. A female
patient with schizophrenia, aged 38, wrote the following: Two men are
controlling the brain through telethapy \[sic\] or by means of ways of
the spirit who open and closes the back channels of my brain releasing
words and holding back the truth, by no means will I speak but will
answer only to written questions by means of writing, knowing full well
the channels of my brain is filtering and only half

9

X X

X X

X

X

X

X

X

145

X

X

X

X

Disorder of the Thinking Process

X X

X

Fig. 9.6 Model of fusion.

of what is the truth, also I knowing I am being read not only by a few
but many very clever people but not at all acceptable they make people
believe that I am some kind of miracle which I am not, I only hold the
name Holyland which came to me by marrying Alfred Holyland, only by
doing this do they wish to make some false stories of me coming from
some special place which I have not. Fusion is demonstrated at the
beginning of this excerpt, where she says that the brain is controlled
'by means' and then this word becomes associated with 'ways'.
'Telethapy'---not the same as telepathy--- is a neologism. There are
also examples of passivity. 'Channels' and 'means' are used as stock
words, that is, they are used more often in her conversation than their
normal meaning could suggest, and they take on for her a greater range
of meaning than usual. It is difficult to represent this
diagrammatically, and I hope the result in Fig. 9.6 is not misleading.
Schneider's mixing or muddling implies a grossly disordered amalgam of
the constituent parts of a single thought process and represents extreme
degrees of fusion and derailment. The resultant speech disorder has been
called drivelling. Thought Blocking

Snapping off is the experience a patient with schizophrenia has of their
chain of thought, quite unexpectedly and unintentionally, breaking off
or ceasing. It may occur in the middle of sorting out a problem or even
in midsentence. It is not caused by distraction by other thoughts, and,
on introspecting, the patient can give no adequate explanation for it;
it simply occurs. It is otherwise described as thought blocking, a
somewhat misleading term. The patient may explain it as

thought withdrawal: 'My thinking stopped because the thoughts were
suddenly taken out of my head'. Fig. 9.7 shows a model of thought
blocking. There is little discussion in the literature about the
possibility of patients actually having no thoughts whatsoever, but this
possibility is the natural corollary of thought blocking. Hurlburt
(1990) described two patients with schizophrenia who using the
Descriptive Experience Sampling reported that they were not thinking
about anything in the moment that their experiences were sampled. In
one, at the moment of sampling, he reported that he was just walking
without thought, an experience described as like having a void within.
Another, a female patient reported that she was not engaged in any
verbalizations, mental images, active listening, observing or anything
else she would recognize as a thought or mental experience. Hurlburt
concluded that patients with schizophrenia, in general, had reduced
amounts of inner verbalizations compared to normal subjects. But, even
more unusual, he concluded that patients whose conditions were
decompensating may have no inner experience at all. CHANGES IN THE FLOW
OF THINKING Two further abnormalities of the flow of thought are
crowding of thought and perseveration. Crowding of thought occurs in
schizophrenia. The patient describes their thoughts as being passively
concentrated and compressed in their head. The associations are
experienced as being excessive in amount, too fast, inexplicable and
outside the person's control. The patient may even locate their thinking
anatomically as being 'crowded into the back of my head' or elsewhere.
It becomes a headlong chase or dance of

146

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

X X X

X

X

Fig. 9.7 Model of thought blocking.

thoughts and has some of the characteristics of flight of ideas, but it
also shows a schizophrenic quality of passivity being controlled from
outside. Perseveration (see Chapter 5) is mentioned here as a
disturbance of the flow of thinking. It is characteristically an organic
symptom. The patient retains a constellation of ideas long after they
have ceased to be appropriate. An idea from that constellation that
occurred in a previous sequence of thought is given in answer to a
different question. In perseveration, a correct response is given by the
patient to the first stimulus, for example, 'Where do you
live?'---'Rowley Regis'. However, any subsequent stimuli that demand
different responses may get this same, by now inappropriate first
response, for instance, 'What is the capital of France?'---'Rowley
Regis', 'Who lives at home with you?'---'Rowley ... my son and his
wife'.

Disturbance of Judgement A judgement is a thought that expresses a view
of reality. The word is used here in the sense of 'in my judgement, such
and such takes place'. To assess whether it is disturbed or not, one
needs to measure it against objective fact. This can be difficult,
perhaps requiring consultation with an expert in the same field as the
patient. Assessment of faulty judgement is not made solely on the basis
of that particular belief or argument but on taking the whole of the
person's behaviour and opinions into account. A person's claims to be a
figure of royalty persecuted by the Marxists could, in fact, be true.
But the opinion that their judgement was disturbed would be confirmed if
they had suddenly become convinced about their royalty when a
psychiatric nurse had commented to them about the tattoos on their arm,
or if they were also found to be hoarding

pebbles and dead spiders in an old tobacco tin. Delusions are, of
course, a disturbance of judgement. Various forms of thought disorder
and intellectual deficit may also result in disturbance of judgement.
DISTURBANCE OF JUDGEMENT AND DELUSION The thinking or psychological
performance required to produce a delusion is quite independent of
intelligence. It occurs in clear consciousness with no signs of organic
disturbance of the brain. Judgement in other areas of life apart from
the delusion can be preserved, and the very ingeniousness the patient
uses to explain and defend their delusional belief demonstrates that
their essential capacity to think logically is largely intact; only the
falsely held belief, the false premise for subsequent beliefs appears
disordered. A delusion in schizophrenia is not a simple defect of
reasoning; its development cannot be understood solely in relation to
the patient's real-­life experience. For instance, not all those with
delusions of persecution have any firsthand experience of being
persecuted. It is an assumption about the world the patient inhabits,
which they do not create by a process of logical conscious thought but
from false premises. The mechanism underpinning the often spontaneous
development of this false premise is yet to be understood. The starting
points of the thinking are already 'deluded', and the patient applies
logic to elaborate and support their belief. We can understand why the
belief should be within that particular context (associated with the
mother; related to interplanetary travel), but we cannot explain how the
form of a primary delusion should have occurred. This is a fundamental
distinction from delusion-­ like ideas (secondary delusions), which
occur, for example, in affective psychoses. In the latter, we can see
the content being progressively influenced

9

Disorder of the Thinking Process

147

by the changing mood state so that, eventually, the false belief becomes
a logical development from the extreme abnormality of mood. Although it
is usual to describe delusions as disorders of thought content, it is
important to be aware that primary delusions are not merely to be
understood in this way. The whole process of thought in primary delusion
is disordered, not just the content. If an idea were formed on
delusional grounds---'I knew that my wife was unfaithful immediately I
saw the bulb had gone out' (see Chapter 8)---but the notion itself was
not false nor unacceptable to the person's peer group (his wife
subsequently admitted to being unfaithful), it would still be a delusion
because the notion was formed on delusional evidence. There is a
difference between delusion and overvalued ideas in that, although both
may be held with absolute conviction, the latter is a reasonable,
possibly even true, belief but is dominating conscious thought to an
unreasonable extent.

patients with schizophrenia are more likely to subscribe to a more
abstract attitude than control subjects (Weiner, 1966; Shimkunas, 1972;
Cutting, 2011) so that, for example, when asked 'In what way is a table
and a chair alike?', the patients might answer 'objects in the
universe'.

CONCRETE THINKING Abnormal processes of thinking in schizophrenia and
organic states may result in a literalness of expression and
understanding. Abstractions and symbols are interpreted superficially
without tact, finesse or any awareness of nuance; the patient is unable
to free themself from what the words literally mean, excluding the more
abstract ideas that are also conveyed. This abnormality is described as
concrete thinking. The term was first introduced by Goldstein (1936). It
is usually tested for by proverb interpretation or by other
psychological tests, but it is well acknowledged that these tests are
unreliable. However, it is recognizable clinically, often quite
dramatically. For example, a female patient with schizophrenia came into
the room for interview and promptly took her shoes off, saying, 'I
always like to keep my feet on the ground when I'm talking'. Another
patient with long-­term schizophrenia was observed by his doctor walking
sideways along the hospital corridor. When asked why he was walking like
that, he said that it was 'because of the side effects'. And another
patient said, 'I was starting to feel high and I didn't want to fly off,
so I've tied these dumb-­bell weights round my ankle'. It is important to
emphasize, however, that despite the compelling examples of concrete
thinking just described, current thinking is that, if anything,

Over-­Inclusive Thinking

PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF THINKING IN SCHIZOPHRENIA A number of
psychological theories attempt to explain thinking in patients with
schizophrenia. These theories are hampered by the fact that there are no
satisfactory general theories of thinking. There are now consistent
findings of deficits in attention, working memory, recognition memory
and executive functions in schizophrenia. These empirical findings are
yet to be integrated into a coherent theory that explains the observed
and self-­reported thinking abnormalities in this condition.

The difference between the concrete thinking of organic psychiatric
disorders and that occurring in schizophrenia was described by Cameron
(1944), who considered that in schizophrenia, the patient is unable to
preserve conceptual boundaries. This he called over-­ inclusive thinking:
ideas that are only remotely related to the concept under consideration
become incorporated within it in the patient's thinking. Thus when asked
'Which of the following are essential parts of a room: walls, chairs,
floor, a window?', the over-­inclusive person with schizophrenia might
include 'chair'. This feature of over-­inclusiveness can be seen in many
aspects of thinking in schizophrenia, and questionnaires have been
devised to test for it, particularly involving sorting tests. The lack
of adequate connection between two consecutive thoughts is called
asyndesis. The concrete thinking of schizophrenia, however, could not be
distinguished from that of other psychotic and neurotic patients (Payne
et al., 1970), and it was found to be associated with intelligence.
Over-­ inclusive thinking occurred only in about half of the patients
with schizophrenia tested, usually those who were more acutely ill. The
other half, usually suffering from more chronic illness, showed much
more marked retardation. McGhie (1969) found that Payne's tests of
over-­inclusiveness did not select schizophrenia

148

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

from some other diagnoses, for example, those with obsessional or manic
thought disorder, and Gathercole (1965) considered that these tests
demonstrated fluency of association rather than over-­inclusive thinking.
A young man who had suffered from schizophrenia for several years was
known to have recently been abusing drugs. To the doctor's enquiry,
'What drugs have you been using?', he replied 'LSD, health foods and
marijuana'. This is an example of over-­inclusive thinking. However, it
was volunteered spontaneously; he might well have given an entirely
correct response to a formal questionnaire that did not touch on
significant areas of his experience. It has been suggested by Chen et
al. (1995) that there may be a broadening of category boundary (e.g.,
'furniture') with preservation of internal category structure in
patients with schizophrenia. This results in related issues that are
actually outside the category being processed by the patient in a way
that is similar to those within it. Cutting (2011) argues that what is
most prominent is that patients with schizophrenia overcategorize,
finding many more and often needless categories to subsume lists within.
Aggernaes et al. (1976) have taken this theory further from the
practical and clinical viewpoint. They consider that patients with
schizophrenia have not parted from reality; they seem to experience the
real world as being real in the same way as normal people do. However,
their defect in reality testing results from a diffuse tendency to
experience some fantasy items as being real as well. Schizophrenic
Inattention and Abnormality of Working Memory: Effect on Performance

McGhie (1969) has focused on the disturbance in the function of
attention in patients with schizophrenia: that they are unable to filter
and discount sensory data irrelevant to the task being performed. He
showed that the performance of patients with schizophrenia was very poor
compared with that of normal subjects, but they were not prone to
distraction by auditory or visual external stimuli in the way that
normal people were. Hebephrenic patients especially showed less
distraction and also poor perception and recall of visual information.
Hebephrenic patients were considered to have an inability to sweep out
irrelevant extraneous information ... especially where the situation

demanded the rapid processing and short-­term storage of information.
This experience is described subjectively: 'When people talk to me now
it's like a different kind of language. It's too much to hold at once.
My head is overloaded and I can't understand what they say. It makes you
forget what you've just heard because you can't get hearing it long
enough. It's all in different bits that you have to put together in your
head---just words in the air unless you can figure it out from their
faces'. The effect of this inattention in ordinary social life was well
observed by Morgan (1977) in his description of 3 weeks lived in close
proximity to two patients with chronic schizophrenia: In the case of
Vine our relationship remained just the same, but I did perhaps come to
understand his disabilities a little better, and this helped. He would
keep 'losing his thread', to some extent in talk but even more
noticeably in action. For example, although we went through the sequence
of routine tests over 500 times together, he never once completed a
sequence without having to be reminded of what came next and what
remained to be done each time. Vine's other main trouble was a curious
one. I would say to him, for example, 'Let's do the tests first and then
I'd like you to get on with the washing up', and I would be surprised
when his response to this was to dash off to the sink and start
clattering the plates. Eventually I made out that he had some defect of
attention. He would often jump like a startled rabbit when he realized
he was being addressed anyway, and I think that by the time he had
recovered and collected himself from that, the first half of my sentence
had gone and all he heard was the second half. Certainly I found that by
inserting a little preliminary padding, I got a more competent response.
Frith (1992) hypothesizes that the mechanism for delusions of control
was also responsible for the thought or language abnormality in
schizophrenia. In this scheme, it is a failure of self-­monitoring that
is responsible for thought or language disorder. Thus the patient is
unable to edit out irrelevant or perseverating phrases, and this results
in poor communication. There is also the related possibility that the
fundamental problem is in planning. In this scheme, the coherence of the
patient's thought or language is

9

undermined by the absence of an explicit goal and plan, and furthermore
there is intrusion of thoughts that do not fit in with the overall goal,
resulting in disorganized thought or language. In summary, patients with
schizophrenia 'are only able to check the accuracy of an utterance after
\[emphasis in original\] they have made it. It is therefore difficult
for them to avoid producing a string of faulty utterances, even during
attempts at repair' (Frith, 1992). Liddle (2001) defines the
disorganization syndrome as consisting of disjointed thought, emotion
and behaviour. However, the cardinal symptoms are formal thought
disorder, inappropriate affect and bizarre, erratic behaviour. He
concludes that disorganization is associated with slowed performance in
neuropsychological tasks that demand selection between competing
responses or with errors of commission in tasks that require suppression
of an inappropriate response. In his view, this suggests that the
disorganization found in schizophrenia derives from impairment of the
neural circuits responsible for response selection and inhibition. The
circuits involved are the ventrolateral frontal cortex, the left
superior temporal gyrus and the adjacent inferior parietal lobule. There
is also involvement of the anterior cingulate and thalamus.

Disorder of Control of Thinking Under this heading, we could discuss
three patterns of thinking: passivity of thought, or delusions of
control of thinking; obsessions and compulsions in which the
unacceptable thoughts are accepted by the patient as being under their
control but are resisted; and the rigid control of thought and
intolerance for variation that becomes habitual with the anankastic or
obsessional personality. The latter two are considered in Chapter 19.
DELUSIONS OF THE CONTROL OF THOUGHT Control of thinking may be
disorganized in that the patient ascribes his own, internal thought
processes to outside influences. The subjective disturbance in thinking
in schizophrenia is experienced as passivity. The patient with
schizophrenia experiences their thoughts as foreign or alien, not
emanating from themself and not within their control. There is a
breakdown in the way they think of the boundary

Disorder of the Thinking Process

149

between themself and the outside world, so that they can no longer
accurately discriminate between the two. They may describe passivity of
thought, thought withdrawal, thought insertion and/or thought
broadcasting; these are first-­rank symptoms of schizophrenia (Schneider,
1959). In Table 9.1 the first-­rank symptoms are listed. Various forms of
thought passivity are described. The patient may describe sharing their
thoughts with other people or their thoughts being controlled or

TABLE 9.1 First-­Rank Symptoms of Schizophrenia and Symptoms from the
Present State Examination

First-­Rank Symptoma Delusion Delusional percept Auditory hallucinations
Audible thoughts Voices arguing or discussing Voices commenting on the
patient's action Thought disorder: passivity of thought Thought
withdrawal Thought insertion Thought broadcasting (diffusion of thought)
Passivity experiences: delusion of control Passivity of affect ('made'
feelings) Passivity of impulse ('made' drives) Passivity of volition
('made' volitional acts) Somatic passivity (influence playing on the
body) aSchneider,

Equivalent Symptom from the Present State Examinationb Primary delusion
Thought echo or commentary Voices about the patient Voices about the
patient

Thought block or withdrawal Thought insertion Thought broadcast or
thought sharing

Delusions of control Delusions of control Delusions of control Delusions
of alien penetration

K., 1959. Clinical Psychopathology, fifth ed. (M.W. Hamilton, Trans).
Grune & Stratton, New York. bWing, J.K., Cooper, J.E., Sartorius, N.,
1974. The Measurement and Classification of Psychiatric Symptoms: An
Instruction Manual for the PSE and Catego Program. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.   

150

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

influenced from outside themself. These delusions of control are often
associated with delusional explanations of how their thinking could be
controlled, for example, with the use of electronic devices, computers
or telepathy. Thought insertion is described, in which they believe that
their thoughts have been placed there from outside themself.
Correspondingly, they may describe their thoughts being taken away from
themself against their will: thought withdrawal. This may be given as an
explanation for thought blocking when the thoughts stop and the mind
suddenly goes completely blank. Thought insertion and withdrawal are
first-­rank symptoms of schizophrenia; thought blocking is not because it
is difficult to decide whether it is truly thought blocking, some form
of retardation or other difficulty with thinking, and blocking is also
subjectively similar to epileptic absences. Thought broadcasting occurs
in schizophrenia when the patient describes their thoughts as leaving
themself and being diffused widely out of their control. It also is a
passivity experience and of first rank. A further subjective symptom
associated with thought of first-­rank importance is the experience of
audible thoughts, that is, hearing one's own thoughts out loud. The
patient knows that they are their thoughts, yet they hear them audibly
while they are thinking them or just before or after thinking them. This
is, of course, a disorder of perception, an auditory hallucination (see
Chapter 7). Earlier in the chapter, we discussed fusion, mixing,
derailment and crowding of thought, all of which occur in schizophrenia.
The resultant confusion causes a loss of ability to think clearly, often
described in terms of passivity. The patient may feel that their brain
is replaced by cotton wool or convoluted rubber. Their thoughts are
jumbled, muzzy, vague, blurred: 'I try to part my way through them but
they are like treacle and keep on coming back and making me stick'.
First-­Rank Symptoms of Schizophrenia

First-­rank symptoms of schizophrenia are discussed in this section for
convenience because many of them are examples of disorder of control or
possession of thoughts. According to Schneider, the presence of one or
more first-­rank symptoms in the absence of organic disease can be used
as positive evidence for schizophrenia. These symptoms of first rank are
not a comprehensive list of the clinical features of schizophrenia,

for the changes in affect, volition and motor activity that may occur in
the condition are not included, and many other types of delusion,
hallucination and disorder of thinking also occur in schizophrenia. For
a symptom to be regarded as first rank, it must have the following
characteristics. It must occur with reasonable frequency in • 
schizophrenia. • It must generally not occur in conditions other than
schizophrenia. • It must not be too difficult to decide whether the
symptom is or is not present. There are some symptoms that occur only in
schizophrenia but occur too rarely to be of practical use as first-­rank
symptoms. There are many features that are characteristic of
schizophrenia but may also occur in other conditions, for example,
unspecified auditory hallucinations, poverty of affect and over-­
inclusive thinking. There are some symptoms that occur only in
schizophrenia, but there is too much scope for argument as to whether it
is, or is not, this precise symptom for it to be valued as of first
rank. An example of this is a primary delusion. Some clinicians may
regard a particular belief of the patient as primary delusion, whereas
others do not. Although first-­rank symptoms are used as a diagnostic
checklist, a patient who exhibits seven of them is not more severely ill
than someone who shows three. To elicit them requires considerable
clinical experience; they cannot be collected quantitatively by riding
past the patient on a bicycle! For a psychiatrist to use them
clinically, they must first know them. Second, they must know how this
person from this social and racial background is likely to describe any
particular first-­rank symptom ('my thoughts are controlled by
television', 'my thoughts are controlled by the spirits of my dead
ancestors'). Third, they must ask the appropriate direct questions
skilfully without putting words in their patient's mouth. Fourth, they
must be able to interpret the patient's answers and decide whether a
first-­rank symptom is being described. The whole process requires a
dextrous use of the phenomenological method as described in Chapter 1.
Many practising psychiatrists' comment at this stage of the discussion
of first-­rank symptoms would be 'Why bother?' They would also agree that
it is often

9

difficult to diagnose schizophrenia, that it is important not to give
this label to people who do not suffer from the illness and that it is
equally important to treat those who do suffer from it appropriately,
effectively and as early in the course of illness as possible. In
clinical practice, the eliciting of first-­rank symptoms could best be
seen as a means of deciding the degree of certainty that may be attached
to the diagnosis. In a patient who shows the general features of
schizophrenia (delusion, hallucination, thought disorder, disordered
affect, volition, motor activity, behaviour, social relationships, life
history), the diagnosis is made, but some doubts remain. If first-­rank
symptoms are found, then, in the absence of clear organic pathology, one
can reckon that the diagnosis has been confirmed. Some of the first-­rank
symptoms are found to be less reliable at follow-­up than others as
indicators of schizophrenia, for example, voices heard arguing (Mellor
et al., 1981). One of the advantages of first-­rank symptoms as a
diagnostic tool is that, because of their emphasis on form rather than
content, a person who is feigning mental illness is unlikely to produce
them. They therefore have a subsidiary use as a method of distinguishing
between true and simulated psychosis, for example, in prisoners. Despite
the value of first-­ rank symptoms indicating schizophrenia when they are
present, there are undoubtedly patients in whom they cannot be elicited;
schizophrenia still remains, to some extent, a diagnosis of exclusion
(Carpenter and Buchanan, 1994). Examples of First-­Rank Symptoms

The only type of delusion that is regarded as of first rank is a
delusional perception, that is, a normal perception delusionally
interpreted and regarded as being highly significant to the patient (see
Chapter 8). Examples of delusional percept and of other first-­ rank
symptoms as follows are cited by Mellor (1970, p. 18). Delusional
perception is exemplified in the following account: A young Irishman was
at breakfast with two fellow lodgers. He felt a sense of unease, that
something frightening was going to happen. One of the lodgers pushed the
salt cellar towards him (he appreciated at the same time that this was
an ordinary salt cellar and his friend's intention was innocent). Almost
before the salt cellar reached him he knew he must return home, 'to
greet

Disorder of the Thinking Process

151

the Pope, who is visiting Ireland to see his family and to reward them
... because Our Lord is going to be born again to one of the women ...
And because of this they (all the women) are all born different with
their private parts back to front'. Three types of auditory
hallucinations are regarded as being of first rank. These are audible
thoughts, voices heard arguing and voices giving a running commentary.
What is meant by audible thoughts is the patient's experience of hearing
their own thoughts said out loud. In British usage, the symptom
sometimes carries its German name, Gedankenlautwerden, or its French
one, écho de pensées. The patient may hear people repeating their
thoughts out loud just after they have thought them, answering their
thoughts, talking about them having said them audibly or saying aloud
what they are about to think so that their thoughts repeat the voices.
They often become very upset at the gross intrusion into their privacy
and concerned that they cannot maintain control of any part of themself,
not even their thoughts: A 35-­year-­old painter heard a quiet voice with
'an Oxford accent', which he attributed to the BBC. The volume was
slightly lower than that of normal conversation and could be heard
equally well with either ear. He could locate its source at the right
mastoid process. The voice would say, 'I can't stand that man, the way
he holds his hand he looks like a poof' ... He immediately experienced
whatever the voice was saying as his own thoughts, to the exclusion of
all other thoughts. When he read the newspaper the voice would speak
aloud whatever his eyes fell on. He had not time to think of what he was
reading before it was uttered aloud. Mellor (1970, p. 16)

Voices heard arguing with each other implies two or more hallucinatory
voices quarrelling or discussing with each other. The patient usually
features in the third person in the content of these arguing voices. The
symptom is not likely to be volunteered spontaneously in this form; the
patient does not actually say, 'I hear voices that argue or discuss with
each other'. So the symptom has to be cautiously and subtly enquired
for: A 24-­year-­old male patient reported hearing voices coming from the
nurse's office. One voice, deep in pitch

152

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

and roughly spoken, repeatedly said, 'G.T. is a bloody paradox', and
another, higher in pitch, said, 'He is that, he should be locked up.' A
female voice occasionally interrupted, saying 'He is not, he is a lovely
man.' Mellor (1970, p. 16)

Hallucinatory voices giving a running commentary on the patient's
activities occur and are of first rank. The time sequence of the
commentary may be such that it takes place just before, during or after
the patient's activities. Again, the symptom is not volunteered
spontaneously but may quite often be inferred from the patient's
complaints against his voices. For the interviewer, there is always the
problem of asking questions in such a way that they are 'let in on the
inside'. They are asking questions about perceptions that are quite
obvious to the patient. The patient does not know that their particular
perception is unique, that other people do not share their perceptual
experience. So the interviewer has the difficulty of asking questions
about something of which they have no personal experience; the patient
has to answer questions that, because of their situation, seem to have
no point. The abnormal thing about voices commenting is that they should
be experienced as perceptions and as coming from outside the self; many
normal people have thoughts, recognized as their own and coming from
inside themselves, commenting on their actions: A 41-­year-­old housewife
heard a voice coming from the house across the road ... The voice went
on incessantly in a flat monotone describing everything she was doing,
with an admixture of critical comments. 'She is peeling potatoes, got
hold of the peeler, she does not want that potato, she is putting it
back, because she thinks it has a knobble like a penis, she has a dirty
mind, she is peeling potatoes, now she is washing them.' Mellor (1970,
p. 16)

Passivity experiences are those events in the realm of sensation,
feeling, drive and volition that are experienced as made or influenced
by others. They have been well described as delusions of control,
because the patient's experience of the event being made to occur takes
the form of a delusion. The terms disorders of passivity, made
experiences, delusions of control and disorders of personal activity
are, in practice, synonymous and

interchangeable. The event is experienced as alien by the patient in
that it is not experienced by the patient as their own but inserted into
the self from outside. Passivity experiences of thinking occur as
thought withdrawal, thought insertion or thought broadcasting. In
thought withdrawal, it is believed by the patient that their thoughts
are in some way being taken out of their mind; they have some feeling of
loss resulting from this process. It may be coupled with other thought
passivity experiences: A 22-­year-­old woman said, 'I am thinking about my
mother, and suddenly my thoughts are sucked out of my mind by a
phrenological vacuum extractor, and there is nothing in my mind, it is
empty.' Mellor (1970, p. 16)

In thought insertion, the patient experiences thoughts that do not have
the feeling of familiarity, of being their own, but they feel that they
have been put in their mind without their volition from outside
themself. As in thought withdrawal, there is clearly a disturbance in
the self-­image and especially in the boundary between what is self and
what is not self; thoughts that have in fact arisen inside themself are
considered to have been inserted into their thinking from outside: A
29-­year-­old housewife said, 'I look out of the window and I think the
garden looks nice and the grass looks cool, but the thoughts of Eamonn
Andrews come into my mind. There are no other thoughts there, only his
... He treats my mind like a screen and flashes his thoughts onto it
like you flash a picture.' Mellor (1970, p. 17)

In thought broadcasting, the patient experiences their thoughts
withdrawn from their mind and then, in some way, made public and
projected over a wide area. The explanation they give for how this can
occur will, as usual for the content of a delusion, depend on their
background culture and predominant interests: A 21-­year-­old student
said, 'As I think, my thoughts leave my head on a type of mental
ticker-­tape. Everyone around has only to pass the tape through their
mind and they know my thoughts.' Mellor (1970, p. 17)

9

Obviously, careful enquiry must be made about the nature of 'influence'
or 'control'. There is a phenomenological world of difference between
the statements 'My thinking is influenced by my parents inasmuch as my
thoughts are crowded from the back into the front of my head'---a
passivity experience, and 'What I do is influenced by my father in that
I ponder what he would do in the circumstances and then do the same' (or
'do the opposite')---not passivity. All passivity experiences are
regarded as first-­rank symptoms. It is not of great significance to
decide which type of passivity is described---whether it is, for
example, passivity of impulse or of volition---but it is important
diagnostically to decide whether it is a passivity experience. Passivity
of emotion occurs when the affect that the patient experiences does not
seem to them to be their own. They believe that they have been made to
feel it: A 23-­year-­old female patient reported, 'I cry, tears roll down
my cheeks and I look unhappy, but inside I have a cold anger because
they are using me in this way, and it is not me who is unhappy, but they
are projecting unhappiness onto my brain. They project upon me laughter,
for no reason, and you have no idea how terrible it is to laugh and look
happy and know it is not your, but their reaction.' Mellor (1970, p. 17)

In passivity of impulse, the patient experiences a drive, which they
feel is alien, to carry out some motor activity. The impulse may be
experienced without the subject carrying out the behaviour. A Jewish
woman, aged 55, suffering from schizophrenia said, 'I feel my hand going
up to salute, and my lips saying "Heil Hitler" ... I don't actually say
it ... I have to try very hard to stop my arm from going up ... they put
drugs in my food; that is what makes it happen'. If carried out, the
action is admitted to be the patient's own, but they feel that the
impulse that precipitated them into doing it was not their own: A
26-­year-­old engineer emptied the contents of a urine bottle over the
ward dinner trolley. He said, 'The sudden impulse came over me and I
must do it. It was not my feeling, it came into me from the X-­ray

Disorder of the Thinking Process

153

department, that was why I was sent there for implants yesterday. It was
nothing to do with me, they wanted it done. So I picked up the bottle
and poured it in. It seemed all I could do.' Mellor (1970, p. 17)

Similarly, with passivity of volition the patient feels that it is not
their will that carried out the action: A 29-­year-­old shorthand typist
described her actions as follows, 'when I reach my hand for the comb it
is my hand and arm which move, and my fingers pick up the pen, but I
don't control them ... I sit there wanting them to move, and they are
quite independent, what they do is nothing to do with me ... I am just a
puppet who is manipulated by cosmic strings. When the strings are pulled
my body moves and I can't prevent it.' Mellor (1970, p. 17)

Somatic passivity is the belief that outside influences are playing on
the body. It is not the same as haptic hallucination, but it is a
delusional belief that the body is being influenced from outside the
self. It may occur in association with various somatic hallucinations.
For example, a kinaesthetic hallucination occurred with a passivity
experience given as explanation by a patient who felt that their hand
was being drawn up to their face. They could feel it moving, although,
in fact, it was motionless. Somatic passivity may also occur in
association with a normal percept; these experiences are quite common in
schizophrenia: A 38-­year-­old man had jumped from a bedroom window,
injuring his right knee which was very painful. He described his
physical experience as, 'The sun-­rays are directed by US army satellites
in an intense beam which I can feel entering the centre of my knee and
then radiating outwards causing the pain.' Mellor (1970, p. 16)

First-­rank symptoms are of general use, diagnostically, in clinical
practice, and they have also been adapted for psychiatric research. The
method of ascertaining and measuring schizophrenic symptoms, among other
symptoms, developed by Wing et al. (1974) in their Present State
Examination uses first-­ rank symptoms as a basis for diagnosing
schizophrenia.

154

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

The Present State Examination provides the clinician with a means of
ascertaining which symptoms and syndromes are present. Koehler (1979),
in a review of the way various authors describe the presence of
first-­rank symptoms in the English literature, considered that they were
sometimes used in a very narrow and sometimes a very wide sense. He
makes the distinction between alienation of thought and influence of
thought and makes a plea for clear statements on the boundary criteria
for first-­rank symptoms and the nosologic bias attached to the
phenomena. From the preceding quoted examples of Mellor, alienation is
necessary---that is, a delusion of control and not just an experience of
influence of thought. Similarly, thought broadcasting would be regarded
as first-rank when the patient describes this as having occurred outside
their control, irrespective of whether these thoughts are shared with
others. Thus this chapter is recommending a narrow use of first-­rank
symptoms. First-­rank symptoms have been employed to establish the
diagnosis; they are not necessarily useful prognostically (Bland and
Orn, 1980). This difference between alienation or experience of control
and influence can be exemplified by the schizophrenic symptom of thought
insertion. Thought insertion is more concrete than the insertion of an
idea into one's thinking. A normal person may say, 'My mother gave me
the idea' or even 'The idea was put into my head by my mother'. Neither
of these is thought to be insertion. The patient experiencing passivity
believes that, by some concrete process, the boundaries of their self
involving thinking are so invaded that their mother is actually placing
thoughts inside their head (see Chapter 12) so that they think her
thoughts, or perhaps she, is thinking inside them. REFERENCES Aggernaes,
A., Haugsted, R., Myschetsky, A., Paikin, H., Vitger, J., 1976. A
reliable clinical technique for investigation of the experienced reality
and unreality qualities connected with everyday life experiences in
psychotic and non-­psychotic persons. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 53,
241--257. Bion, W.R., 1962. The psycho-­analytic study of thinking.
Intern. J. Psychoanal. 43, 306--310. Bland, R.C., Orn, H., 1980.
Schizophrenia: Schneider's first-­rank symptoms and outcome. Br. J.
Psychiatry 137, 63--68. Bleuler, E., 1911. In: Dementia Praecox or the
Group of Schizophrenias (J. Zinkin, Trans, 1950). International
Universities Press, New York.

Cameron, N., 1944. Experimental analysis of schizophrenic thinking. In:
Kasanin, J.J. (Ed.), Language and Thought in Schizophrenia. University
of California Press, Berkeley. Carpenter, W.T., Buchanan, R.W., 1994.
Schizophrenia. N. Engl. J. Med 330, 681--690. Chen, E.Y.H., McKenna,
P.J., Wilkins, A., 1995. Semantic processing and categorization in
schizophrenia. In: Sims, A. (Ed.), Speech and Language Disorders in
Psychiatry. Gaskell, London. Cutting, J., 2011. A Critique of
Psychopathology. The Forest Publishing Company, Forest Row. Fish, F.,
1967. Clinical Psychopathology. John Wright, Bristol. Fish, F.J., 1962.
Schizophrenia. John Wright, Bristol. Frith, C.D., 1992. The Cognitive
Neuropsychology of Schizophrenia. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hove.
Fuchs, T., 2018. The "As-­If" function and its loss in schizophrenia. In:
Summa, M., Fuchs, T., Vanzago, L. (Eds.), Imagination and Social
Perspectives. Routledge, New York, pp. 83--98. Gathercole, C.E., 1965. A
note on some tests of over-­ inclusive thinking. Br. J. Med. Psychol. 38,
59--62. Goldstein, K., 1936. The modification of behaviour consequent to
cerebral lesions. Psychiatr. Q. 10, 586--610. Hurlburt, R.T., 1990.
Sampling Normal and Schizophrenic Inner Experience. Plenum, New York.
Hurlburt, R.T., 2011. Investigating Pristine Inner Experience: Moments
of Truth. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Isräels, H., Schatzman,
M., 1993. The seduction theory. Hist. Psychiat. 4, 23--60. Jaspers, K.,
1997. General Psychopathology (J. Hoenig, M.W. Hamilton, Trans). The
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. Jones, E., 1962. The Life and
Work of Sigmund Freud. Penguin, Harmondsworth. Kahneman, D., 2011.
Thinking, Fast and Slow. Penguin Books, London. Koehler, K., 1979. First
rank symptoms of schizophrenia: questions concerning clinical
boundaries. Br. J. Psychiatry 134, 236--248. Kraepelin, E., 1904.
Lectures on Clinical Psychiatry (E.T. Johnston, Trans). Hafner, New
York. Liddle, P.F., 2001. Disordered Mind and Brain: The Neural Basis of
Mental Symptoms. Gaskell, London. McGhie, A., 1969. Pathology of
Attention. Penguin, Harmondsworth. Mellor, C.S., 1970. First rank
symptoms of schizophrenia. Br. J. Psychiatry 117, 15--23. Mellor, C.S.,
Sims, A.C.P., Cope, R.V., 1981. Changes of diagnosis in schizophrenia
and first rank symptoms: an eight year follow-­up. Compr. Psychiatry 2,
184--188. Morgan, R., 1977. Three weeks in isolation with two chronic
schizophrenic patients. Br. J. Psychiatry 131, 504--513. Payne, R.W.,
Hochberg, A.C., Hawks, D.V., 1970. Dichotic stimulation as a method of
assessing the disorder of attention of an over-­ inclusive schizophrenic
patient. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 76, 185--193. Roth, I., 2004. Imagination.
In: Gregory, R.L. (Ed.), The Oxford Companion to the Mind. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. Schneider, C., 1930. Psychologie der
Schizophrenie. Thieme, Leipzig. Schneider, K., 1959. Clinical
Psychopathology (M.W. Hamilton, Trans), fifth ed. Grune & Stratton, New
York. Shimkunas, A.M., 1972. Conceptual deficit in schizophrenia: a re-­
appraisal. Br. J. Med. Psychol. 45, 149--157.

9 Smith, E.E., Kosslyn, S.M., 2007. Cognitive Psychology: Mind and
Brain. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. Sutherland, N.S., 1976.
Breakdown: A Personal Crisis and a Medical Dilemma. Weidenfeld &
Nicholson, London. Tversky, A., Kahneman, D., 1974. Judgment under
uncertainty: heuristics and biases. Science 185, 1124--1131. Webster,
R., 1995. Why Freud Was Wrong. HarperCollins, London.

Disorder of the Thinking Process

155

Weiner, L.B., 1966. Psychodiagnosis in Schizophrenia. Wiley, New York.
Wing, J.K., Cooper, J.E., Sartorius, N., 1974. The Measurement and
Classification of Psychiatric Symptoms: An Instruction Manual for the
PSE and Catego Program. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Winnicott, D.W., 1957. The Child and the Family: First Relationships.
Tavistock Publications, London.

This page intentionally left blank

     

Chapter 10

Disorder of Speech and Language Chapter Outline Summary Speech
Disturbances Aphonia and Dysphonia Dysarthria Stuttering and Stammering
Logoclonia Echolalia Changes in the Volume and Intonation of Speech
Unintelligible Speech Organic Disorders of Language Sensory Dysphasia
Motor Aphasia Mutism Schizophrenic Language Disorder Clinical
Description and Thought Disorder Psychogenic Abnormalities Statistical
Model of Language Linguistic Approaches to Schizophrenia

KEYWORDS Language Speech Aphasia Mutism Alogia

Summary Speech is the aspect of language that corresponds to the
mechanical and articulatory functions that allow language to be
vocalized, whereas language is itself a complex system based on a number
of elements including phonemes, syntactic structure, semantics, prosody
and pragmatics, all designed to aid communication and to encode facts in
memory. Abnormalities of speech are common in neurology but rare in
psychiatry. Language and thinking disorders are intricately affected in
psychiatric disorders, particularly in schizophrenia. The actual
relationship between thinking and language is yet to be fully
elucidated. To speak is not only to utter words, it is to
propositionize. A proposition is such a relation of words that it makes
one new meaning. J. Hughlings Jackson (1932)

It is very obvious that the functions of thinking and speaking overlap
and cannot be readily separated from each other; at the same time, they
are clearly different. The contents of this chapter cannot be considered
in isolation from its predecessor, although this one considers speech
and language from a different perspective. Maher (1972, p. 3) proposed a
model that attempt­ed to demonstrate the link between thinking and the
behaviour of speech in language: conceptualizing the relationship
between language and thought. The model might be likened to a typist
copying from a script before her. Her copy may appear to be 157

158

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

distorted because the script is distorted although the communication
channel of the typist's eye and hand are functioning correctly.
Alternatively, the original script may be perfect, but the typist may be
unskilled, making typing errors in the copy and thus distorting it.
Finally, it is possible for an inefficient typist to add errors to an
already incoherent script. Unfortunately, the psychopathologist can
observe only the copy (language utterances): he cannot examine the
script (the thought). In general most theorists concerned with
schizophrenic language have accepted the first of the three
alternatives, namely that a good typist is transcribing a deviant
script. The patient is correctly reporting a set of disordered thoughts.
As Critchley put it: 'Any considerable aberration of thought or
personality will be mirrored in the various levels of articulate speech
-- phonetic, phonemic, semantic, syntactic and pragmatic'. The language
is a mirror of the thought. The script is likened to thought and the
typist to language. Most clinicians have taken the view that language
closely mirrors thought and see the primary abnormality as the thinking
disorder (Beveridge, 1985). Disordered language is then seen as merely a
reflection of this underlying disturbance with diagnosis of thought
disorder only possible on the basis of what the patient says. Some of
the more recent linguistic theories used for the analysis of
schizophrenic speech contradict the primacy of thinking. The assumption
that language directly mirrors thought can be challenged (Newby, 1995).
One tradition argues that language itself structures thinking and
concepts and determines how the world is understood. This view derives
from the works of Edward Sapir (1884--1939) and Benjamin Whorf
(1897--1941). In essence, the Sapir--Whorf hypothesis says that language
influences cognition. There is limited empirical support for this view,
and Pinker (1994) concludes that 'the representations underlying
thinking, on the one hand, and the sentences in a language, on the
other, are in many ways at cross-­purposes ... People do not think in
English or Chinese or Apache; they think in a language of thought. This
language of thought probably looks a bit like all these languages;
presumably it has symbols for concepts, and arrangements of symbols that
correspond to who did what to whom'. This radical view contradicts the
point-­to-­point relationship

between language and thought implicit in Maher's proposition noted
earlier and the linguistic determinism of the Sapir--Whorf hypothesis.
The relationship between thinking and language is as complicated for
organic disorders as it is for schizophrenia: there can be quite marked
disturbance in the use of language with no apparent thought disorder.
This is revealed in the rare isolated abnormalities of specific function
of language described in this chapter. An understanding of how the
healthy person expresses thoughts in language can be achieved only by
study of the normal development of language. This is outside the scope
of this book but is discussed in relation to perception in Carterette
and Friedman (1976). Language is built of a number of elements. Phonemes
are the most basic sounds that are available for use in language, and
any particular language, such as English, uses only a limited repertoire
of phonemes. The repertoire used in English may share only a limited
overlap with that used, for example, in Yoruba. Morphemes are produced
from phonemes and are the smallest meaningful unit of a word, and
combinations of morphemes make up words. A morpheme may be a word such
as 'do' or 'un'. Syntax (grammar) is the allowable combination of words
in phrases and sentences and includes the rules that determine word
order. Semantics are the meanings that correspond to the words and
include the meaning of all possible sentences. Prosody refers to the
modulation of vocal intonation that influences accents, and also the
literal and emotional meanings of words and sentences. The pragmatics of
language is the study of the ways that language is used in practice.
This is a relatively new area of study. It refers to the multiple
potential meanings of any utterance, which requires knowledge of context
and of the speakers for full interpretation. For example, the sentence
'this room is cold' can have any of several meanings depending on the
identity of the speaker, the context of the utterance and who is being
addressed, that is the social or relative distance of the addressee. It
is perhaps important to distinguish between language and speech for our
purpose. Speech is the aspect of language that corresponds to the
mechanical and articulatory functions that allow language to be
vocalized. Thus for language to become speech the vocal cords, the
palate, the lips and the tongue need to perform a complex and
synchronized

10

dance of intricate steps. The dissociation between poorly articulated
speech and intact language indicates that these two functions are
separate. Chomsky's (1986) theory of language is the most influential.
Essentially, Chomsky argued that language is like an instinct, and
furthermore that 'every sentence that a person utters or understands is
a brand new combination of words, appearing for the first time in the
history of the universe. Therefore a language cannot be a repertoire of
responses; the brain must contain a recipe or programme that can build
an unlimited set of sentences out of a finite list of words. The
programme may be called a mental grammar' (Pinker, 1994). In addition to
this, children rapidly develop these complex grammars without formal
instruction. This suggests that they must be innately endowed with a
plan common to the grammars of all languages, a universal grammar. How
language develops, how word meaning is learned and the neuropsychology
of language are all areas of increasing study.

Speech Disturbances This subject is dealt with in textbooks of neurology
and has been reviewed by Critchley (1995); it is only summarized here.
Many abnormalities, such as paraphasia, have both organic and
psychogenic causes (as described earlier); diagnosis will require full
medical and psychiatric history and neurologic and mental state
examination. APHONIA AND DYSPHONIA Aphonia is the loss of the ability to
vocalize; the patient talks only in a whisper. Dysphonia denotes
impairment with hoarseness but without complete loss of function. It
occurs with paralysis of the ninth cranial nerve or with disease of the
vocal cords. Aphonia may also occur without organic disease in
dissociative aphonia, not uncommon as a presentation among ear, nose and
throat outpatients. Such a patient may speak in a 'stage whisper';
phonation may fluctuate according to the response of those the person is
addressing. DYSARTHRIA Disorders of articulation may be caused by
lesions of the brainstem such as bulbar and pseudobulbar palsy.

Disorder of Speech and Language

159

It may also occur with structural or muscular disorders of the mouth,
pharynx, larynx and thorax. Idiosyncratic disorders of articulation are
sometimes seen in schizophrenia and, perhaps, with personality disorders
consciously produced. STUTTERING AND STAMMERING These have in the past
been enquired about in the psychiatric history under neurotic
disturbances of childhood along with behaviours such as nail biting.
However, psychogenic aetiology has certainly now been disproved, and any
association with neuroticism may well be secondary to the barriers in
communication that stuttering causes. LOGOCLONIA This describes the
spastic repetition of syllables that occurs with parkinsonism
(Scharfetter, 1980). The patient may get stuck using a particular word.
ECHOLALIA The patient repeats words or parts of sentences that are
spoken to them or in their presence. There is usually no understanding
of the meaning of the words. It is most often demonstrated in excited
schizophrenic states with learning disability and with organic states
such as dementia, especially if dysphasia is also present. CHANGES IN
THE VOLUME AND INTONATION OF SPEECH Many depressed patients speak
quietly with a monotonous voice. Manic patients often speak loudly and
excitably with much variation in pitch. Excited patients with
schizophrenia may also speak loudly; intonation and stresses on words
may be idiosyncratic and inappropriate. None of these modes of behaviour
has diagnostic significance. The speed and flow of talk mirrors that of
thought and is dealt with in Chapter 9. UNINTELLIGIBLE SPEECH Speech may
be unintelligible for several reasons, and most of the abnormalities
described here, if taken to extremes, will result in
incomprehensibility. • Dysphasia may be so profound that, although
syllables are produced, speech is unintelligible.

160

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

• Paragrammatism (disorder of grammatical construction) and incoherence
of syntax may occur in several disorders. Recognizable words may be so
deranged in their sentences as to be meaningless---word salad, as occurs
in schizophrenia. In mania, the speed of association may be so rapid as
to disrupt sentence structure completely and render it meaningless,
whereas in depression retardation may so inhibit speech that only
unintelligible syllables, often of a moaning nature, are produced. •
Private meaning may occur in schizophrenia with the use of (1) new words
with an idiosyncratic, personal meaning---neologisms; (2) stock words
and phrases in which existing words are used with special individual
symbolic meaning; or (3) a private language that may be spoken
(cryptolalia), or written (cryptographia).

Organic Disorders of Language Dysphasic symptoms are probably more
useful clinically than any other cognitive defect in indicating the
approximate site of brain pathology (David et al., 2007). However, the
auditory, visual and motor mechanisms of speech are spread through
several parts

of the brain; often several functions are affected and lesions are
usually diffuse, and thus precise brain localization is often not
possible. Ninety percent of right-­handed people without any brain damage
have speech located in the left hemisphere, and 10% have right
hemisphere speech. Among those who are left-­ handed or ambidextrous, 64%
have left hemisphere speech, 20% right hemisphere and 16% bilateral
speech representation. SENSORY DYSPHASIA The terms aphasia and dysphasia
are often used interchangeably. However, aphasia implies the loss of
language altogether, and dysphasia implies impairment of, or difficulty
with, language. Dysphasia is conventionally divided for classification
purposes into sensory (receptive) and motor (expressive) types.
Frequently, there is a global impairment of language with evidence of
impairment of both elements. Table 10.1 summarizes some of the
abnormalities that occur with the different aspects of language that are
impaired. Pure Word Deafness (Subcortical Auditory Dysphasia)

In pure word deafness, the patient can speak, read and write fluently,
correctly and with comprehension. They cannot understand speech, even
though hearing

TABLE 10.1 Impairment of Language Function with Different Types of
Dysphasia Type

Spontaneous Speech-­Fluent

Comprehension Repetition

Naming

Reading

Writing

Pure word deafness

- 

--

--

- 
- 

--

-- --

- (not to dictation)
- -- --

Pure word blindness Primary sensory dysphasia Conduction dysphasia
Nominal dysphasia Pure word dumbness Pure agraphia Primary motor
dysphasia Alexia with agraphia Isolated speech area Transcortical motor
dysphasia Transcortical sensory dysphasia

-- -- Aloud --, compr.n + --

--

-- --

-- --

--

--

-- -- --

--

--

Compr.n, Comprehension. After Lishman (1997), with permission of
Blackwell Scientific.

- ±, aloud --, compr.n ± -- -- Aloud --, compr.n + --

-- -- -- --

--

10

is unimpaired for other sounds; they hear words as sounds but cannot
recognize the meaning even though they know that they are words. This is
therefore a form of agnosia (lack of recognition) for the spoken word.
Pure Word Blindness (Subcortical Visual Aphasia)

The patient with pure word blindness can speak normally and understand
the spoken word; they can write spontaneously and to dictation but
cannot read with understanding (alexia). The condition is therefore
agnosic alexia without dysgraphia. They may have more difficulty with
printed than handwritten script. Such a patient will also suffer a right
homonymous hemianopia (loss of the right half of the field of vision in
both eyes) and an inability to name colours even though colour can be
perceived. Primary Sensory Dysphasia (Receptive Dysphasia)

Patients with primary sensory dysphasia are unable to understand spoken
speech, with loss of comprehension of the meaning of words and of the
significance of grammar. Hearing otherwise is not impaired. Consequent
on this deficit in the auditory association cortex (Wernicke's area),
there is also impairment of speech, writing and reading. Speech is
fluent, with no appreciation of the many errors in the use of words,
syntax and grammar. Conduction dysphasia could be considered to be a
type of sensory dysphasia in which sensory reception of speech and
writing are impaired in that the patient cannot repeat the message
although they can speak and write it. If they are questioned on the
message, they are able to give 'yes' or 'no' answers correctly, thus
demonstrating comprehension. There are marked errors of grammar and
syntax (syntactical dysphasia). Nominal Dysphasia

The patient with nominal dysphasia is unable to produce names and sounds
at will. They may be able to describe the object and its function and to
recognize the name when presented: a patient described a watch as a
'clock vessel'. Typically, 'empty' nouns such as 'thing' and 'object'
are used frequently, and 'distinguishing' nouns rarely. Speech is flat,
the structure of sentences generally correct and understanding
unimpaired.

Disorder of Speech and Language

161

Jargon Dysphasia

In jargon dysphasia speech is fluent, but there is such gross
disturbance for words and syntax that speech is unintelligible. The
intonation and rhythm of speech are retained. This is considered a
severe type of sensory dysphasia; there is failure to evaluate the
patients' own speech, in that patients are not emotionally disturbed
when listening to recordings of their own grossly impaired speech. MOTOR
APHASIA Pure Word Dumbness

The patient with pure word dumbness understands spoken speech and
writing and can respond to comments. Writing is preserved but speech is
indistinct and cannot be produced at will. There is no local disturbance
of muscles required in speaking, and the disability is an apraxia
limited to movements required for speech. Pure Agraphia

Pure agraphia is an isolated inability to write that may also occur with
unimpaired speech (agraphia without alexia); there is normal
understanding of written and spoken material. This is the equivalent for
writing of pure word dumbness in speech. Primary Motor Dysphasia

In primary motor dysphasia there is disturbance to the processes of
selecting words, constructing sentences and expressing them. Speech and
writing are both affected, and there is difficulty in carrying out
complex instructions, even though understanding for both speech and
writing may be preserved. The patient finds it difficult to choose and
pronounce words, and speech is hesitant and slow; they recognize their
errors, try to correct them and are clearly upset. Gesture may be used
to replace verbal communication. Speech is attempted and recognized as
spoken words, but words are omitted and sentences shortened, and
perseveration occurs. Alexia with Agraphia

Visual aspects of language are construed as being more complex than
auditory in that visual schemata are required---'seeing the written word
inside his head', in addition to auditory---'hearing the words in one's

162

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

head'. In alexia with agraphia, the patient is unable to read or write,
but speaking and understanding speech are preserved. Alexia in this
condition is similar to that of pure word blindness: the patient cannot
understand words that are spelt out aloud, showing that they are
effectively illiterate because of disturbance of the visual symbolism of
language. Isolated Speech Area

Impaired comprehension may occur with slow, hesitant speech in an
abnormality in which it is assumed that the anatomic Wernicke's and
Broca's areas and the connections between them are intact but
connections from other parts of the cortex with this language system are
disturbed. Two types, expressive and receptive, are described:
transcortical motor dysphasia and transcortical sensory dysphasia. Most
frequently, of course, with dysphasia, there is a mixture of expressive
and receptive elements and the clear syndromes cannot be demonstrated,
but their significance is partly theoretical in demonstrating the range
of anatomic lesions and the specificity of resultant symptoms. This
description has been exclusively concerned with the symptoms; precise
description of the anatomic lesions and of associated neurologic
symptoms is outside our scope. It is important to distinguish the
phenomena of dysphasia, perhaps with neologisms and defects of syntax,
from the word salad of schizophrenia with superficially similar defects
of language. Verbigeration describes the repetition of words or
syllables that expressive aphasic patients may use while desperately
searching for the correct word. In psychosis, most often in catatonia,
verbigeration is an example of mannerisms or stereotypy of speech in
which words or phrases are either spontaneously repeated or provoked by
questions that result in repetition of words or phrases. Hamilton (1974)
describes repetition of one or several sentences or strings of
fragmented words, going on for hours at a time. Sometimes the string is
of incomprehensible jargon in a monotonous voice. The example is from
Kraepelin (1919): 'Dear Emily, give me a kiss; we want to get well, a
greeting and it would be nothing. We want to be brave and beautiful,
follow, follow, mother, so that we can come home soon. The letter was
for me; take care, that I get it', and the patient repeated this for 3
hours without stop.

MUTISM Mutism, refraining from speech during consciousness, is an
important sign in psychiatric illness with an extensive differential
diagnosis. Eliciting the history and mental state becomes impossible in
a mute patient. All the major categories of psychiatric disorder may
manifest mutism: learning disability, organic brain disease (sometimes
drug related), functional psychosis and neurosis and personality
disorder. Some more specific causes include depressive illness,
catatonic schizophrenia and dissociative disorder. Mutism occurs as an
essential element of stupor (Chapter 3), and it is necessary to assess
the level of consciousness as part of a full neurologic examination for
all patients with this sign. If there is no lowering of consciousness as
in functional psychoses and neuroses, it is likely that the mute patient
understands everything that is said around them. As well as specific
brain disorders, the causes of stupor include general metabolic
disorders that also affect the brain, such as hepatic failure, uraemia,
hypothyroidism and hypoglycaemia.

Schizophrenic Language Disorder Defective communication in language is
the defining characteristic of schizophrenia according to Crow (1997),
and it is associated with genetic variation at the time language was
acquired by Homo sapiens. The use of language by people with
schizophrenia can differ from that in normal people, and this difference
can be subtle and unrelated to positive symptoms such as delusions and
hallucinations. There is good reason to believe that the abnormalities
of language use are associated with thought disorder. The precise nature
of the language abnormality has so far defied clarification, and this
account is provisional; it describes the way some of the phenomena have
been viewed and conceptualized. There is no single explanatory theory
that unifies the disparate abnormalities that have been observed and
described. Investigation into language disorder may be ascribed to one
of the four models shown in Table 10.2. CLINICAL DESCRIPTION AND THOUGHT
DISORDER The only unequivocal demonstration of disorder of thinking can
be through language. Thought disorder may be revealed in the flow of
talk (as in Chapter 9), disturbed content and use of words and grammar,
and

10

Disorder of Speech and Language

163

TABLE 10.2 Models for Investigating Language Disorder in Schizophrenia

TABLE 10.3 Categorization of Thought Disorder in Speech

Model of Language

Technique Employed

Clinician

Categorization

Concept of thought disorder Behavioural learning theory Statistical
model Linguistic model

Psychiatric: clinical description of schizophrenic speech Word
association test, multiple choice vocabulary test The Cloze technique,
type:token ratio Analysis of syntax, cohesion or propositions

Kraepelin Bleuler Gardner Cameron Goldstein Von Domarus Schneider

Akataphasia Loosening of associations Form of regression Asyndesis
Concrete thinking Defect of deductive reasoning Derailment,
substitution, omission, fusion and drivelling

After Beveridge (1985), with permission.

in the inability to conceptualize appropriately. Critchley (1964)
considered that the 'causation of schizophrenic speech affection lies in
an underlying thought disorder, rather than in a linguistic
inaccessibility'. Some of the ways in which clinicians have categorized
schizophrenic thought disorder manifesting in speech are linked in Table
10.3. The German psychopathologic literature on schizophrenic language
and speech disorders was concerned with the rules of language
dysfunction; it consistently reported the patient's uncertainty in
choosing the correct metaphorical level in communication (Mundt, 1995).
Kraepelin (1919) defined akataphasia as a disorder in the expression of
thought in speech. Loss of the continuity of associations, which implied
incompleteness in the development of ideas, was the first of the
functions included among the fundamental symptoms of schizophrenia by
Bleuler (1911). Gardner (1931) considered thought disorder to be a form
of regression. Cameron (1944), in describing asyndesis, considered there
to be an inability to preserve conceptual boundaries and a marked
paucity of genuinely causal links. He gave the example of a patient who,
given these alternatives, completed the sentence 'I get warm when I run
because ...' with all the words: 'quickness, blood, heart of deer,
length, driven power, motorized cylinder, strength'. The patient was
prone to use imprecise expressions---metonyms, for example, a patient
said he was alive: Because you really live physically, because you have
menu three times a day; that's the physical \[What else is there

beside the physical?\] Then you are alive mostly to serve a work from
the standpoint of methodical business. He also demonstrated
over-inclusive thinking in which a loose association of concepts that
were related in some way to the dominant theme became interwoven into
responses, for example: \[The wind blows\] Due to velocity. \[Question
repeated\] Due to loss of air, evaporation of water. \[What gives the
velocity?\] the contact of trees, of air in the trees. Concrete
thinking, a term denoting an inability to think abstractly was proposed
by Goldstein (1944), but the validity of this was challenged by Payne et
al. (1959). Allen (1984) considers that speech-­ disordered patients with
schizophrenia produce evidence of concrete thinking, thinking without
inferring and restricted to what is explicitly stated, whereas
nonspeech-­disordered patients with schizophrenia do not. When the
thematic organization of speech was analysed for patients with positive
speech disorder (incoherence of speech) or negative speech disorder
(poverty of speech), there was no difference found: speech-­disordered
patients, positive as well as negative, showed cognitive restriction and
produced fewer inferences than nonspeech-­disordered patients. A
deficiency in the logic of deductive reasoning in schizophrenia was
suggested by Von Domarus (1944). Some of the abnormalities of thinking
expressed in speech observed by Schneider are discussed in Chapter 9. An
attempt has been made by Andreasen (1979) to classify the description of
patients' cognitive and linguistic behaviour on the phenomena
demonstrated

164

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

without making inferences about concepts of 'global' thought disorder;
these abnormalities occur in both mania and schizophrenia. Some types of
thought disorder, such as neologism and blocking, occurred too
infrequently to have diagnostic significance. However, she found high
reliability between raters with many types of thought disorder and also
discrimination between different psychotic illnesses. Derailment, loss
of goal, poverty of content of speech, tangentiality and illogicality
were particularly characteristic of schizophrenia. Derailment implies
loosening of association so that ideas slip on to either an obliquely
related, or totally unrelated, theme. Loss of goal is the failure to
follow a chain of thought through to its natural conclusion. Poverty of
content of speech includes poverty of thought, empty speech, alogia,
verbigeration and negative formal thought disorder; patients' statements
convey little information and tend to be vague, overabstract,
overconcrete, repetitive and stereotyped. Tangentiality means replying
to a question in an oblique or even irrelevant manner. Illogicality
implies drawing conclusions from a premise by inference that cannot be
seen as logical. Misuse of Words and Phrases

The patient with schizophrenia sometimes shows misuse of words in that
they have, in the terminology of Kleist (1914), a defect of word
storage. They have a restricted vocabulary and so use words
idiosyncratically to cover a greater range of meaning than they usually
encompass. These are called stock words or phrases, and their use will
sometimes become obvious in a longer conversation in which an unusual
word or expression may be used several times. For example, a patient
used 'dispassionate' as a stock word, and used it frequently with a
bizarre and idiosyncratic meaning in the course of a few minutes'
speech. A woman who was delusionally concerned that the police were
intruding into her private affairs interspersed her conversation, often
bizarrely, with the expression 'confidentially speaking'. This
abnormality appears partly to reflect a poverty of words and syntax and
also an active tendency for words or syllables by association to intrude
into thoughts and therefore speech soon after utterance. In the sample
of speech in Chapter 9, the following words could be seen as stimuli and
responses by

intrusion: 'means'---'ways', 'opens'---'closed', 'holding back the
truth'---'by no means will I speak', 'written questions'---'by means of
writing', 'miracle'--- 'Holyland'. They also appear to be stock words or
phrases in that they are used with greater frequency and with a greater
range of meaning than is normal and correct. Words carry a semantic
halo, that is, their constellation of associations is greater than just
the dictionary meaning of the word. A boy aged 16 steals an apple. If I
call him 'a trespasser', it has biblical associations; 'a criminal'
suggests a greater degree of viciousness than the action merits; 'a
delinquent' is readily associated with his youthfulness because of the
phrase 'juvenile delinquent'. The constellations of associations in
patients are disordered in that they often make apparently irrelevant
associations. These may be explained by misperception of auditory
stimuli with specific inattention; the actual mediation of associations
in patients with schizophrenia may be similar to that in healthy people.
This comes some way to explaining why the associations seem appropriate
subjectively to the patient themself, as they do not realize that they
have misperceived the cue: it seems reasonable to them but is quite
irrelevant to the interviewer. To quote Maher, 'What seems to be bizarre
is not the nature of the associations that intrude into the utterance,
but the fact that they intrude at all' (Maher, 1972). Among the
disorders of words, neologism is well recognized. A patient believed
that their thoughts were influenced from outside themself by a process
of 'telegony'. Although such a word does actually exist, the patient had
no notion of this nor what it meant. They created the word to describe a
unique experience of his for which no adequate word existed. A
47-­year-­old male patient with schizophrenia and expansive mood described
himself thus: 'I am the triplicate actimetric kilophilic telepathic
multibillion million genius'--- which does suggest a certain
grandiosity! The unintentional puns of schizophrenia have been explained
by Chapman et al. (1964). If a word has more than one meaning, it is
likely that one usage is dominant. For example, the majority of people,
in most contexts, would be more likely to use the word 'bay' to refer to
an inlet of the sea than to a tree, the noise a hound makes, the colour
of a horse, an opening in a wall, the second branch of a stag's horn, an

10

uncomfortable place at which to stand or even, phonetically, a Turkish
governor! There is a marked tendency in schizophrenia to show intrusion
of the dominant meaning when the context demands the use of a less
common meaning. Chapman et al. (1964) used a sentence such as 'the
tennis player left the court because he was tired' and asked patients
with schizophrenia to interpret its meaning with one of three
explanations: one referring to a tennis court, one to a court of law and
one altogether irrelevant. An analysis of responses shows that dominant
meanings, here a court of law, intrude into the responses quite
frequently, but intrusion of minor meanings is less frequent. Maher
(1972) has described disorder of language in schizophrenia in which
intrusion occurs through clang associations with the initial syllable of
a previous word: 'the subterfuge and the mistaken planned
substitutions'. This is unlike the clang associations that occur
normally in poetry, in humour and in manic speech in which the clang
occurs in terminal syllables. The repetitiveness of speech disorder is
also thought to be associated with the intrusion of associations: the
normal process of eliminating irrelevant associations does not take
place so that a word in a clause will provoke associations by pun, clang
and ideational similarity. When that clause is completed, a
syntactically correct clause may then be inserted, disrupting meaning
but demonstrably associated with that previous word or idea. Maher
considers that an inability to maintain attention may account for the
language disturbances seen in some patients. Disturbed attention allows
irrelevant associations to intrude into speech, similarly to the
disturbance affecting the filtering of sensory input. In this theory,
normal coherent speech is seen as the progressive and instantaneous
inhibition of irrelevant associations to each utterance, and so the
determining tendency proceeds with the active elimination of those
associations that are not goal directed. This is but one of many
potential explanations for the observed abnormalities. Destruction of
Words and Grammar

Alogia is a term used to describe negative thought disorder, or poverty
of thoughts as expressed in words. Correspondingly, paralogia is used to
describe positive thought disorder, or the intrusion of irrelevant or

Disorder of Speech and Language

165

bizarre thought. Paraphasia is a destruction of words with interpolation
of more or less garbled sounds. Although the patient is only able to
produce this nonverbal sound, it clearly has significance or meaning to
them. Literal paraphasia is gross misuse of the meaning of words to such
an extent that statements no longer make any sense. Verbal paraphasia
describes the loss of the appropriate word but the statements are still
meaningful, for example a patient described a chair as 'a four-­legged
sit-­up'. Disturbances in words and their meanings are much more common
in schizophrenia than disturbance of grammar and syntax. However,
grammar is also sometimes altered; the loss of parts of speech is
described as agrammatism. Adverbs are occasionally lost, resulting in
coarsening and poverty of sentences, a form of telegramese. For example,
'rich table is worn; the woman is rich to write; son is also
lamentation'. This, as well as showing stock words (rich---lamentation),
shows loss of parts of speech, for example, the indefinite article. The
meaning is more disjointed than the grammar. Paragrammatism occurs when
there is a mass of complicated clauses that make no sense in achieving
the goal of thought. However, the individual phrases are, in themselves,
quite comprehensible. It seems probable that the rules of syntax are
preserved in schizophrenia long after a marked disturbance in the use of
words, so that, if in the preceding clause an intrusive association were
to replace the word 'rules', the word used would probably, correctly, be
a noun. For instance, the patient just discussed might have said in this
context 'the lamentations of syntax are ...' In addition to the observed
abnormalities already described, there are suggestions that patients
with schizophrenia demonstrate lack of use of cohesive ties in discourse
(for a full discussion, see McKenna and Oh, 2005). Cohesive ties in
discourse are devices that are utilized to link sentences together, so
that speech is not merely a collection of unrelated sentences. There are
four main types of cohesive ties: reference, conjunction, lexical
cohesion and ellipsis. References in English are personal pronouns such
as 'he', 'she', 'they', 'it'; demonstratives are such words as 'this'
and 'that'; and comparatives such terms as 'smaller than', 'equal to',
etc. In the following sentences, 'He' is a reference tie: 'I met Peter
yesterday. He was wearing a dark suit'. In

166

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

the sentence 'She went to the High Street this morning and bought some
cakes from the supermarket', 'and' is a conjunction tie. A lack of use
of cohesive ties means that the listener in dialogue with a patient with
schizophrenia can have difficulty following the speech of the patient.
PSYCHOGENIC ABNORMALITIES Andreasen (1979) showed that the abnormalities
of language present in schizophrenia were also present in mania.
Furthermore, McKenna and Oh (2005) make the case that there is a
continuum of language or thought disturbance from schizophrenia through
mood disorder to organic disorders such as epilepsy and frontotemporal
dementia. The point that McKenna and Oh want to emphasize is that
language abnormalities in schizophrenia have a neurologic substrate,
linking the observed disturbances to aphasia, a return to the ideas that
originated with Kleist in the 20th century. Manic speech has been
analysed, and the speech and number of associations demonstrated in
flight of ideas and pressure of talk is seen in the greater number of
cohesive links occurring in manic speech. The content of depressive
speech is, of course, influenced by the mood state, and so also is the
choice of words. Sentences tend to be short and have fewer and simpler
associations, with retardation. Hysterical mutism may occur as an
abnormal reaction to stress. A man aged 35 had been unable to tolerate
the continual nagging from his wife and her two sisters who lived with
them. One day, after heavy drinking the previous evening, he smashed his
wife's furniture at home and then became mute for 24 hours. He was
eventually referred from the accident and emergency department to the
psychiatric ward, and speech returned gradually over the next 2 to 3
days without other treatment. With the phenomenon of approximate answers
(Chapter 5), the patient gives an incorrect answer to a simple question:
'How many legs has a sheep?'---'Five'. This is, according to Anderson
and Mallinson (1941), 'a false response to the examiner's question where
the answer, although wrong, indicates that the question had been
grasped'. This symptom may occur in a number of conditions, including
schizophrenia in which it is often associated with fatuous mood;
dissociative

disorder, previously designated hysterical pseudodementia (before making
such a diagnosis, the wise psychiatrist thoroughly excludes an organic
cause); Ganser's syndrome; and other organic conditions. Eccentric and
pedantic use of words may sometimes be seen in those with anankastic
personality; obsessionality obtrudes into the choice of words and
construction of sentences. STATISTICAL MODEL OF LANGUAGE The Cloze
procedure involves deleting words from the transcripts of speech and
assessing whether the omitted word can be predicted. Maher considered
that, in schizophrenia, the greater the severity of the illness, the
greater is the degree of unpredictability of the utterance of language.
In normal speech, a large part of every sentence could be omitted
without losing the meaning. For example, if the words 'a ... part ...
could be ... the' were omitted from the last sentence, the meaning would
still be obvious; if letters were omitted from words, for instance nrml
spech, the meaning is still clear. Predictability is the ability to
predict the missing words accurately; in this sense, patients with
schizophrenia are unpredictable in their speech. They are likely to use
unexpected words and phrases. In the perception of language, the patient
with schizophrenia is less able to gain information from the
redundancies, both semantic and syntactic, in everyday speech. A
sophistication of the Cloze procedure has been investigated by Newby
(1998). This involves the following: •  The modified Cloze procedure in
which the nature of the inserted word is noted, such as its part of
speech. •  In the reverse Cloze procedure, thought-­ disordered patients
were asked to make sense of a script that had been mutilated by
instituting the Cloze procedure, for example, by deleting every fourth
or fifth word. Patients with schizophrenia performed significantly worse
than a control group of orthopaedic patients, with manic-­depressive
patients intermediate on both modified and reverse Cloze procedures.
Schizophrenic speech is considered less predictable than normal speech,
and lack of predictability is more marked with clinically manifest
thought disorder (Manschreck et al., 1979). An experiment was carried

10

out using the Cloze procedure in which raters were asked to assess
passages of schizophrenic or normal speech with the fourth or fifth word
deleted. With fifth word deletion, thought-­disordered schizophrenic
speech was significantly less predictable than normal or
nonthought-­disordered schizophrenic speech; this latter was no less
predictable than normal speech. Whether schizophrenic speech is really
less redundant than normal has been questioned by Rutter (1979), who was
able to demonstrate no difference. The view that schizophrenic language
can be reduced to such simple mathematical rules has been rejected by
Mandelbrot (1968). But studies using this technique continue, even if
sporadically, and demonstrate that the speech and language of patients
with psychosis may be less predictable than that of controls (Adewuya
and Adewuya, 2006). The type:token ratio is a measure of the number of
different words compared with the total number of words used by a
speaker (Zipf, 1935). Maher concluded that the type:token ratio of
schizophrenic patients was lower than for normal subjects. The tendency
of schizophrenic patients to repeat certain words and use them in an
idiosyncratic way is referred to as the use of stock words. LINGUISTIC
APPROACHES TO SCHIZOPHRENIA Various linguistic theories have been
applied to schizophrenia (for a full discussion, see McKenna and Oh,
2005). These methods of analysis of schizophrenic language are tentative
and do not yet cover the range of abnormalities occurring in the
condition. Chomsky (1959) proposed that humans are able to use strings
and combinations of words they have never heard before through use of a
limited set of integrative processes and generalized patterns. However,
Moore and Carling (1982) have labelled Chomskyan linguistics a container
view of language, separated from the real way users of language apply it
to their own meanings and contexts. Individual case studies have used
tape-­ recorded interviews with patients with schizophrenia to
demonstrate distinctive abnormalities. However, on closer analysis, such
abnormalities are often found to occur in the speech of normal people,
although less frequently. A further study of bilingual patients showed
psychotic symptoms to be present in their native language but absent in
their second language.

Disorder of Speech and Language

167

The problem of individual studies is, of course, the extent to which
they can be generalized to all patients with schizophrenia. Syntactical
Analysis

In studies of speech analysed for syntax, compared with manic and normal
controls, patients with schizophrenia showed less complex speech, fewer
well-­ formed sentences, more semantic and syntactic errors and less
fluency. There were also marked use of paraphrasias, agrammatisms,
anomia, pronoun word problems, circumlocutions, etc. These problems
seemed to be associated with a general intellectual impairment (McKenna
and Oh, 2005). Such studies do not, of course, justify the conclusion
that differences are due directly to the disease or to thought disorder,
nor does it take into account the social context or emotional aspects.
However, marked differences are of interest when one considers that the
majority of patients with schizophrenia do not show overt disorder of
language. Propositional Analysis

This is a form of textual analysis in which the text is broken down into
its component propositions, and these are then represented
diagrammatically to show the 'mental geometry' (Hoffman et al., 1982).
Normal speech is considered to proceed as in a single tree diagram with
all branches leading from a single key proposition, but psychotic speech
more often breaks the 'rules' of propositional relationships. Observers,
listening to the speech of patients with schizophrenia, are often struck
with its oddity and deviance. It has been considered by Chaika (1995)
that this is not purely a deficit of syntax but more a phenomenon like
severe and repeated slips of the tongue, in which the error is a lapse
of executive control, a lapse of volition. It has been shown by Morice
(1995) that with increasing complexity of syntax there is an increase in
the number of errors in the speech of patients with schizophrenia;
speakers expressing very simple sentences made relatively few errors.
One of his patients expressed this: 'and communicating ordinarily I can
get lost in the chaos of the language'. This finding was confirmed by
Thomas and Leudar (1995) using the Hunt test, a written test in which
subjects produce syntactically complex sentences from simple input
phrases. Communication-­ disordered

168

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

patients with schizophrenia made more errors than
noncommunication-­disordered patients with schizophrenia or normal
controls, and these errors were more likely to occur with more complex
syntactic structures. The patients were therefore thought to have a
discrete failure of language processing that was distinct from the more
general cognitive disorders of the condition. Although these methods are
still experimental, the patient's use of language and syntax does enable
a quantitative method of evaluating the mental state and subjective
experience to be developed. Study of language disorder should be an area
in which descriptive psychopathology can contribute to psychiatric
research. REFERENCES Adewuya, O.A., Adewuya, A.O., 2006. Predictability
of speech and language in Nigerian patients with psychosis: a controlled
study. Psychiatry Res. 143, 199--204. Allen, H.A., 1984. Positive and
negative symptoms and the thematic organisation of schizophrenic speech.
Br. J. Psychiatry 144, 611--617. Anderson, W.E., Mallinson, W.P., 1941.
Psychogenic episodes in the course of major psychoses. J. Ment. Sci. 87,
383--396. Andreasen, N.C., 1979. Thought, language and communication
disorder. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 36, 1315--1330. Beveridge, A., 1985.
Language Disorder in Schizophrenia. MPhil Thesis. University of
Edinburgh. Bleuler, E., 1911. Dementia Praecox: Or the Group of
Schizophrenias. International University Press, New York. Cameron, N.,
1944. Experimental analysis of schizophrenic thinking. In: Kasanin, J.
(Ed.), Language and Thought in Schizophrenia. University of California
Press, Berkeley. Carterette, G., Friedman, M.P., 1976. Handbook of
Perception. Language and Speech, vol. VII. Academic Press, New York.
Chaika, E., 1995. On analyzing schizophrenic speech: what model should
we use? In: Sims, A.C.P. (Ed.), Speech and Language Disorders in
Psychiatry. Gaskell, London. Chapman, L.J., Chapman, J.P., Miller, G.A.,
1964. A theory of verbal behaviour in schizophrenia. In: Maher, B.A.
(Ed.), Progress in Experimental Personality Research, vol. 1. Academic
Press, New York. Chomsky, N., 1959. Review of Skinner. Language 35,
26--58. Chomsky, N., 1986. Knowledge of Language: Its Nature, Origin and
Use. Praeger, New York. Critchley, E.M.R., 1995. Growth points in the
neurology of speed and language. In: Sims, A.C.P. (Ed.), Speech and
Language Disorders in Psychiatry. Gaskell, London. Critchley, M., 1964.
The neurology of psychotic speech. Br. J. Psychiatry 110, 353--364.
Crow, T.J., 1997. Is schizophrenia the price that Homo sapiens pays for
language? Schizophr. Res. 28, 127--141. David, A.S., Fleminger, S.,
Kopelman, M.D., Lovestone, S., Mellers, J.D.C., 2007. Lishman's Organic
Psychiatry: A Textbook of Neuropsychiatry. Wiley-­Blackwell, Chichester.

Gardner, G.E., 1931. The measurement of psychotic age: a preliminary
report. Am. J. Psychiatry 10, 963--975. Goldstein, K., 1944.
Methodological approach to the study of schizophrenic thought disorder.
In: Kasanin, J.S. (Ed.), Language and Thought in Schizophrenia.
University of California Press, Berkeley. Hamilton, M., 1974. Fish's
Clinical Psychopathology: Signs and Symptoms in Psychiatry. John Wright,
Bristol. Hoffman, R.E., Kirstein, L., Stopek, S., Cicchetti, D.V., 1982.
Apprehending schizophrenic discourse: a structural analysis of the
listener's task. Brain Lang. 15, 207--233. Jackson, J.H., 1932. Selected
Writings of John Hughlings Jackson. Hodder and Stoughton, London.
Kleist, K., 1914. Aphasie und Geisteskrankheit. Munch Med. Wochenschr.
61, 8. Kraepelin, E., 1919. Dementia Praecox and Paraphasia (B.M.
Barclay, Trans). Livingstone, Edinburgh. Lishman, W.A., 1997. Organic
Psychiatry: The Psychological Consequences of Cerebral Disorder, third
ed. Blackwell, Oxford. Maher, B.A., 1972. The language of schizophrenia:
a review and interpretation. Br. J. Psychiatry 120, 3--17. Mandelbrot,
B., 1968. Information theory and psycholinguistics. In: Oldfield, R.C.,
Marshall, J.C. (Eds.), Language. Penguin Books, London. 1968.
Manschreck, T.C., Maher, B.A., Rucklos, M.E., White, M.T., 1979. The
predictability of thought-­disordered speech in schizophrenic patients.
Br. J. Psychiatry 134, 595--601. McKenna, P., Oh, T., 2005.
Schizophrenia Speech: Making Sense of Bathroots and Ponds that Fall in
Doorways. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Moore, T., Carling, C.,
1982. Understanding Language: Towards a Post-­Chomskyan Linguistics.
Macmillan, London. Morice, R., 1995. Language impairments and executive
dysfunction in schizophrenia. In: Sims, A.C.P. (Ed.), Speech and
Language Disorders in Psychiatry. Gaskell, London. Mundt, C., 1995.
Concepts of schizophrenic language disorder and reality assessment in
German psychopathology. In: Sims, A.C.P. (Ed.), Speech and Language
Disorders in Psychiatry. Gaskell, London. Newby, D., 1998. 'Cloze'
procedure refined and modified: 'modified Cloze', 'reverse Cloze' and
the use of predictability as a measure of communication problems in
psychosis. Br. J. Psychiatry 172, 136--141. Newby, D.A., 1995. Analysis
of language: terminology and techniques. In: Sims, A.C.P. (Ed.), Speech
and Language Disorders in Psychiatry. Gaskell, London. Payne, R.W.,
Matussek, P., George, E.I., 1959. An experimental study of schizophrenic
thought disorder. J. Ment. Sci. 105, 627--652. Pinker, S., 1994. The
Language Instinct. Penguin Books, London. Rutter, D.R., 1979. The
reconstruction of schizophrenic speech. Br. J. Psychiatry 134, 356--359.
Scharfetter, C., 1980. General Psychopathology: An Introduction.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Thomas, P., Leudar, I., 1995.
Syntactic processing and communication disorder in first onset
schizophrenia. In: Sims, A.C.P. (Ed.), Speech and Language Disorders in
Psychiatry. Gaskell, London. Von Domarus, E., 1944. The specific laws of
logic in schizophrenia. In: Kasanin, J.S. (Ed.), Language and Thought in
Schizophrenia. University of California Press, Berkeley. Zipf, G.K.,
1935. The Psychobiology of Language. Houghton Mifflin, Boston.

Chapter 11

Insight Chapter Outline Summary Insight in Clinical Practice Overview of
the Concept Development of the Concept Measurement of Insight
Schizophrenia Insight and Cognitive Impairment Outcome Bipolar Disorders
Criticisms of the Concept Aetiology of Impaired Insight

KEYWORDS Insight Self-­awareness Self-­monitoring Theory of mind

Summary Insight, in psychiatry, refers to the capacity of the patient to
recognize that their mental symptoms are indicative of mental illness
and that these symptoms require treatment. It is now known to be
associated with impaired cognitive function and predicts poor compliance
with treatment, compulsory admission and coercive treatment in hospital.
The underlying neural mechanism of poor insight is starting to be
illuminated and is linked more widely to deficits in self-­awareness,
self-­monitoring, empathy and theory of mind: A man who knows who and
what he is, his position in the world, and what the persons and things
are around him; who judges according to known, or intelligible rules;
and who, if he has singular ideas or singular habits, can give a reason
for his opinions and his conduct; a man who, however wrong he may act,
is not misled by any uncontrollable impulse or passion; who does not
idly squander his means; who knows the legal consequences of his
actions; who can distinguish between unseemly and seemly behaviour, who
feels that which is proper and that which is improper to utter,
according to the circumstances in which he is placed; and who reverences
the subject and the ministers of religion; a man who, if he cannot
always regulate his thoughts and his temper and his actions, is not
continually in the extremes, and if he errs, errs as much from
benevolence and hesitation, as from passion and excitement, and more
frequently: lastly, a man who can receive reproof, and acknowledge when
he has needed correction. John Perceval (1840)

169

170

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Self-­awareness is a basic human ability. It refers to the ability to
recognize one's own existence and experience and the existence and
experience of others. It includes the facility for monitoring the events
in one's own life and the ability to make decisions about the future on
the basis of that knowledge. Furthermore, it involves the ability to
communicate this awareness of self and others to other human beings
(Marková, 1987). This characteristically human ability is partly the
subject of Sophocles' (496--406 bce) Oedipus the King, in which Oedipus'
quest for self-­ knowledge resulted in his discovery that he had killed
his own father and fathered children by his own mother. The aphorism
'Know Thyself' is said to have been inscribed at the forecourt of the
Temple to Apollo at Delphi and in The Apology, Socrates (470--399 bce)
says, 'The unexamined life is not worth living for a human being'. These
references to self-­knowledge in antiquity underline the place of this
notion in human life. Self-­awareness obviously takes in much more than
an awareness of illness, but it is plain that the psychiatric notion of
insight is a subset of the general concept of self-­awareness or
self-­knowledge. Insight, as a notion, is much wider than just knowing
whether one is ill, and if so, having a sensible view regarding
treatment. It involves our capacities for introspection, empathy and
communication; not only is it glimpsing ourselves as we really are but
also ourselves as others see us, and therefore others as they really are
because they go through the same repertoire of mental mechanisms that we
do. Even for the most private and internal of insights, what might be
termed our social awareness, the capacity for relationships, for
empathy, and knowing and understanding how our behaviour will affect the
emotions and experience of other people is important. Insight is the
direct product of knowing ourselves. It is a quality that has been
highly valued by most mental health clinicians, because a strong link is
assumed between having insight and have better quality of life and a
more fulfilling life (McGorry and McConville, 1999). Although, in
psychiatry, we concentrate mostly on the narrow meaning of insight with
regard to mental illness, we need to retain this broader concept. Often,
our work with patients involves us having insight into their thinking
and behaviour because of our capacity for empathy as fellow human beings
and also helping

them gain insight into themselves and the roots of their problems. The
relationship between this capacity for insight in a general sense and
the practical issues of treatment is close. A physician suffering from
delusional disorder advertised and sold magnets for the medical
treatment of arthritis and hay fever. They strongly believed that this
form of treatment was of unequalled value for virtually all medical
conditions, and they had physically assaulted a pharmacist who had tried
to persuade them otherwise. They decried the validity of the whole of
psychiatry, 'because I am a scientist and everything has to be proved
with evidence'. Because of their lack of insight into their own
condition and the nature of their beliefs, it was impossible to initiate
treatment. Their symptoms persisted long term. Jaspers (1997) has
written about the patient's attitude to their illness under the
following headings: 1. Understandable attitudes to the sudden onset of
acute psychosis (perplexity, awareness of change) 2. Working through the
effects of acute psychoses 3. Working through the illness in chronic
states 4. The patient's judgement of their illness 5. The determination
to fall ill 6. The attitude to one's own illness: its meaning and
possible implications All these points, and especially 3, 4 and 6,
involve the process of insight, the knowledge of oneself with particular
reference to illness. A person who becomes seriously and suddenly ill,
whatever the nature of the illness, after previously having been fit for
many years, is astonished by their change of health status. Such a
person is likely to undergo a profound change in self and body image.
They have become a person who, from being healthy and seeing illness as
something that happens to other people, now sees themself as potentially
frail and vulnerable. This can be personally enriching and is not
necessarily a wholly negative experience.

Insight in Clinical Practice So that they can better help their patient
with a possible mental illness, the psychiatrist asks specific questions
about the patient's opinions concerning their illness. These include
their degree of acknowledgement of

11 Insight

illness, their attitudes to illness, their understanding of the effects
of their illness on their current capabilities and future prospects. All
this adds up to the assessment of insight into their condition. Insight
is not an absolute; it can vary in its impairment with different facets
of the condition; for example, a patient could have some limited
understanding concerning their unlikelihood to obtain a job compatible
with their qualifications but virtually no understanding as to how their
psychotic symptoms interfere with relationships. Thus insight is now not
considered to be an all-­or-­none phenomenon in either clinical evaluation
or measurement, but rather a dimensional one so that subjects can have
different levels of awareness of their illness (Surguladze and David,
1999). All mental illnesses will alter the patient's worldview and
capacity to cope with circumstances. Assessment of insight measures the
awareness of this change by the patient and their ability to adapt to
the change. Insight is highly complex as a function. It is the
understanding of the individual about their own state of health,
capacity and worth; it also relates this assessment of internal state to
other people and the world outside. In other words, insight requires
both inner and outer orientation. This aspect of insight becomes more
apparent later in this chapter, in the discussion of the contribution of
Gestalt psychology to the conceptualization of insight. Insight in
Gestalt psychology is oriented towards problem solving in the external
world, whereas insight in clinical practice is inner-­directed. David
(1990) regards insight as composed of three distinct, overlapping
dimensions: the recognition of morbid psychological change, the
labelling of this change as deriving from mental illness and the
understanding that this change requires treatment that needs to be
complied with. An assessment schedule was constructed for determining
the nature of insight and quantitative loss of insight correlated with
the degree of psychopathology (David et al., 1992). One of the most
frustrating aspects of practising psychiatry is, from the point of view
of the treating professional, the apparent inability of patients to
recognize and/or admit that they are mentally ill. Patients, especially
those with schizophrenia, often deny that their experiences are abnormal
and that they are unwell. Daniel Schreber (1842--1911) described his
attitude towards his auditory verbal hallucinations

171

in his book Memoirs of My Nervous Illness (Schreber, 1955) as follows: I
noticed therefore with interest that according to Kraepelin's TEXTBOOK
OF PSYCHIATRY (5th edition, Leipzig, 1896, p. 110 ff) which had been
lent to me, the phenomenon of being in some supernatural communication
with voices had frequently been observed before in human beings whose
nerves were in a state of morbid excitation. I do not dispute that in
many of these cases one may be dealing with mere hallucinations, as
which they are treated in the mentioned textbook. In my opinion science
would go very wrong to designate as 'hallucinations' all such phenomena
that lack objective reality, and to throw them into the lumber room of
things that do not exist. Furthermore, Schreber continues: Science seems
to deny any reality background for hallucinations ... In my opinion this
is definitely erroneous, at least if so generalized. These quotations
from Daniel Schreber demonstrate one of the most complex aspects of the
nature of insight. This is the capacity to have an attitude towards
abnormal experiences in others where one can recognize them as
pathologic, but to deny the abnormality of the experience in oneself and
to designate it as not being evidence of mental illness. This is the
so-­called double book-­keeping. The resulting refusal to cooperate with
treatment and rehabilitation causes long-­term suffering for the patients
and their carers. It is this capacity of patients to understand their
own illness that is evaluated clinically in insight. Like many other
concepts, terminological confusion exists, with textbooks describing
insight as the patient's capacity to form judgements about their own
illness and mental state. In recent years, there has been a resurgence
of interest in the concept with attempts to define it reliably and
quantifiably and to study its correlates (Kumar and Sims, 1998).

Overview of the Concept The attitude of the patient towards their
illness has obvious clinical implications, and insight tries to

172

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

assess the awareness of the patient concerning the impact their illness
has had on their life and their capacity to adapt to the changes brought
about by it. As a function, it is highly complex and has to do with an
individual's evaluation of their self and nonself and their relatedness
(see Chapter 12). In clinical practice, only certain aspects are given
importance, such as the patient's awareness of illness and compliance
with prescribed treatment. The assessment of insight assumes more
importance in psychosis, as the incongruence between the patient's and
others' view of their illness often leads to difficulties with
treatment. The convention in psychiatry is that insight is unimpaired in
nonpsychotic conditions, but it can be seen that a broader view nearer
to the lexical definition is relevant when neurotic symptoms hamper the
full realization of a person's potential. DEVELOPMENT OF THE CONCEPT
Contributions to the development of the concept of insight derive from
psychopathology, Gestalt psychology and psychoanalysis. In Gestalt
psychology, insight is conceived as a sudden, unexpected solution to a
problem. According to Marková (2005), the 'suddenness' specifies an
abrupt solution to a problem, the 'unexpectedness' refers to the
surprise element of the event and the term solution to a problem signals
the discreteness of the event in time. In essence, in Gestalt
psychology, insight is by definition related to a specific task, a
problem that stands in need of solution in the external world.
Furthermore, there has been extensive debate within Gestalt psychology
about the nature of insight, whether it is a unique human facility that
is also a specific cognitive skill. The fact that, in Gestalt
psychology, insight refers to a problem in the external world
distinguishes it from the concept of insight in clinical practice. In
clinical practice, insight focuses on understanding of changes or
happenings within an individual. For Jaspers (1997), typically the
patient's attitude to their illness involves 'an awareness of illness'
in which the patient 'expresses a feeling of being ill and changed, but
there is no extension of this awareness to all his symptoms nor to the
illness as a whole. It does not involve any objectively correct estimate
of the severity of the illness nor any objectively correct judgement of
its particular type'. For Jaspers, 'only when all this is

present and there has been a correct judgement of all the symptoms and
the illness as a whole according to type and severity, can we speak of
insight \[emphasis in original\]'. Thus for Jaspers, insight becomes
manifest only when the patient is able to turn away from the content of
their psychic experiences towards making a judgement about it and
inquiring into its causes and reasons. Lewis' (1934) definition of
insight as 'a correct attitude to morbid change in oneself' is a
restatement of Jaspers' description of insight. Freud (1981) used the
term insight to denote knowledge of illness but, on the whole, in
psychoanalytic therapy the development of a deeper awareness of self is
considered to be the goal of treatment. This is another way of saying
that in psychoanalysis, insight refers to knowledge and understanding of
one's unconscious mental processes. This is a more complex notion of
insight because it involves the patient acquiring understanding of the
unconscious motivations of their behaviour and, in the light of Freud's
structure of the mind, it suggests a degree of depth of understanding.
David (1990) has proposed that insight is composed of the three
overlapping dimensions described earlier. It has been suggested that
parallels can be drawn between the loss of insight in psychiatric
patients and the loss of awareness of disease of parts of the body in
certain neurologic conditions. In cortical blindness, left-­sided
hemiplegia after stroke and amnesic syndrome, lack of awareness of
disease is well recognized. The term anosognosia was coined by Babinski
(1857--1932) to refer to the unawareness or denial of hemiplegia seen in
patients after a stroke. There is a difference, however, between the
lack of insight seen in psychiatry and the lack of awareness seen in
neurologic disease. In psychiatry, lack of insight is often attended by
a wider loss of judgement beyond merely the symptoms or their
implications for the patient. In neurologic cases, the lack of awareness
is focused on a discrete disability. Nonetheless, even though the lack
of insight in psychiatry and lack of awareness of disease in neurology
are not identical, it may be that comparisons may point to possible
neurobiological bases that they share in common. There is increasing
interest in cognitive insight as opposed to clinical insight. Cognitive
insight is a term derived from the work of Beck et al. (2004) and refers
to a combination of self-­reflection and the ability to

11 Insight

question one's own conclusions. Cognitive insight is a core feature of
metacognition, an aspect of cognition, which enables the ability to
reflect on one's own thoughts, intentions, emotions and beliefs. It is
an aspect of cognition that is fundamental to critical self-­appraisal.
Thus concepts of cognitive insight and metacognition are related to
clinical insight, but wider. On the face of it, these ought to be
predictably related, but empirical evidence of significant association
is inconsistent (Pijnenborg et al., 2020). There are certain philosophic
problems when we consider insight in patients with psychosis. People
without any psychiatric illness vary in their ability to know themselves
and the consequences of their personalities. Because at least some
conceptualizations of psychosis rely on the lack of insight as a
defining feature, discussion concerning the concept can become circular.
Added to this is the fact that varying degrees of insight can occur and
that nonverbalization of insight may be different from the lack of it.
Yet another problem is that a possibly specious model in which a
'normal' part of the mind is capable of passing judgement on the
'abnormality' of another part has to be entertained. This works for as
long as the clinician recognizes that it is merely a way of speaking,
not necessarily an accurate representation of how self-­monitoring takes
place. As David (2020) has suggested, the notion of cognitive insight,
at least, makes it possible to start to conceive of clinical insight in
the context of normal psychological processes, thereby expanding our
comprehension of how impaired insight arises in the context of illness.
MEASUREMENT OF INSIGHT Earlier attempts to measure insight centred on
its role in psychodynamic therapies. Tolor and Reznikoff (1960)
developed a test using hypothetical situations based on common defence
mechanisms and found a correlation with intelligence. This test was used
by Roback and Abramowitz (1979), who found a correlation in those with
schizophrenia between greater subjective distress and better behavioural
adjustment. The validity of this test for general clinical work is
affected by the concept of insight being based on psychodynamic rather
than psychopathologic features.

173

Any reliable and valid measure of insight in clinical practice should be
based on the following four assumptions: • insight is complex and
multidimensional, • cultural factors need to be taken into account, •
the level of insight can vary across the many manifestations of mental
illnesses, and • information about the nature of a person's illness from
situations other than the interview should be taken into account
(McGorry and McConville, 1999). McEvoy et al. (1989a) developed a
questionnaire to measure insight, defined as the patient's awareness of
the pathologic nature of their experiences and also their agreement with
the treating professionals about the need for treatment. The Insight and
Treatment Attitudes Questionnaire (ITAQ) is a validated 11-­item,
semi-­structured interview that generates a score from 0 (no insight) to
22 (maximum insight). Using this questionnaire, they found no
correlation with aspects of acute psychopathology. The Schedule for
Assessment of Insight in Psychosis was published in 1992 (David et al.,
1992) in which, apart from the recognition of mental illness and
compliance with treatment, the ability to re-­label unusual mental events
as pathologic was also included. There were seven items with a maximum
possible score of 14 and an additional item on hypothetical
contradiction. The Scale to Assess Unawareness of Mental Disorder
(Amador and Strauss, 1993) is a much more comprehensive scale with six
general items and four subscales, from which 10 summary scores can be
calculated. Other scales available are the Global Insight Scale
(Greenfield et al., 1989) and the self-­reported Insight Scale for
Psychosis (Birchwood et al., 1994). The scale by Marková and Berrios
(1991) is more directed to evaluating aspects of self-­awareness and less
to clinical definition of insight with regard to illness. This is also
true for the Beck Cognitive Insight Scale (Beck et al., 2004) that
measures a wider notion of insight, encompassing patients' capacity for
evaluating their anomalous experiences and their erroneous inferences.
The scale is composed of two subscales: self-­reflectiveness and
self-­certainty. Other approaches have been to use the 'lack of insight
and judgement' item of the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS;
Kay et al., 1987) as a

174

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

single global measure of insight, and the use of psychopathology
vignettes. McEvoy et al. (1993) used vignettes that cast specific
psychopathologic features in everyday language to judge whether patients
demonstrated these features and the degree to which they attributed them
to mental illness. They found that patients failed to acknowledge
negative symptoms and failed to view positive symptoms as evidence of
mental illness. From earlier impressionistic assessments of a global
nature, measurement of insight has more recently progressed to the use
of operationalized definitions and standardized instruments. Although
the different instruments might be measuring different aspects of a
complex phenomenon, there is at least the freedom to choose one to suit
specific clinical or research aims. There is an inverse correlation
between insight, the severity of psychopathology and positive affective
disturbance (Sanz et al., 1998). SCHIZOPHRENIA It is not really
surprising that most of the research work on the clinical correlates of
insight has been on patients with schizophrenia. McEvoy et al. (1989a)
reported that insight as measured by the ITAQ did not correlate with
either the severity of acute psychopathology or the changes in
psychopathology with treatment. They speculated whether the mechanisms
underlying the production of positive symptoms and disturbed insight
were independent and whether the latter was more resistant to the
effective use of neuroleptic medication. David et al. (1992) found that
the 'total insight score' in their study had a moderate inverse
correlation with the Present State Examination (Wing et al., 1974) total
score, which was an indication of the global severity of the illness.
Both David et al. (1992) and McEvoy et al. (1989b) found that, as a
group, involuntary (that is compulsorily admitted) patients have less
insight. Overall, it does appear that the relationship between poor
insight and aspects of psychopathology is not linear but complicated by
other factors, including compliance with treatment. Another approach to
investigating clinical insight in psychosis is to study help-­seeking
behaviour, which is construed as involving five steps, namely (1) the
recognition that one has a problem, (2) acting on the recognition of the
problem, (3) choosing where

to access help, (4) making contact and (5) disclosing the nature of the
problem (Nordgaard et al., 2020). In this approach, the first step in
help-­seeking behaviour involves symptom perception, symptom evaluation
and symptom interpretation. It is obvious that help-­ seeking behaviour
overlaps with aspects of clinical insight. Nordgaard et al. (2020)
report a qualitative study that demonstrates that our current notions of
clinical insight are far too narrow as it ignores contextual factors.
For example, in their study often patients recognize and identify that
there is a problem 'I worried about some of the experiences that I have
had, and I wanted to find an explanation? Is it because I'm a human
being and some human beings just have some semi-­experiences \[sic\]?'
The decision on what to do about the experiences was often determined by
the results of inquiries from others 'I asked my close friend how often
he had such experiences-­but he never did. That was unfortunate. then I
asked about other experiences, but he also didn't recognize those. It
made me sad to hear. Then I asked him if he thought I should see a
doctor and he said it was probably a good idea'. And the decision about
making contact with the identified source of help was influenced by fear
of the consequences of disclosing the recognized aberrant experiences 'I
was scared that I was going to end up in a, well, a crazy place, where
people are just yelling and screaming'. The setting of clinical insight
in the wider context of the literature on health beliefs and illness
behaviour allows for a more comprehensive account of clinical insight,
one that recognize the roles of society and culture in determining
self-­awareness and action. As Jacob (2020) argues, our notions of
clinical insight need not devalue patients' beliefs and explanations as
these are often consistent with local and culturally accepted
explanations.

Insight and Cognitive Impairment It has often been speculated that poor
insight may have a neurologic basis. Lysaker and Bell (1994) found that
subjects with impaired insight performed more poorly than subjects with
unimpaired insight on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST). They used
the PANSS item of 'lack of insight and judgement' to measure insight.
This item had been shown by factor analytical studies to be a member of
the component composed of

11 Insight

symptoms of cognitive impairment such as cognitive disorganization, poor
attention, stereotyped thinking and poor abstract thinking. However,
using a different methodology, Kemp and David (1996) failed to show a
relationship between insight and neuropsychological deficits. It is
possible that chronicity of the illness could be an additional variable,
which predisposes to cognitive impairment. David et al. (1992) had found
a relationship between aspects of insight and intellectual performance.
Cuesta et al. (1995) failed to show any relationship between insight and
poor performance on the WCST. However, the study did not use any of the
standard rating scales to measure insight. In another study, Upthegrove
et al. (2002) showed that impaired digit span as a measure of working
memory was significantly associated with insight as measured by a
standardized measure. Additionally, it is becoming clearer that insight
correlates with indices of cognitive functions including measures of
error monitoring, empathy and theory of mind (Pegaro et al., 2013;
Pijnenborg et al., 2013; Kao et al., 2013). However, on balance, the
exact nature and extent of these relationships is still unresolved. As
in other clinical situations, the relationship may not be a
straightforward one, as other variables, such as the chronicity of
illness, treatment factors and gender may be involved. OUTCOME The
relationship between insight and outcome is complex. First, greater
insight seems to predict hopelessness, depression and suicide (Ampalam
et al., 2012; Balhara and Verma, 2012; Schrank et al., 2014). Awareness
of the adverse social implications of mental illness may be the
mediating factor between insight and depression (Thomas et al., 2014).
But definitely the relationships are complex. It has been shown that
cognitive insight as opposed to merely clinical insight has a role in
mediating between distress and depression in psychosis. Clinical insight
is associated with less psychotic symptoms and better social functioning
but paradoxically associated with depression, psychological distress and
poorer subjective outcome. Cognitive insight, in particular the domain
of self-­reflexivity, on the other hand in the initial stages leads to
increased awareness of sadness and grief about the experience of
psychosis but ultimately may lead to reduced distress (García-­Mieres et
al., 2020).

175

Second, McEvoy et al. (1989c) found that patients with good insight were
significantly less likely to be rehospitalized and tended to be more
compliant with treatment 30 days after discharge; the overall
relationship between insight and outcome closely approached statistical
significance. Their measure of 'after-­ care environment', which aimed to
reflect the degree to which others' efforts were helpfully invested in
maintaining the patient in treatment, was not related to insight. Amador
and Strauss (1993) also found their measures of insight to be correlated
with the course of the illness. Related to the issue of prognosis and
outcome is compliance with treatment. The relationship between poor
insight and poor compliance with treatment has been shown by Bartko et
al. (1988), Lin et al. (1979) and McEvoy et al. (1989c). The balance of
evidence seems to be that higher levels of awareness of having an
illness are associated with better medication compliance and clinical
outcome (Amador et al., 1991) in schizophrenia. However, there is a risk
of circularity of logic, in that some of the measures of insight are
based on definitions of insight that include noncompliance. Moreover,
compliance with prescribed treatment is a much more complex phenomenon
affected by social factors and beliefs about health and sickness
(Bebbington, 1995). It is also possible that the relationship between
compliance and different aspects of insight may be different. David et
al. (1992) found that treatment compliance was not strongly related to
the ability to recognize one's own delusions and hallucinations and to
re-­label them as abnormal. It is interesting that patients may comply
with treatment, even though they do not believe themselves to be ill, if
the social milieu is conducive (McEvoy et al., 1989b, 1989c). The role
of health beliefs and illness representation in determining compliance
with treatment is recognized, but how these interact with insight to
influence treatment compliance has yet to be extensively studied. The
domains of illness representation are identity (the label of the
disease), causes (explanatory models), timeline (onset and anticipated
duration), control (belief that self can influence outcome) and
consequences (functional as well as other consequences) (Brownlee et
al., 2000). What is obvious is that insight is not the only determinant
of care-­seeking

176

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

and treatment adherence (see Nordgaard et al., 2020). McEvoy et
al. (1993) proposed that insight would improve with attempts at
psychosocial rehabilitation. This was further studied by Lysaker and
Bell (1995) on a sample of patients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia or
schizoaffective disorder. Earlier, Lysaker et al. (1994) had found
insight as measured by the item on PANSS to be correlated with poor
levels of work quality and participation in rehabilitative programmes.
In their study reported in 1995, patients enrolled in vocational
rehabilitative programmes were found to have improved insight after 5
months. This improvement was greater for patients with comparatively few
cognitive deficits, echoing their earlier findings regarding a
relationship with cognitive impairments. However, the lack of a control
group limits the generalizability of the findings. It does seem an
interesting suggestion that vocational rehabilitation can favourably
affect insight in the absence of cognitive impairment. McEvoy et al.
(1993) have proposed that enhanced self-­esteem from rehabilitation may
underlie improvement in insight. So far, the discussion has centred on
the role and influence of clinical or cognitive insight in determining
the nature and quality of outcome. Thirioux et al. (2020) have suggested
that empathy, which they conceptualize as the capacity to internally
experience the other's thoughts through a process incorporating hetero-­
centred visuospatial perspective-­ taking and embodiment, is involved
alongside cognitive insight in determining the quality of insight. This
goes to show that a concept such as clinical insight that is simple and
serviceable within the clinic may be a composite of several different
cognitive skills that is complex and irreducible to simple notions.
BIPOLAR DISORDERS Ghaemi et al. (1995) studied insight in patients in
acute mania using the ITAQ and found that improvement in insight did not
correlate with recovery from other symptoms. However, as in
schizophrenia, poor insight was correlated with involuntary admission.
Swanson et al. (1995) used the case vignette method to study insight in
two groups of patients with schizophrenia and mania. They found a
qualitative difference between mania and schizophrenia in that patients
with schizophrenia but not mania had reduced awareness of features of
their illness. However, although the

manic patients were aware of their symptoms, they did not agree that
these emanated from a mental illness. Amador et al. (1994) and
Michalakes et al. (1994), on the other hand, found no significant
difference between patients with schizophrenia and mania on measures of
insight. The former found that severely manic patients were similar to
patients with schizophrenia on scores of insight, whereas depressed and
schizoaffective patients had more insight. In conclusion, it seems to be
that both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder patients have impaired
insight, and the mediating factors may be severity of symptoms and
cognitive impairment, especially working memory impairment (Varga et
al., 2007). CRITICISMS OF THE CONCEPT The recent resurgence of interest
in insight has had its share of criticism. Medical anthropologists have
criticized the concept of insight for failing to recognize that people
can have various culturally shaped frameworks to explain their
illnesses, all possibly valid. From this point of view, the concept of
insight is 'Eurocentric and essentially arrogant' (Perkins and Moodley,
1993), as it dictates that patients should, apart from agreeing that
they are mentally ill and requiring treatment, also agree to reconstruct
their experiences within the terms and concepts of Western psychiatry.
Johnson and Orrell (1995) have reviewed work by social scientists on
cultural and social variations in lay perceptions of mental illness and
argue that these would influence insight. Social and cultural
backgrounds influence perceptions of stigma from mental illness and the
congruence of the patients with Western medical views of mental illness.
The ability to re-­label mental phenomena as abnormal may be less
influenced by social factors compared with beliefs about the causation
of mental illness. Although there are few studies in this area, evidence
seems to be emerging that social and cultural factors are important in
the diagnosis of poor insight. For example, differences in the ethnic
background of the psychiatrist and the patient appear to influence the
judgement of the former about insight (Johnson and Orrell, 1996).
AETIOLOGY OF IMPAIRED INSIGHT Attempts to explain the causation of poor
insight have focused on three hypotheses (Amador et al.,

11 Insight

1991; Lysaker and Bell, 1994). The first two focus on putative
psychological mechanisms. It has been suggested that refusal to take
prescribed medication, implying poor insight, is a wilful preference for
the experience of psychotic phenomenology over drug-­ induced normality.
The second formulation suggests that patients deny illness at a
psychological level to help them cope with normal life as they recover
from a psychosis. A third explanation has suggested that poor insight
may have something to do with cognitive impairment, drawing on
similarities with neurologic conditions such as anosognosia. As
mentioned earlier, studies have found a significant correlation between
impaired performance on the WCST and poor insight, suggesting that
cognitive impairments resulting from frontal lobe deficits may underlie
poor insight in schizophrenia. A fourth explanation is that disruption
of neural mechanisms and networks underlying self-­ and other-­monitoring
are involved. In a 2012 study, patients with schizophrenia demonstrated
less activation in the posterior cingulate cortex in the self-­and
other-­reflection conditions and less activation in the precuneus in the
other-­reflection condition compared with healthy controls. Better
insight was associated with greater response in the inferior frontal
gyrus, anterior insula and inferior parietal lobule during self-­
reflection. In addition, better cognitive insight was associated with
higher activation in ventromedial prefrontal cortex during
self-­reflection (van der Meer et al., 2013). More recently, there is the
suggestion that symptom unawareness may be distinct from symptom
misattribution and that this distinction may be underpinned by differing
neurobiology as demonstrated by functional magnetic resonance imaging
investigation (Shad and Keshavan, 2015). Clearly, there is still much to
learn about the true nature of insight. In the advent of the distinction
between clinical and cognitive insight, there has been increasing
interest in determining the underlying neural substrate for these
distinct types of insight in psychosis. Pijnenborg et al. (2020) report
from their systematic review and meta-­analysis that poorer clinical
insight was related to smaller whole brain grey matter and white matter
volume and grey matter volume of the frontal gyri. Cognitive insight, on
the other hand, was positively correlated with structure and function of
the hippocampus and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex. In

177

essence, clinical insight is a reflection of spatially diffuse global
and frontal abnormalities suggesting that clinical insight relies not on
simple or discrete brain regions, but on a range of cognitive processes.
They conclude that clinical insight is a complex construct with several
partly overlapping dimensions that may be associated with functioning
over several overlapping brain areas. These may involve error monitoring
and correction, working memory and cognitive flexibility, and the
ability to use explicit feedback of others to improve task performance.
Finally, higher order social cognitive and self-­oriented processes such
as self-­reflectiveness, affective mentalizing and empathy may be
involved. REFERENCES Amador, X.F., Strauss, D.H., Yale, S.A., 1991.
Awareness of illness in schizophrenia. Schizophr. Bull. 17, 113--132.
Amador, X.F., Strauss, D.H., 1993. Assessment of insight in psychosis.
Am. J. Psychiatry. 150, 873--879. Amador, X.F., Flum, M., Andreasen,
N.C., 1994. Awareness of illness in schizophrenia and schizoaffective
and mood disorders. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry. 51, 826--836. Ampalam, P.,
Deepthi, R., Vadaparty, P., 2012. Schizophrenia---insight, depression: a
correlation study. Ind. J. Psychol. Med. 34, 44--48. Balhara, Y.P.,
Verma, R., 2012. Schizophrenia and suicide. East Asia Arch. Psychiatry.
22, 126--133. Bartko, G., Herzog, I., Zador, G., 1988. Clinical
symptomatology and drug compliance in schizophrenic patients. Acta
Psychiatr. Scand. 77, 74--76. Bebbington, P.E., 1995. The context of
compliance. Int. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 9 (Suppl. 5), 45--50. Beck,
A.T., Baruch, E., Balter, J.M., Steer, R.A., Warman, D.M., 2004. A new
instrument for measuring insight: the Beck Cognitive Insight Scale.
Schizophr. Res. 68, 319--329. Birchwood, M., Smith, J., Drury, V., 1994.
A self-­report insight scale for psychosis; reliability, validity, and
sensitivity to change. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 89, 62--67. Brownlee, S.,
Leventhal, H., Leventhal, E.A., 2000. Regulation, self-­regulation, and
construction of the self in the maintenance of physical health. In:
Boekartz, M., Pintrich, P.R., Zeidner, M. (Eds.), Handbook of
Self-­Regulation. Academic Press, San Diego. Cuesta, M.J., Peralta, V.,
Caro, F., 1995. Is poor insight in psychotic disorders associated with
poor performance on the Wisconsin card sorting test? Am. J. Psychiatry.
152, 1380--1382. David, A.S., 1990. Insight and psychosis. Br. J.
Psychiatry. 156, 798--808. David, A.S., 2020. Insight and psychosis: the
next 30 years. Br. J. Psychiatry. 217 (3), 521--523. David, A.S.,
Buchanan, A., Reed, A., Almeida, O., 1992. The assessment of insight in
psychosis. Br. J. Psychiatry. 161, 599--602. Freud, A., 1981. Insight:
its presence and absence as a factor in normal development. In: Solint,
A.J., Eissler, R.S., Freud, A. (Eds.), The Psychoanalytic Study of the
Child, vol. 36. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.

178

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

García-­Mieres, H., De Jesús-­Romero, R., IDENTITY group, Ochoa, S.,
Feixas, G., 2020. Beyond the cognitive insight paradox: self-­
reflectivity moderates the relationship between depressive symptoms and
general psychological distress in psychosis. Schizophr. Res. 8 (222),
297--303. Ghaemi, S.N., Stoll, A.L., Pope, H.G., 1995. Lack of insight
in bipolar disorder: the acute manic episode. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 183,
464--467. Greenfield, D., Strauss, J.S., Bowers, M.B., 1989. Insight and
interpretation of illness in recovery from psychosis. Schizophr. Bull.
15, 245--252. Jacob, K.S., 2020. Insight in psychosis: a critical review
of the contemporary confusion. Asian J. Psychiatr. 48, 101921. Jaspers,
K., 1997. General Psychopathology. J. Hoenig, M.W. Hamilton, Trans. The
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. Johnson, S., Orrell, M.,
1995. Insight and psychosis: a social perspective. Psychol. Med. 25,
515--520. Johnson, S., Orrell, M., 1996. Insight, psychosis and
ethnicity: a case-­note study. Psychol. Med. 26, 1081--1084. Kao, Y.C.,
Liu, Y.P., Lien, Y.J., et al., 2013. The influence of sex on cognitive
insight and neurocognitive functioning in schizophrenia. Prog.
Neuro-­Psychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry. 44, 193--200. Kay, S.,
Fiszbein, A., Opler, L., 1987. The positive and negative syndrome scale
(PANSS) for schizophrenia. Schizophr. Bull. 13, 261--276. Kemp, R.,
David, A., 1996. Psychological predictors of insight and compliance in
psychotic patients. Br. J. Psychiatry. 169, 444--450. Kumar, T.M., Sims,
A.C.P., 1998. Insight and its measurement in relation to psychosis.
Psychiatry Update. 1, 13--18. Lewis, A., 1934. The psychopathology of
insight. Br. J. Med. Psychol. 14, 332--348. Lin, I.F., Spiga, R.,
Fortsch, W., 1979. Insight and adherence to medication in chronic
schizophrenics. J. Clin. Psychiatry. 40, 430--432. Lysaker, P., Bell,
M., 1994. Insight and cognitive impairment in schizophrenia: performance
on repeated administrations of the Wisconsin card sorting test. J. Nerv.
Ment. Dis. 182, 656--660. Lysaker, P., Bell, M., 1995. Work
rehabilitation and improvements in insight in schizophrenia. J. Nerv.
Ment. Dis. 183, 103--106. Lysaker, P., Bell, M., Milstein, R.M., 1994.
Insight and treatment compliance in schizophrenia. Psychiatry 57,
289--293. Marková, I., 1987. Human Awareness: Its Social Development.
Hutchinson, London. Marková, I.S., 2005. Insight in Psychiatry.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Marková, I.S., Berrios, G.E.,
1991. The assessment of insight in clinical psychiatry: a new scale.
Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 86, 159--164. McEvoy, J.P., Apperson, L.J.,
Appelbaum, P.S., 1989a. Insight in schizophrenia: its relationship to
acute psychopathology. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 177, 43--47. McEvoy, J.P.,
Applebaum, P.S., Apperson, L.J., 1989b. Why must some schizophrenic
patients be involuntarily committed? The role of insight. Compr.
Psychiatry. 30, 13--17. McEvoy, J.P., Freter, S., Everett, G., 1989c.
Insight and the clinical outcome in schizophrenia. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis.
177, 48--51. McEvoy, J.P., Freter, S., Merritt, M., Apperson, L.J.,
1993. Insight about psychosis among outpatients with schizophrenia.
Hosp. Community Psychiatry. 44, 883--884. McGorry, P.D., McConville,
S.B., 1999. Insight in psychosis: an elusive target. Compr. Psychiatry.
40, 131--142. Michalakes, A., Skatas, C., Charalambous, A., 1994.
Insight in schizophrenia and mood disorders and its relation to
psychopathology. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 190, 46--49.

Nordgaard, J., Nilsson, L.S., Gulstad, K., Buch-­Pedersen, M., 2020. The
paradox of help-­seeking behaviour in psychosis. Psychiatr. Q. 92 (2),
549--559. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11126-­020-­ 09833-­3. Pegaro, L.F.,
Dantas, C.R., Banzato, C.E., Fuentes, D., 2013. Correlation between
insight dimensions and cognitive functions in patients with deficit or
non-­deficit schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res. 147, 91--94. Perceval, J.,
1840. A narrative of the treatment experienced by a gentleman during a
state of mental derangement to explain the causes and the nature of
insanity. In: Bateson, G. (Ed.), Perceval's Narrative: A Patient's
Account of His Psychosis. Hogarth Press, London, pp. 1830--1832.
Perkins, R., Moodley, P., 1993. The arrogance of insight? Psychiatr.
Bull. 17, 233--234. Pijnenborg, G.H., Spikman, J.M., Jeronimus, B.F.,
Aleman, A., 2013. Insight in schizophrenia. Eur. Arch. Psychiatry Clin.
Neurosci. 263, 299--307. Pijnenborg, G.H.M., Larabi, D.I., Xu, P., et
al., 2020. Brain areas associated with clinical and cognitive insight in
psychotic disorders: a systematic review and meta-­analysis. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 9 (116), 301--336. Roback, H.B., Abramowitz, S.I., 1979.
Insight and hospital adjustment. Can. J. Psychiatry. 24, 233--236. Sanz,
M., Constable, G., Lopez-­Ibor, I., Kemp, R., David, A.S., 1998. A
comparative study of insight scales and their relationship to
psychopathological and clinical variables. Psychol. Med. 28, 437--446.
Schrank, B., Amering, M., Hay, A.G., Weber, M., Sibitz, I., 2014.
Insight, positive and negative symptoms, hope, depression and self-­
stigma: a comprehensive model of mutual influences in schizophrenia
spectrum disorders. Epidemiol. Psychiatr. Sci. 23, 271--279. Schreber,
D., 1955. In: Memoirs of My Nervous Illness (I. MacAlpine, R.A. Hunter,
Trans, Edited with Introduction, Notes and Discussion). Wm. Dawson and
Sons Ltd, London. Shad, M.U., Keshavan, M.S., 2015. Neurobiology of
insight deficits in schizophrenia: an fMRI study. Schizophr. Res. 165,
220--226. Surguladze, S., David, A., 1999. Insight and major mental
illness: an update for clinicians. Adv. Psychiat. Treat. 5, 163--170.
Swanson, C.L., Freudenreich, O., McEvoy, J.P., 1995. Insight in
schizophrenia and mania. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 193, 752--755. Thirioux,
B., Harika-­ Germaneau, G., Langbour, N., Jaafari, N., 2020. The
relationship between empathy and insight in psychiatric disorders:
phenomenological, aetiological, and neuro-­ functional mechanism. Front.
Psychiatry. 10, 966. Thomas, N., Ribaux, D., Phillips, L.J., 2014.
Rumination, depressive symptoms and awareness of illness in
schizophrenia. Behav. Cogn. Psychother. 42, 143--155. Tolor, A.,
Reznikoff, M., 1960. A new approach to insight: a preliminary report. J.
Nerv. Ment. Dis. 130, 286--296. Upthegrove, R., Oyebode, F., George, M.,
Haque, M.S., 2002. Insight, social knowledge and working memory in
schizophrenia. Psychopathology 35, 341--346. van der Meer, L., de Vos,
A.E., Stiekem, A.P., et al., 2013. Insight in schizophrenia: involvement
of self-­reflection networks? Schizophr. Bull. 39, 1288--1295. Varga, M.,
Magnusson, A., Flekkoy, K., David, A.S., Opjordsmoen, S., 2007. Clinical
and neuropsychological correlates of insight in schizophrenia and
bipolar 1 disorder: does diagnosis matter? Compr. Psychiatry. 48,
583--591. Wing, J.K., Cooper, J.E., Sartorius, N., 1974. Measurement and
Classification of Psychiatric Symptoms. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Section IV

SELF AND BODY

179

This page intentionally left blank

     

Chapter 12

The Disordered Self Chapter Outline Summary Ego and Self Embodiment and
the Self Self-­Concept and Body Image Self-­Image and Nonverbal
Communication Awareness of the Body Disorders of Self Disorder of Being
or Ego Vitality Disorder of Activity Disorder of Singleness or Ego
Consistency and Coherence Disorder of Identity Disorder of the
Boundaries of Self or Ego Demarcation

KEYWORDS Ego Body image Self-­image Autoscopy Possession state

Summary The self is a construct that has changed in meaning and
significance over the years. There are five putative, formal
characteristics of the self: ego vitality, ego activity, unity of the
self over time, self-­identity and boundary of the self. These formal
aspects of the self can be impaired by psychiatric disorders. The sense
of vitality can be impaired to produce a feeling of deadness, the
extreme example being nihilistic delusions. In disorder of activity the
'my-­ness' of actions, the sense of being an agent enacting one's will in
the world, can be disrupted as occurs in passivity experiences. The
unity of the self over time is markedly affected in autoscopy and
dissociative identity disorders. Additionally, disorder of self-­identity
is illustrated by possession states and phenomena such as lycanthropy.
Finally, abnormalities of the distinction between self and nonself
(disturbance of boundary) are central to our understanding of such
diverse experiences in schizophrenia as passivity experiences, thought
insertion and thought withdrawal. Often, when I was alone, I sat down on
this stone, and then began an imaginary game that went something like
this: 'I am sitting on top of this stone and it is underneath'. But the
stone also could say 'I' and think: 'I am lying here on this slope and
he is sitting on top of me'. The question then arose: 'Am I the one who
is sitting on the stone, or am I the stone on which he is sitting?' This
question always perplexed me, and I would stand up, wondering who was
what now. Jung (1963)

181

182

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

The self was never meant to be a solid object like a stone, a horse, or
a weed, nor even a concept to be considered as semantically tantamount
to changes in blood flow or test scores. Of course, patients with
disordered minds do sport hurting, afflicted and cursing selves but not
as they do carcinomas or broken legs. Their selves live in the same
realm as do their virtues, vices, beliefs and aspirations, and that is
where they should remain.

These demands are always divergent and often seem incompatible. No
wonder that the ego so often fails in this task. Its three tyrannical
masters are the external world, the super-­ego and the id.

Berrios and Marková (2003)

There is a convention that separates out the body from the self. This
approach dates back at least to Descartes' (1596--1650) dualism in which
the body is regarded as distinct from the thinking immaterial self. More
recently, there has been a growing body of work both empirical and
philosophic that makes the case for a complex interaction between the
fact we as persons are embodied, that is that our experiences as a
physical being permeates and influences all the central features of
consciousness such as thinking, memory, language and of course, the
nature of self. Gibbs (2005) put it like this:

Ego and Self The self is a construct that has changed in meaning and
significance since the inception of Hellenistic philosophy (Berrios and
Marková, 2003). From the mid-­ 19th century onwards, various concepts
about the self have found their way into psychiatry such that, in
contemporary psychiatry, there is reckoned to be some disturbance in the
way one thinks about and estimates oneself; this, of course, differs
according to the nature of the illness. There is, however, no consensus
on what exactly it means to be a self. There is a plurality of
conceptions, including the ecological self, the interpersonal self, the
extended self, the private self and the conceptual self among many
(Zahavi, 2003). In this chapter, the terms ego and self are used more or
less interchangeably. Ego has the advantage of being a technical term
and therefore more circumscribed in its meaning; this is also a
disadvantage when it is simply oneself, as is usually understood and
subjectively experienced, that is being referred to. Freud's use of the
word ego echoes Nietzsche (1901): It is this which sees everywhere deed
and doer; this which believes in will as cause in general; this which
believes in the 'ego' as being, in the ego as substance, and which
projects its belief in the ego-­substance on to all things. Freud (1933)
described ego as standing 'for reason and good sense while the id stands
for the untamed passions'. The ego: has been modified by the proximity
of the external world with its threat of danger... The poor ego has to
serve three severe masters and does what it can to bring their claims
and demands into harmony with one another.

Freud (1933)

Embodiment and the Self

People's subjective, felt experiences of their bodies in action provide
part of the fundamental grounding for language and thought. Cognition is
what occurs when the body engages the physical, cultural world and must
be studied in terms of the dynamical interactions between people and the
environment. Human language and thought emerge from recurring patterns
of embodied activity that constrain ongoing intelligent behaviour. We
must not assume cognition to be purely internal, symbolic,
computational, and disembodied, but seek out the gross and detailed ways
that language and thought are inextricably shaped by embodied action.
This approach has profound implications not only for how we conceive of
the self but also for our understanding of perception, abstract
concepts, language and cognitive processes, among other things. There is
a natural link between a first person bodily perspective and the self in
the brute sense that there can be no self without a body. Again as Gibbs
(2005) puts it, 'I know who I am, and that I am, in part, because I see
my body ... as I move and experience specific sensations as a result of
action'. And, the distinction that is drawn between self and nonself is,
at least in part, shaped and influenced by the distinction between our
body and the physical environment.

12 The Disordered Self

In summary, despite the deeply set convention to treat the self and the
body as separate entities, it is important to keep in focus the fact the
self and the body are truly inseparable and that the conceptual
distinction is for convenience only.

Self-­Concept and Body Image The body is unique in that it is experienced
by a person both as subject of experience and as an object with the same
materiality as any other physical object in the world. There is a way in
which I am subjectively aware of my own body that is different from how
I experience a block of wood. But I am also aware that my body is an
object in the world, to be viewed and even acted on by others. For most
of the time, we are not aware of our body but, for example, in extreme
anxiety, traumatic pain and sexual excitement, there is an awareness of
the body as an object: 'my heart banging, my finger throbbing'. For the
rest of the time, we assume the parts of the body to be integrated, and
this integrated body, for practical purposes, coincides with and is
coterminous with the 'self' of which we are not separately aware and
which we take for granted. In other words it is mostly in times of
distress or pain that we become aware of our bodies as distinct from
'ourselves'. It is through our body that we have contact with the world
outside our self: movements of the body relate us to external space; our
hands have a prehensile tool-­like aspect to them that allow us to grasp
objects in the world; and our bodies have a physicality about them that
occupies space, gives us presence, locating us as objects in the world.
One of Eugene Minkowski's (1970) patients said: I don't want to attach
so much attention to my movements, but I am only grub and defaecation. I
am only a sort of animal function, and one that injures himself. I have
the feeling of being nothing but living tripe. I have neither sensations
nor precise ideas. I have the feeling of being nothing but vegetative
functions, of being nothing but a mass. Another said: One day out of
two, my body is hard as wood. Today my body is thick like this wall
(points to the wall).

183

Minkowski referred to these experiences as exaggerated materiality in
which the patients demonstrate an increased awareness of the
'objectified' aspect of the body and rendering salient for the clinician
an attitude to the body that is not manifest in day-­to-­day life. Many
terms are used to describe the way a person conceptualizes themself.
Neurologists, neuropsychiatrists, psychoanalysts and psychologists have
used variously the terms body schema, body concept, body cathexis, body
image and perceived body. They describe approximately the same thing but
with different nuances. For example, self-­concept tends to refer to the
fully conscious and abstract awareness of oneself, whereas body image is
more concerned with unconscious and physical matters and includes
experiential aspects of body awareness. Sometimes self-­concept is the
same as body concept, and at other times, conscious self is
conceptualized as being independent of its 'cage', the body. The body
schema implies a spatial element and is more than, and usually bigger
than, the body itself. For instance, if you imagine yourself on your way
to work, automatically included within your schema of yourself are your
clothes and your spectacles, if worn. The body schema changes with
changing circumstances. When I drive my car, I incorporate within my
concept of my physical size the width of my car, so that I am unlikely
to attempt to drive through a doorway or up a flight of steps.
Spectacles, a cigar, the carpenter's screwdriver and the blind man's
stick all contribute to that person's concept of their self in a
particular situation. Cathexis implies the notion of power, force,
libido---perhaps analogous to electrical charge: the self that makes
things happen! Social aspects are obviously important. A man with
shoulder-­length hair is not usually so endowed through neglect; more
likely, it represents a deliberate choice---how he sees himself in his
social setting. It accords with his chosen peer group and also
distinguishes him from those from whom he would wish to be
disassociated. Critchley (1950) has commented on 'that curious emotional
state usually known as being in love', in which there is 'a compulsive
trend in two body images of opposite sex towards propinquity and
contiguity, eventually culminating in a total fusion or merger'. As a
phenomenologist, one could take exception to Critchley's misuse of the
term compulsive. According to Schilder (1935), body images

184

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

are never isolated; they are always encircled by the body images of
others. Body images are more closely bound together in the erogenous
zones and are social in nature. Our body image and the way other people
see us are not exclusively dependent on each other. A person sees
themself and forms their self-­image in a social setting. They see
themself in relation to other people; their view of themself is not
totally dependent on, but importantly influenced by, how another
individual sees them. It is also determined by how they believe that
people might see them. The development of body image has been neatly
summarized diagrammatically by Bahnson (1969). He considers that self-­
image is changeable and amorphous. At any one time, the individual
perceives only a small sample from a gallery of possible self-­images. In
Fig. 12.1 the manner in which 'phenomenological selves are superimposed
on each other like the layers of an onion' is demonstrated. Different
aspects of self-­image develop as the person increases the scope and
complexity of his relationships. The term ego is not phenomenologically
describable, and there has been argument that the self cannot observe
itself; that is, a thing and what observes that thing cannot be the
same. However, it is the nature of self and ego to be experienced as
either subject or object: a small nuisance like a mouth ulcer can make
me feel uncomfortable (subjectively); I can describe what a person with
a mouth ulcer experiences (objectively).

Self-­Image and Nonverbal Communication In a social relationship, a
person expresses views they have about themself: their words, and the
way they say them, convey how they view their relationship with the
other person and also how they see themself, for example, the shopkeeper
'talking down' to a child. Probably more important than this verbal
manner of expressing, often unconscious, views on how we see ourselves
is nonverbal communication. All gestures and postures, movements of the
face and pauses in our conversation convey meaning to the person we are
talking to; partly, this is also a comment on the way we see ourselves.

Somatic self: prenatal, 1 year Self-differentiation from the
environment: 1--3 years Oedipus, family, role taking, externally derived
self-image: 4--10 years

Puberty, revival of body image: 11--14 years

Redefinition of social roles: 15--18 years

Adult investment in society, symbols, abstractions, family of
procreation Fig. 12.1 Developmental phases of the self-­image.

'The central core of self-­image consists for a person of their name,
their bodily feelings, body image, sex and age. For a man the job will
be central -- unless he is suffering from job alienation. For a woman,
her family and her husband's job may also be important' (Argyle, 1975).
The gender discrimination of that statement is now dated, but it
emphasizes that for different people, there are varying aspects that
form the essential concept of self. Nonverbal aspects of communication
are important in sending and receiving information about the
personality. The role in society one has adopted and the group with
which one identifies are intentionally conveyed and therefore display
self-­image. These include 'age, sex, race, social class, rank,
occupation, school or college attended, nationality, regional origins,
religious group and family connections' (Argyle, 1975). These attributes
of the person are often deliberately displayed, but there are other
characteristics that will be received nonverbally by observers even when
the person has no intention of revealing them, for example, temperament,
personality traits such as introversion, intellect, beliefs and values
and past experiences.

12 The Disordered Self

Nonverbal communication expresses the attitudes of a person, according
to Argyle, for the following reasons: • There is, in some areas of human
concern, a lack of language or 'verbal coding'; for example, shape is
more readily expressed with the hands than verbally. Describing
personality, our own or another's, or commenting on personal
relationships is more easily done nonverbally. A person will attempt to
communicate nonverbally their own physical attractiveness, role and
attitude towards the other person. Nonverbal signals are more powerful:
actions •  speak louder than words. For a schoolteacher, beckoning may
be more likely to result in action than a verbal order. • Nonverbal
signals are less censored and therefore more likely to be genuine. If
conflicting messages are given verbally and nonverbally, the nonverbal
signal is accepted as truthful. •  Some messages, because of social
censorship, cannot be made explicit in a social setting and therefore
cannot be verbalized but can be conveyed nonverbally by appropriate
posture, gesture and movement in space. For example, by facial
expression and turning away, a person might suggest without making it
explicit 'I do not like you and am bored with speaking to you'. • Verbal
messages are punctuated and emphasized nonverbally, for example, the
pause at the end of a phrase or the cadence of voice used. These
embellishments add meaning to the actual words used. A person interacts
with others by the use of language. However, nonverbal signals are also
important in expressing meaning and conveying feelings. The ego talks
with the body as well as with words.

Awareness of the Body We have an awareness of our self and an awareness,
which overlaps with this but is slightly different, of our bodies. What
is this sense of body image or awareness? According to Head and Holmes
(1911), the body schema is formed as the composite experience of
sensations. Schilder (1935) developed

185

further the importance of perceiving sensations in forming the body
schema: 'the picture of our own body which we form in our mind, that is
to say, the way in which the body appears to ourselves'. Freud (1933)
also was concerned with body image in the development of personality:
'the ego is firstly the body ego'. Clearly, abnormality of body image
may be the result of abnormal sensations, but this is not always so. For
instance, the abnormality of body image of an amputee is directly
because of the physical damage, but a hypochondriacal patient may have
no abnormal sensations yet believe they have cancer. In transsexualism,
a man may have a normal sensory experience of his body but say that he
hates his body and especially his penis; he may feel that he is actually
a woman trapped inside a male body (Morris, 1974). His disturbed body
image is not a result of disturbed sensation; there is a conflict
between ego (the way he experiences himself and the gender he ascribes
to it) and body image. The distinction made for convenience between this
chapter and Chapter awareness and awareness of the 14, between self-­
body, is artificial. The body image can be altered through enhancement,
diminution (or ablation) or distortion. It incorporates more than just
the body, except perhaps for those few occasions when a person is both
unclothed and conceptualizing themself as naked: tailors have long tried
to persuade us that 'clothes make the man'. Certainly, they are an
effective means of nonverbal communication. Clothes give us some insight
into the way a person sees themself and also in the way they propose to
interact with other people. A person complements their mood and their
social role of the moment in their choice of clothes. They wear clothes,
as a ship hoists a flag, for signalling, and particular clothes are worn
to convey a message to someone who can read it. A medical student wears
a suit for an oral examination, a person undoes their collar button on
leaving the office for lunch. As the patient comes into a doctor's
consulting room, they start to give information about themself from
their appearance before either of them utters a word. A person whose
clothes are chosen for them, as in mental hospitals in the past,
presents a peculiarly bleak and meaningless appearance;

186

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

this aspect of their body image is expressionless and conveys nothing of
themself.

Disorders of Self In descriptive psychopathology, one uses the term ego
disorders or disorders of self to describe the abnormal inner
experiences of I-­ness and my-­ness that occur in psychiatric illness.
These may occur in the patient's state of inner awareness irrespective
of any changes they may show in their attitude to, or experience of, the
world outside themself. Jaspers (1997), with characteristic clarity,
described self-­awareness---that is, the ability to distinguish I from
not I---as having four formal characteristics. Scharfetter (1981, 1995,
2003) added a fifth dimension of ego vitality to the list and has made a
case for its inclusion based on factor analysis. Previously, this
characteristic was incorporated within the awareness of activity, which
subsumed 'being' and 'existing' with other present participles. Thus we
now have the following characteristics of self-­awareness: • The feeling
of awareness of being or existing (ego vitality): I know that I am alive
and exist, and this is fundamental to awareness of self. • The feeling
of awareness of activity (ego activity): I know that I am an agent who
initiates and executes my thoughts and actions. • An awareness of unity
(ego consistency and coherence): at any given moment, I know that I am
one person. • Awareness of identity (ego identity): there is continuity
in my biography, physiognomy, gender, genealogic origin, etc.; I have
been the same person all the time. • Awareness of the boundaries of self
(ego demarcation): I am distinct from other things and beings and can
distinguish what is myself from the outside world, and I am aware of the
boundary between self and nonself. The disorders of inner experience in
which these characteristics are disturbed are now explored in more
detail. We will deal with these five functions described by Jaspers and
Scharfetter in order. DISORDER OF BEING OR EGO VITALITY I never have to
ask myself the question as to whether I exist. It is an assumption that
I make with unquestioning certainty. I am so sure of this that it does
not even come on to the agenda of doubts and uncertainties.

My only knowledge that everything else exists is based on the premise
that I do. Being: the patient's experience of their very existence may
be altered: 'I do not exist; there is nothing here' or 'I am not alive
any more' or 'I am rotting'. This is the core experience of nihilistic
delusions, which may occur in affective psychoses (see Chapters 8 and
16). See below for an example: I do not sense myself anymore. I do not
exist anymore. When someone speaks to me, I feel as if he were speaking
to a dead person. I have to look at myself to be sure that it is I. I
have the feeling of being an absent person. In sum, I am a walking
shadow. Minkowski (1970)

Less pronounced nihilistic ideas (not delusions) are experienced as
depersonalization, an alteration of the way one experiences oneself,
which is accompanied by a feeling of an alteration or loss of
significance for self: 'I feel unreal, a bit woozy, as though I can't be
quite certain of myself any more'. DISORDER OF ACTIVITY I do something
and know that I am doing it. Everything I do, in everything I
experience, through every event that impinges on me, I am aware that the
experience has the unique quality of being mine. 'It was incredible. I
pinched myself to make sure it was really happening to me' expresses the
relationship we experience between awareness of reality and activity. It
is in our actions, including our thinking, that we reinforce ourselves
concerning our existence. Moving may show abnormality---for example, in
the passivity experience or delusions of control of patients with
schizophrenia. Schreber described several examples of this experience:
The difficulties which were put in my way defy description. My fingers
are paralysed, the direction of my gaze is changed in order to prevent
my finding the correct keys, the tempo is quickened by making the
muscles of my fingers move prematurely: all these were and still are
daily occurrences. and the bellowing-­miracle when my muscles serving the
processes of respiration are set in motion by the lower

12 The Disordered Self

God (Ariman) in such a way that I am forced to emit the bellowing
noises. Memorizing and imagining may be changed in that the patient with
depression feels they are unable to initiate the act of memory or
fantasy, or, alternatively, a patient with schizophrenia feels that this
activity when it occurs is not initiated by them but from outside
themself. A depressed patient said, 'my memory has gone, I have no
thoughts, I cannot think at all'. Willing may be altered---for example,
the patient with schizophrenia who no longer experiences their will as
being their own. Commonly, neurotic patients describe an inability to
initiate activity, a feeling of powerlessness, of being ground down in
the face of life's vicissitudes. Some of these abnormalities of
experience of one's own activities are closely associated with
mood---for example, the feeling of the depressed patient who believes
that they are incapable of doing anything at all: the alteration of
self-­concept is directly linked to the mood state. Sometimes, however,
it is not the affect associated with the change of activity but the
belief about the initiation of the activity that is changed. These are
the passivity experiences (made experiences), which are discussed in
more detail with other first-­rank symptoms of schizophrenia in Chapter
9. DISORDER OF SINGLENESS OR EGO CONSISTENCY AND COHERENCE In health, a
person is integrated in their thinking and behaviour so that they are
not aware of their feeling of unity. There is an implicit assumption
that they are one person, and they know their limitations and
capabilities. This assumption of unity may be lost in some conditions.
In dreams, one sometimes sees oneself, even perhaps with some surprise,
in the drama. In some forms of transcendental meditation, by carrying
out repetitive monotonous acts the subject enters a self-­induced trance
in which they can observe themself carrying out the behaviour. 'Self' is
both the observer and also the object of observation (Box 12.1).
Autoscopy (Heautoscopy)

Autoscopy is a profoundly conceptually challenging phenomenon in which
the usual indivisibility of the self appears to be compromised.
According to

187

BOX 12.1 DISORDERS OF SINGLENESS • There are six types of autoscopy:
feeling of presence, negative autoscopy, inner autoscopy, autoscopic
hallucination, out-­of-­body experience, heautoscopy proper. • Feeling of
presence is a distinct feeling of the physical presence of another
person. • Negative autoscopy refers to the failure to perceive one's own
body either in a mirror or when looked at directly. • Inner autoscopy
refers to the experience of visual hallucinations of internal organs in
extra corporeal space. • Out-­of-­body experience is characterized by the
projection of an observing (psychological) self in extra personal space
seemingly totally dissociated from the physical body. • Heautoscopy
designates a condition in which an individual sees his double, or
doppelgänger.

Fish (1967), 'in this strange experience the patient sees himself and
knows that it is he. It is not just a visual hallucination because
kinaesthetic and somatic sensation must also be present to give the
subject the impression that the hallucination is he'. More recently,
Brugger and Regard (1997) have identified six types of autoscopy: the
feeling of presence, negative heautoscopy, inner heautoscopy, autoscopic
hallucination, out-­of-­body experience and heautoscopy proper. In the
feeling of presence, the patient has a distinct feeling of the physical
presence of another person. No visual perception is usually reported.
The feeling of presence may be confined to one hemispace especially when
the experience occurs in association with a seizure. Negative
heautoscopy refers to the failure to perceive one's own body either in a
mirror or when looked at directly. This phenomenon is often associated
with depersonalization. Inner heautoscopy refers to the experience of
visual hallucinations of internal organs in extra-­corporeal space
(Sollier, 1903). Autoscopic hallucination is said to occur when a
patient sees an exact mirror image of themself, or of their face or
trunk. This experience is distinct from heautoscopy proper because the
patient does not localize themself in the position of the mirror image.
These hallucinatory experiences are usually brief, lasting seconds to
minutes and followed by flash-­like recurrences (Lhermitte, 1951;
Dewhurst and Pearson, 1955; Brugger, 2002).

188

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Out-­of-­body experiences are characterized by the projection of an
observing (psychological) self in extra-­ personal space seemingly
totally dissociated from the physical body. In this phenomenon, the
patient sees themself and the world from a location distinct from their
physical body. There are three phenomenological characteristics here:
disembodiment, the impression of seeing the body from a distant and
elevated visuo-­spatial perspective (the so-­called extra corporeal
egocentric perspective) and the impression of seeing one's own body from
this elevated position (Anzellotti et al., 2011). Heautosocpy proper
designates a condition in which an individual sees their double or
doppelgänger. The double usually appears colourless, can behave
independently and may or may not mirror the patient's appearance. There
is strong self-­identification with the second body, often associated
with the experience of existing at and perceiving the world from two
places at the same time (Heydrich and Blanke, 2013). There may be
vestibular sensations such as extreme lightness of the body, sensation
of flying, elevation, rotation and vertigo (Anzellotti et al., 2011;
Blanke et al., 2004). There is a North European myth, shared by several
countries, that someone may see their double ('wraith', 'fetch') shortly
before their death, and it has therefore become a sinister omen (Todd
and Dewhurst, 1962). These authors present interesting historical
material to substantiate the link between perceptual doppelgänger and
death. The usual legend is that, as the person lies dying, their wraith
floats before their eyes, and they see themself performing all the most
disreputable and reprehensible actions of their life; they are paraded
before them as they expire. There is continuing popular interest in the
concept of the double. It is the subject of diverse fiction as in The
Double by Fyodor Dostoevsky (1846), Robert Louis Stevenson's The Master
of Ballantrae (1889) and Shusaku Endo's Scandal (1986). The very worst
feature of the double for the subject themself is well illustrated in
William Styron's Darkness Visible (1991). The terrible, inextricable
involvement of the double with the subject in trying to mortify them,
goad them, provoke them to destroy the double and/or destroy themself:
the sense of being accompanied by a second self -- a wraith-­ like
observer, able to watch with dispassionate curiosity as his companion
struggles against the oncoming disaster, or

decides to embrace it ... I, the victim-­to-­be of self-­murder, was both
the solitary actor and lone member of the audience ... I watched myself
in mingled terror and fascination. There is growing evidence that
autoscopic phenomena occur in association with seizures (Anzellotti et
al., 2011). Furthermore, it has been postulated that autoscopy derives
from a failure of integration of proprioceptive, tactile and visual
information about the body accompanied by vestibular dysfunction (Blanke
et al., 2004; Heydrich and Blanke, 2013). The anatomic basis and
mechanism of autoscopy is yet to be clarified, but there is tentative
evidence that the left posterior insular is involved in heautoscopy and
right occipital cortex in autoscopic hallucination (Heydrich and Blanke,
2013). Because of the hypothesis that autoscopy is a failure of
integration, the multimodal junctions between the parietal and temporal
lobes and between the parietal and occipital lobes have been implicated.
There is experimental work deriving from the application of
transmagnetic stimulation of the left temporoparietal junction to
produce heautoscopy (doppelgänger) (Blanke and Arzy, 2005). In practice,
these phenomena can be extremely difficult to identify and delineate.
The following description by a 37-­year-­old, intelligent man with a
history of epilepsy, receiving treatment with phenobarbitone, is
considered an example of autoscopic hallucination, but analysis
demonstrates features of heautoscopy as well as out-­of-­the-­body
experience. The patient held his head rigidly with apparent torticollis
to the right. If he rotated it to the left, there was marked head
nodding, but not if he turned it further to the right. I'm standing
outside myself on the left hand side but only when I'm sitting down ...
it comes in short episodes for about 30 seconds ... my true self loses
all its senses as all the senses are in my hallucinatory self ... the
true self is just a shell without any senses ... the hallucinatory self
can see the true self and the whole surroundings, and it seems to me as
though the hallucinatory self is looking at me and at other things in
the room from a position standing to the left hand side of me, and
everything is in the right perspective. If it was occurring now, the
hallucinatory self would see you more full face and from higher up than
I see you now because it is standing ... I can't see it or hear it but
it can see the side of my head.

12 The Disordered Self

It seems to be there. I know that it isn't me as such. It's like having
a dream and you know that it is a dream. I thought it was a dream but it
has occurred when I am fully waking. It seems as clear as a nightmare at
the time but I know afterwards that it is a figment like a very vivid
dream but more real than a dream. I would not see a fleck of dust on my
cheek or something like that. The other one is not a different
personality. When this experience occurred, the patient felt all
sensation was in the 'hallucinatory self', including hearing, seeing and
feeling cold: 'I felt cold on the back of the hallucinatory self'. There
had been no experience of taste or smell but there had been an
experience of affect. I was talking to a representative. The
hallucinatory self felt sorry for this man because he looked abnormal.
It had no feelings for the real self. He looked abnormal because I had
stopped talking and a glazed expression had come into my eye. A bizarre
example of autoscopy was reported by Ames (1984): the self-­shooting of a
phantom head. This patient was suffering from schizophrenia. He
described seeing and hearing a voice from another head that was set on
his own shoulders, attached to his body and trying to dominate his own
head. He described himself as having two heads but believed that the
other head was actually that of his wife's gynaecologist, whom he
believed to be having an affair with her. The voice from the second head
was that of the gynaecologist, and there were also the voices of Jesus
and Abraham around him, conversing with each other and talking about his
having two heads. The patient tried to remove the other head by shooting
six shots at it and through his own palate, causing extensive damage to
his brain. Ames labelled this condition the phenomenon of perceptual
delusional bicephaly. Multiple Personality (Dissociative Identity
Disorder)

In dissociative (hysterical) states, so-­called dual and multiple
personalities have been described (McDougall, 1911; Abse, 1982; Prince,
1905). Slater and Roth (1969) comment: A girl who is by turns 'May' and
'Margaret', may be quiet, studious and obedient as May, and unaware of
Margaret's existence. When she becomes Margaret,

189

however, she may be gay, headstrong and wilful, and refer to May in
contemptuous terms. It seems that these multiple personalities are
always artificial productions, the product of the medical attention that
they arouse. The essence of multiple personality is the embodiment of at
least two personalities (identities). This phenomenon raises doubts
about our natural intuition that an individual human being is
indivisible and is an embodied singular person. Prince's account gave a
vivid description: Miss Christine L Beauchamp, the subject of this
study, is a person in whom several personalities have become developed;
that is to say, she may change personality from time to time, often from
hour to hour, and with each change her character becomes transformed and
her memories altered. In addition to the real, original or normal self,
the self that was born and which was intended by nature to be, she may
be anyone of the three persons. I say three different, because, although
making use of the same body, each nevertheless, has distinctly different
character: a difference manifested by different trains of thought, by
different views, and temperament, and by different acquisitive tastes,
habits, experiences, and memories. In a characteristic case study of
multiple personality before the conditions for medical practice in the
United States resulted in a proliferation of cases of so-­called multiple
personality disorder, Larmore et al. (1977) described 'a 35-­year-­old
white woman of rural Kentucky background' who had made seven suicide
attempts of which she claimed to have no memory. 'Shortly after
admission a hypnotic interview was conducted, during which one of the
personalities spontaneously revealed herself and gave hints of the
existence of other personalities'. Four distinct personalities were
identified: Faith, 'the primary personality ... known as "the little
angel" by personality Alicia ... kind, loving and helpful ... has
difficulty in expression ... anger, and in dealing with criticism';
Alicia, 'a Satanic agent ... claims control over most of Faith's
physiological functions ... manifesting either assaultive or
self-­destructive behaviour'; Alicia--Faith, under the influence of
Alicia, 'has only peripheral awareness

190

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

of Alicia and no knowledge of Faith or Guardian Angel'; Guardian Angel,
'first made its appearance following the grandfather's death ... claims
to be the protector of Faith'. There has been a vast output of
psychiatric literature on the subject of multiple personality disorder
based initially on the diagnostic criteria of the third revision,
revised, of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM) (American Psychiatric Association, 1987) and renamed Dissociative
Identity Disorder in DSM-­ 5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013) but
often lacking in psychopathologic precision. This has been well
summarized by Fahy (1988): Recently there has been a dramatic rise in
the number of case reports of multiple personality disorder (MPD) ... A
review of the recent literature reveals a poverty of information on
reliability of diagnosis, prognosis, or the role of selection bias. It
is argued that iatrogenic factors may contribute to the development of
the syndrome. There is little evidence from genetic or physiological
studies to suggest that MPD represents a distinct psychiatric disorder.
Abse states that 'one-­way amnesia' is usual for multiple personality;
that is, personality A is amnesic for the other personality B, but the
second, B, can discuss the experiences of A. Usually, A is inhibited and
depressed and B is freer and more elated. The forms of multiple
personality seen in practice are usually: • simultaneous partial
personalities, • successive well-­defined partial personalities, or •
clustered multiple partial personalities. When such patients have been
treated in psychotherapy, ingenious explanations are often given by
patient and by therapist for the appearance of the additional
personalities. Although this remains a disputed area, an authoritative
opinion from Merskey (2000) states: In this author's view there is no
place for the diagnosis of multiple personality disorder in psychiatry,
and the important question is how such a diagnosis managed to achieve so
much prominence in professional circles in North America, although
generally not elsewhere.

Lability in the Awareness of Personality

The loss of unity of self in schizophrenia was exemplified by a patient
who described how, every night, he became a horse and trotted down
Whitehall. At the same time as this was happening in his mind, he also
believed he was in Whitehall watching the horse. This type of symptom
has been called lability in the awareness of personality and was
described by Bonhoeffer (1907) as occurring in paranoid psychosis.
DISORDER OF IDENTITY I am who I was last week or 30 years ago; I am who
I will be next week or in 10 years' time. This truism, which we can
claim without hesitation, is by no means certain for some people
suffering from schizophrenia or organic states, from neuroses or from
depression, or even for some healthy people in abnormal situations (see
possession state later in the chapter). This disorder of self-­awareness
is characterized by changes in the identity of self over time. A person
who feels threatened in their job and is afraid of redundancy is not
likely to function well because of their feeling of impermanence. A
feeling of continuity for oneself and one's role is a fundamental
assumption of life, without which competent behaviour cannot take place.
In health, we have no doubts about the continuity of oneself from our
past into our present. However, patients with schizophrenia sometimes
deny that they have always been the same person. Characteristically,
this takes the form of a passivity experience, and the patient claims
that at some time in the past they have been completely changed from
being one person to another, whom they now are. Jaspers (1997) gives an
account of one patient who said: When telling my story I am aware that
only part of my present self experienced all this. Up to 23rd December
1901, I cannot call myself my present self; the past self now seems like
a little dwarf inside me. It is an unpleasant feeling; it upsets my
feelings of existence if I describe my previous experiences in the first
person. I can do it if I use an image and recall that the dwarf reigned
up to that date, but since then his past has ended. This complete
alteration in the sense of identity is exclusively psychotic; there is a
break in the sense of identity of self, and there is a subjective
experience of

12 The Disordered Self

someone completely different, although still described as oneself,
'taking over'. A feeling of loss of continuity, which is, however, of
lesser intensity than the psychotic change described earlier and without
its element of passivity, may be experienced in health and in neuroses
and personality disorders. The person knows that both people, before and
after, are truly them, but they feel very altered from what they were.
This may occur after an overwhelmingly important life situation or
during emotional development without an outside event. For example, an
adolescent may quite suddenly feel in the course of a week 'as if' they
are quite a different person. It should be stressed that the sense of
reality is never lost to the extent that they actually believe themself
to be a different person. In the nonpsychotic, it is more that thoughts
and feelings do not seem to be in keeping with their previous self as
they have come to accept themself. In the next chapter, a man is
described as developing long-­term depersonalization after experiencing
massive stress at work, culminating in an extremely harassing journey in
which he was the car driver. Afterwards, his wife said that he was never
again like the man she had married, 'but like his (non­existent) twin
brother'. She said that, whereas previously he was incisive, was quick
thinking and made the decisions in the family, now he lacked
self-­confidence and she had to do everything. Neither partner was in any
doubt that he was the same person, but his whole demeanour had changed
as if he had become someone similar but not identical. The feeling of
loss of continuity contributes to the inertia of the person with
schizophrenia and the apathy of the depressive. Lack of a clear sense of
identity from the past continuing into the future is a strong
disincentive to concerted activity. The patient with schizophrenia, as
part of disturbance of passivity, may have doubts about his continuity
from the past to the present; the depressive, secondary to disorder of
mood, often sees no continuation into the future: 'everything is bleak,
there is nothing to look forward to'. A part of the sense of continuity
of self is accepting that the changes in one's total state at present
are due to illness. This is the characteristic usually described in the
mental state examination under the term insight (David, 1990). The
individual recognizes that he is still the same person but that his
current change in subjectivity is due to the intervening process of
illness.

191

Possession State

This is classified in the 10th revision of the International
Classification of Disease under dissociative (conversion) disorders
(F44)---trance and possession disorders (F44.3) (World Health
Organization, 1992). However, although the trance or altered state of
conscious awareness is a prerequisite, possession state does not
necessarily occur in the context of dissociative or hysterical disorder.
It can occur in normal, healthy people in unusual situations, either as
a group phenomenon (mass hypnosis) or individually; such a case is
described subsequently. There is a temporary loss of both the sense of
personal identity and full awareness of the surroundings. The person
acts as if they have, and believes themself to have been, taken over by
another---a spirit, a force, a deity or even another person. The
difference between those conditions that constitute disorder and those
that may be considered as being within a cultural or religious context
alone is that the former are unwanted, cause distress to the individual
and those around and may be prolonged beyond the immediate event or
ceremony at which it was induced. Possession of a young, entirely
healthy woman with a husband and three children by two 'goddesses' was
witnessed in Sri Lanka. The woman had become a varama, a healer with
special powers, about 2 years previously, when she 'saw' her deceased
father-­ in-­ law, who came to her and said that she would have
supernatural power to help other people and her own family. Her husband
had become addicted to arak, a local spirit, and his drinking had by
then brought the family into extreme economic hardship. After this
experience, she offered her services as a healer and solver of domestic
difficulties to her village, and several people consulted her each day
at home, where she had devoted one tiny room to a sanctuary and another
to a waiting room. With her husband blowing a buffalo horn repeatedly
and herself chanting, she induced a trance in herself in which she spoke
with different voices as either one of two female deities giving advice
to her clients, which her husband interpreted. The villagers had found
her ministrations to be helpful, it gave useful occupation to her
delinquent husband and she had completely solved her own family's
financial problems through the gifts she received for services rendered.

192

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

A different case, with psychiatric disorder present, was that of a
37-­year-­old Sri Lankan housewife who believed herself to be possessed by
her long-­ dead grandmother; on three occasions she had gone into a
trance, lost contact with the outside world and seen the image of her
grandmother coming close to her and trying to squeeze her neck. These
episodes were described with fear and distress. She showed symptoms of
depressive illness, with poor sleep, early morning wakening, loss of
appetite and weight, anergia, fatigue and feeling low in mood; she had
been abandoned by her mother when she was 7 years old. Wijesinghe et
al. (1976) surveyed a semiurban population of 7653 people in Sri Lanka
and identified 37 subjects, 9 male and 28 female, with 'possession
trance states', showing altered state of conscious awareness, behaviour
for which the subject did not acknowledge responsibility, and had
amnesia for the period of the trance. Episodes, often lasting about 30
minutes, were usually precipitated either by emotional stress or
culture-­bound stimuli such as witnessing an exorcism ceremony. During
trance, subjects were most often restless with rhythmic trembling of the
trunk and exaggerated gesturing, speech was aggressive and commanding
and, typically, mood was angry; most often, the possessing spirit was
that of a close but dead relative. In females especially as the
condition continued they were increasingly likely to become permanent
adepts. These authors regarded only one of their subjects as suffering
from schizophrenia, although 17 of 37 manifested active psychiatric
disorder, mostly neurotic in nature. Possession and trance states
straddle the boundary between normative behaviour and abnormal behaviour
indicative of a disorder. Moreira-­Almeida and Cardeña (2011) argue that
lack of personal suffering, absence of social or functional impairment,
absence of psychiatric comorbidity, self-­control over the experience and
personal growth all point in the direction of a nonpathological
spiritual experience. It is clear, however, that possession and trance
states can occur in the setting of indubitable neurologic disease such
as lesions in the basal ganglia and frontoparietal lobes (Basu et al.,
2002), hence the need to have an integrative model that is grounded in
neuroscience but admits sociocultural processes informed by aspects of
how the self is socially constructed (Seligman and Kirmayer, 2008).

Jaspers (1997), in writing about disorders of self-­ awareness, concerned
himself with disorder of content as well as of form. In discussing
states of possession, he commented on the rare condition of lycanthropy,
the patient believing that he has been transformed into an animal,
literally a wolf. Lycanthropy has a long history in Western societies
and identical beliefs of transformation into other feared animals such
as the fox in Japan, the tiger, hyena and crocodile in China, Malaysia
and India are documented (Fahy, 1989). In antiquity there was belief in
the possibility of radical physical transformation of the human body
into that of a wolf. However, recent case reports have adopted a robust
phenomenological approach and identify the belief of transformation as a
delusion of nonspecific value but principally associated with mood
disorders, schizophrenia and occasionally organic brain disease (Keck et
al., 1988; Fahy, 1989; Kulick et al., 1990). Lycanthropy is usually a
transient belief but occasionally the belief can be enduring, lasting
for many years (Keck et al., 1988). Koehler et al. (1990) reviewed
Jaspers' work in relation to lycanthropy and showed that Jaspers
differentiated between states of possession presenting with an altered
consciousness and states of possession in which consciousness remains
clear; the former were usually dissociative (hysterical) in origin,
whereas the latter were more often associated with schizophrenia. This
emphasizes the importance for psychiatric diagnosis in assessing
psychopathologic form. DISORDER OF THE BOUNDARIES OF SELF OR EGO
DEMARCATION Disorder of the boundaries of the self refers to the
disturbance in knowing where I ends and not I begins. Abnormality is not
confined to schizophrenia. For example, in lysergic acid diethylamide
intoxication, the feeling of impending ego dissolution associated with
the feeling of self 'slipping away' with considerable anxiety has been
described (Anderson and Rawnsley, 1954). One subject put this as: I was
being disorganized ... the world around was looking very distorted
indeed ... things were pretty rocky so I decided to sit back quietly for
a moment and reassure myself by returning to my own private inner world.
As soon as I introspected in this manner I felt to my dismay that 'I'
myself was somehow disturbed. The central core

12 The Disordered Self

193

of the personality, the ego, the sense of personal identity, was itself
fluctuating and, for want of a better phrase, dissolving. Another
subject said, 'If anyone present went out of the room it felt as though
I were being deprived of something. I became smaller---definitely felt
vulnerable'. Boundaries of Self in Schizophrenia

In schizophrenia, the sense of invasion of self appears to be
fundamental to the nature of the condition as it is experienced; many
but not all first-­rank symptoms have in common permeability of the
barrier between the individual and their environment, loss of ego
boundaries (Sims, 1993). There is a merging between self and not self;
this is clearly portrayed in Fig. 12.2, painted by a young patient with
schizophrenia. The patient is not aware of the disturbance being one of
ego boundaries; he describes a problem only inasmuch as 'other people
are doing things to me; events are taking place outside myself'. The
external observer finds a blurring or loss of the boundaries of self
that is not apparent to the patient himself. All passivity experiences
falsely attribute functions to not self influences from outside, which
are actually coming from inside the self. This is also true for
disorders of the possession of thought, such as thought insertion and
thought withdrawal. Thought broadcasting obviously involves private
thoughts becoming public without the consent or action of the patient.
This is another example of a breakdown in the normal boundaries of what
is self and nonself. Other experiences, such as auditory hallucinations,
rely on the patient ascribing internally generated activity, that is,
internal speech, to external agencies. Passivity, delusion of control,
is discussed in Chapter 9. The subjective experience of passivity is a
disorder of the distinction between what is and what is not self.
Sensations, emotions, impulses and actions that in objective reality
come from inside the self are ascribed to not self. Other Alterations to
Boundaries

In states of ecstasy, there are also disturbances in the boundaries of
self (Chapter 16). The participant might describe feeling at one with
the universe, merging with

Fig. 12.2 Picture by a young schizophrenic patient.

nirvana, experiencing unity with the saints, identifying with the trees
and flowers or a oneness with God. Ecstasy states occur in normal people
and in those with personality disorder, as well as in sufferers from
psychoses and in epilepsy. In epilepsy it is part of the aura and is
characterized by intense feelings of well-­ being and heightened
self-­awareness. It is thought to emanate from hyperactivation of the
anterior insula rather than the temporal lobe (Picard and Craig, 2009).
This alteration in awareness of the boundaries of self is different from
that of schizophrenia described earlier. In ecstasy, it is an as if
experience, and it is mediated affectively. The phenomenon described by
Jung in himself with which this chapter begins is a lack of definition
of the boundaries of self. However, there was no loss of reality
judgement; it was a game, and Jung did in fact know what was himself and
what was the stone. In psychosis, this ability to discriminate is lost.
A patient with schizophrenia said, 'I am invaded day and night. I have
no more privacy since television came inside me'. Another patient
believed that while he was in a hospital ward he was helping other
patients because he permeated the medical staff and thereby assisted
them in their work.

194

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

REFERENCES Abse, W., 1982. Multiple personality. In: Roy, A. (Ed.),
Hysteria. John Wiley, Chichester. American Psychiatric Association,
1987. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, third ed.,
revised. American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC. American
Psychiatric Association, 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, fifth ed., revised. American Psychiatric Association,
Washington, DC. Ames, D., 1984. Self-­shooting of a phantom head. Br. J.
Psychiatry 145, 193--194. Anderson, E.W., Rawnsley, K., 1954. Clinical
studies of lysergic diethylamide. Monatsschr. Psychiatr. Neurol. 128,
38--55. Anzellotti, F., Onofri, V., Maruotti, V., et al., 2011.
Autoscopic phenomena: case report and review of literature. Behav. Brain
Funct. 7, 2. Argyle, M., 1975. Bodily Communication. Methuen, London.
Bahnson, C.B., 1969. Body and self-­images associated with audio-­ visual
self-­confrontation. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 148, 262--280. Basu, S., Gupta,
S.C., Akhtar, S., 2002. Trance and possession like symptoms in a case of
CNS lesion: a case report. Indian J. Psychiatry 44, 65--67. Berrios,
G.E., Marková, I.S., 2003. The self and psychiatry: a conceptual
history. In: Kircher, T., David, A. (Eds.), The Self in Neuroscience and
Psychiatry. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Blanke, O., Arzy, S.,
2005. The out-­of-­body experience: disturbed self-­processing at the
temporo-­parietal junction. Neuroscientist 11, 16--24. Blanke, O.,
Landis, T., Spinelli, L., Seeck, M., 2004. Out-­of-­body experience and
autoscopy of neurological origin. Brain 127, 243--258. Bonhoeffer, K.,
1907. Klinische Beiträge zur Lehre von den Degenerationspsychosen. Alt's
Samml, vol. 7. Marhold, Halle. Brugger, P., 2002. Reflective mirrors:
perspective-­taking in autoscopic phenomena. Cognit. Neuropsychiatry 7,
179--194. Brugger, P., Regard, M., 1997. Illusory reduplication of one's
own body: phenomenology and classification of autoscopic phenomena.
Cogn. Neuropsychiatry 2, 19--38. Critchley, M., 1950. The body image in
neurology. Lancet 1, 335--341. David, A.S., 1990. Insight and psychosis.
Br. J. Psychiatry 156, 798--808. Dewhurst, K., Pearson, J., 1955. Visual
hallucinations of the self in organic disease. J. Neurol. Neurosurg.
Psychiatry 18, 53--57. Dostoevsky, F., 1846. The Double (C. Garnett,
Trans, 1913). Heinemann, London. Endo, S., 1986. Scandal. Penguin Books,
London. Fahy, T.A., 1988. The diagnosis of multiple personality
disorder: a critical review. Br. J. Psychiatry 153, 597--606. Fahy,
T.A., 1989. Lycanthropy: a review. J. R. Soc. Med. 82, 37--39. Fish,
F.J., 1967. Clinical Psychopathology. John Wright, Bristol. Freud, S.,
1933. New introductory lectures on psychoanalysis. Standard Edition of
the Complete Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. 22 (J. Strachey, Trans, 1964).
Hogarth Press, London. Gibbs, R.W., 2005. Embodiment and Cognitive
Science. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Head, H., Holmes, G.,
1911. Sensory disturbances from cerebral lesions. Brain 34, 102--254.
Heydrich, L., Blanke, O., 2013. Distinct illusory own-­body perceptions
caused by damage to posterior insula and extrastriate cortex. Brain 136,
790--803.

Jaspers, K., 1997. General Psychopathology (J. Hoenig, M.W. Hamilton,
Trans). The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. Jung, C.G., 1963.
Memories, Dreams, Reflections. Collins Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
Keck Jr., P.E., Pope, H.G., Hudson, J.I., McElroy, S.L., Kulick, A.R.,
1988. Lycanthropy: alive and well in the twentieth century. Psychol.
Med. 18, 113--120. Koehler, K., Ebel, H., Vartzopoulos, D., 1990.
Lycanthropy and demonomania: some psychopathological issues. Psychol.
Med. 20, 629--633. Kulick, A.R., Pope, H.G., Keck Jr., P.E., 1990.
Lycanthropy and self-­ identification. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 178, 134--137.
Larmore, K., Ludwig, A.M., Cain, R.L., 1977. Multiple personality -- an
objective case study. Br. J. Psychiatry 131, 35--40. Lhermitte, J.,
1951. Visual hallucination of the self. Br. Med. J. 1, 431--434.
McDougall, W., 1911. Suggestion in Encyclopaedia Britannica, eleventh
ed. University Press, Cambridge. Merskey, H., 2000. Conversion and
dissociation. In: Gelder, M.G., López-­Ibor, J.J., Andreasen, N.C.
(Eds.), New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. Minkowski, E., 1970. Lived Time: Phenomenological and
Psychopathological Studies. Northwestern University Press, Evanston, IL.
Moreira-­Almeida, A., Cardeña, E., 2011. Differential diagnosis between
non-­pathological psychotic and spiritual experiences and mental
disorders: a contribution from Latin American studies to the ICD-­11.
Rev. Bras. Psiquiatr. 33 (Suppl. 1), S21--S36. Morris, J., 1974.
Connundrum. Faber and Faber, London. Nietzsche, F., 1901. In: The Will
to Power (W. Kaufmann, R.J. Hollingdale, Trans, 1968). Vintage Books,
New York. Picard, F., Craig, A.D., 2009. Ecstatic epileptic seizures: a
potential window on the neural basis for human self-­awareness. Epilepsy
Behav. 16, 539--546. Prince, M., 1905. The Dissociation of a
Personality. Longman, New York. Scharfetter, C., 1981.
Ego-­psychopathology: the concept and its empirical evaluation. Psychol.
Med. 11, 273--280. Scharfetter, C., 1995. The Self-­Experience of
Schizophrenics: Empirical Studies of the Ego/Self in Schizophrenia,
Borderline Disorders and Depression. Private publication, Zurich.
Scharfetter, C., 2003. The self-­experience of schizophrenics. In:
Kircher, T., David, A. (Eds.), The Self in Neuroscience and Psychiatry.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Schilder, P., 1935. The Image and
Appearance of the Human Body: Studies in the Constructive Energies of
the Psyche. Kegan Paul, London. Seligman, R., Kirmayer, L.J., 2008.
Dissociative experience and cultural neuroscience: narrative, metaphor
and mechanism. Cult. Med. Psychiatry 32, 31--64. Sims, A.C.P., 1993.
Schizophrenia and permeability of self. Neurol. Psychiatry Brain Res. 1,
133--135. Slater, E., Roth, M., 1969. Personality deviations and
neurotic reactions. In: Mayer-­Gross, W., Slater, E., Roth, M. (Eds.),
Clinical Psychiatry, third ed. Baillière Tindall and Cassell, London.
Sollier, P., 1903. L'autoscopie interne. Revue Philosophique 55, 1--41.
Stevenson, R.L.B., 1889. The Master of Ballantrae. Collins, London.
Styron, W., 1991. Darkness Visible. Jonathan Cape, London. Todd, J.,
Dewhurst, K., 1962. The significance of the Doppelgänger (hallucinatory
double) in folk-­lore and neuropsychiatry. Practitioner 188, 377--382.

12 The Disordered Self Wijesinghe, C.P., Dissanayake, S.A.W., Mendis,
N., 1976. Possession trance in a semi-­urban community in Sri Lanka.
Aust. N. Z. J. Psychiatry 10, 135--139. World Health Organization, 1992.
The ICD-­10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Clinical
Description and Diagnostic Guidelines. World Health Organization,
Geneva.

195

Zahavi, D., 2003. Phenomenology of self. In: Kircher, T., David, A.
(Eds.), The Self in Neuroscience and Psychiatry. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

This page intentionally left blank      

Chapter 13

Depersonalization Chapter Outline Summary Definitions and Descriptions
Subjective Experience of Depersonalization Organic and Psychological
Theories Depersonalization: Further Considerations

KEYWORDS Depersonalization Derealization

Summary Depersonalization is a subjective state of unreality in which
there is a feeling of estrangement, either from a sense of self or from
the external environment. Frequently, it is accompanied by the symptom
of derealization, a term denoting a similar feeling of unreality with
regard to awareness of the external world. The localization of this
feeling of unreality to a selected part of the body is called
desomatization. There may be experience of changes of size or quality,
for example, appearing large or small, empty, detached or filled with
water or foam. Deaffectualization has been used to describe the
consistent loss of the capacity to feel emotion, so that the person
seems unable to cry, love or hate. These experiences are associated with
anxiety and mood disorders and organic disease such as epilepsy and
traumatic brain injury. Depersonalization can also be triggered by the
use of cannabis, hallucinogens, ecstasy and alcohol. It can be a brief
or long-­lasting experience. It is invariably distressing to the patient:
I may be looking with some degree of attentiveness at a tumbler. As long
as I say to myself that this tumbler is a glass or metal vessel made for
the purpose of putting liquid into it and carrying it into one's lips
without upsetting it -- as long as I am able to represent the tumbler to
myself in a convincing manner -- so long shall I feel that I have some
sort of relationship with it, a relationship close enough to make me
believe in its existence and also, on a subordinate level, in my own.
But once the tumbler withers away and loses its vitality ... reveals
itself to me as something with which I have no relationship, once it
appears to me as an absurd object -- then from that very absurdity
springs boredom, which when all is said 197

198

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

and done is simply a kind of incommunicability and the capacity to
disengage oneself from it. Alberto Moravia (1960)

Definitions and Descriptions Depersonalization is the term used to
designate a peculiar change in the awareness of self, in which the
individual feels as if they are unreal (Sedman, 1972). It is best to
reserve the use of the word to this as if feeling rather than the
experience of unreality that occurs in psychosis. The as if prefix is
used by the patient, to denote that they are not using words literally
(how could they know what it would be like not 'fitting into the world',
as all their experience has been in the world?). They are expressing
uncertainty and painting a picture, and 'as if' is the best way they can
do it. It has been considered that, after depression and anxiety,
depersonalization is the most frequent symptom to occur in psychiatry
(Stewart, 1964), and 12-­month prevalence estimates for depersonalization
and derealization in a rural population are put at 19.1% and 14.4%
(Aderibigbe et al., 2001). Schilder (1928), whose classic monograph in
1914 was a turning point in the study of depersonalization, wrote: To
the depersonalized individual, the world appears strange, peculiar,
foreign, dream-­like. Objects appear at times strangely diminished in
size, at times flat. Sounds appear to come from a distance. The tactile
characteristics of objects likewise seem strangely altered. Patients
characterize their imagery as pale, colourless and some complain that
they have altogether lost the power of imagination. The emotions
likewise undergo marked alteration. Patients complain they are capable
of experiencing neither pain nor pleasure; love and hate have perished
with them. They experience a fundamental change in their personality,
and the climax is reached with their complaints that they have become
strangers to themselves. It is as though they were dead, lifeless, mere
automatons. The objective examination of such patients reveals not only
an intact sensory apparatus, but also an intact emotional apparatus. All
these patients exhibit natural affective reactions in their facial
expressions, attitudes, etc.; so that it is impossible to assume that
they are incapable of emotional response.

BOX 13.1 COMPONENTS OF DEPERSONALIZATION • Emotional numbing • Changes
in body experience • Changes in visual experience • Changes in auditory
experience • Changes in tactile experience • Changes in gustatory
experience • Changes in olfactory experience • Loss of feelings of
agency • Distortions in the experiencing of time • Changes in the
subjective experience of memory • Feelings of thought emptiness •
Subjective feelings of an inability to evoke images • Heightened
self-­observation After Sierra, M., Berrios, G.E., 2001. The
phenomenological stability of depersonalization: comparing the old with
the new. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 189, 629--636, with permission.

Depersonalization has been defined by Fewtrell (1986) as a subjective
state of unreality in which there is a feeling of estrangement either
from a sense of self or from the external environment. A more
comprehensive definition has been given by Ackner (1954a). Definitive
features are as follows: • Depersonalization is always subjective; it is
a disorder of experience. • The experience is that of an internal or
external change characterized by a feeling of strangeness or unreality.
• The experience is unpleasant. • Any mental functions may be the
subject of this change, but affect is invariably involved. • Insight is
preserved. Excluded from depersonalization are: • the experience of
unreality of self when there is delusional elaboration, • the ego
boundary disorders of schizophrenia, and • the loss or attenuation of
personal identity. An even more comprehensive description is given in
Sierra and Berrios (2001). The symptoms are listed in Box 13.1. There is
consensus that there are four or five principal domains including (1)
anomalous body experience, (2) emotional numbing, (3) anomalous
subjective recall, (4) alienation from surrounding and (5) body
distortion (Sierra, 2009). The relationship between depersonalization
and various theoretical aspects of self-­perception in phenomenology has
been reviewed by Mellor (1988), who discusses

13

the influences of Jaspers (1997), Mayer-­Gross (1935), Schilder (1920)
and Schneider (1958) on the concept. Mellor comments on the frequency of
the condition and the variety of different psychiatric illnesses with
which it may be associated. It may occur with organic psychosyndromes
including traumatic brain damage (Grigsby and Kaye, 1993), epilepsy and
migraine (Lambert et al., 2002), cannabis, hallucinogens and ecstasy
(Matthew et al., 1993; Simeon et al., 2009). It is associated with mood
disorders and anxiety disorders including social anxiety (Simeon et al.,
1997; Michal et al., 2005). The depth of depression is positively
correlated with depersonalization, and in depressed patients with
anhedonia, depersonalization was present in 75% of cases (Zikić et al.,
2009). Although the symptom has been described for longer, the term was
used by Heymans (1904) and by Dugas and Moutier (1911). The earliest
theories implicate the sensory system, but loss of mood and loss of
feelings were also prominent in early descriptions (Sierra and Berrios,
1997). Frequently, depersonalization is accompanied by the symptom of
derealization, a term used by Mapother (1935) to denote a similar change
in the awareness of the external world. Depersonalization and
derealization often go together, because the ego and its environment are
experienced as one continuous whole. However, in Mayer-­Gross' cases,
about a quarter of patients had depersonalization without derealization,
and 15% had only derealization. This relationship between
depersonalization and derealization is confirmed in the study by Baker
et al. (2003), namely that depersonalization occurs as a primary
condition in 71% and is associated with derealization in 73% of cases
such that both can effectively be regarded as a single condition. Pure
derealization does occur too but is rare. The less a patient takes
themself for granted, the more unfamiliar and alien the world around
them becomes (Scharfetter, 1980). A young female patient said: I felt as
if I didn't fit into the world ... When I saw the moon, I felt I
couldn't cope. One day it wasn't there and the next it was. I saw it and
it upset me and I went to pieces ... I felt I did not want to be alive
because I was not related to anything. I just seemed totally out of
everything and I started to cry. I couldn't cope with the hurt and the
pain. I felt I never would feel part of anything.

Depersonalization

199

It is important to realize that depersonalization, the experience, like
other nonpsychotic phenomena, occurs in healthy, normal people. Some
people may have feelings of 'not being quite themselves ... looking in
on themselves from the outside' and so on, without provocation. Others
may have such experiences at times of powerful emotional stimuli or life
crisis of any valence: extreme happiness, falling in love, the loss of
bereavement or intense fear or anger. The actual self-­ description of
depersonalization is similar irrespective of context. Dixon (1963), for
example, showed that 46% of college students had experienced symptoms of
depersonalization over a 12-­month period, and Sedman (1966) reported
that 70% of medical students had experienced symptoms of
depersonalization in a lifetime. These reports go to show that it is not
only that symptoms of depersonalization occur in normal populations but
that they are quite common. There is one particular feature described by
patients and not occurring in the depersonalization that healthy people,
especially children, may experience spontaneously in states of fatigue,
after prolonged sleep deprivation or under sensory deprivation. This is
the patient's description of the experience being intensely unpleasant
and distressing (Ackner, 1954a). It may subjectively be much the worst
symptom in an affective, reactive illness. A young married woman said: I
feel very weird in my head. I have a great deal of torment. My mind will
not leave me alone. It's the surroundings; I cannot get my mind to
myself. I felt as though I was going to fall over. I feel as if I'm lost
in a fog. I just feel as if I'm not in my head. I feel numb. The symptom
is described in a number of ways, and it is often impossible to make a
distinction between depersonalization and derealization: 'everything
seemed to be going away from me'. The five qualities of the experience
of self described in Chapter 12 may each be involved in the description
of symptoms, although always with this as if character: vitality,
activity, singleness, identity (continuity) and boundaries or
definition. There is virtually always other evidence of disturbance of
mood present: depression or anxiety or both. Coupled with this is a
feeling of loss of self-­ esteem as a very prominent symptom: 'I feel
unreal,

200

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

flat, not properly there, less of a person, as though I can't go and get
stuck in'; that is, the feeling of unreality about oneself or one's
environment has implications for lack of competence in relationships.
The patient not only feels unreal but also 'detached'; there is a
barrier to normal communication. At this point, it is important to
emphasize the distinction between depersonalization as a symptom,
occurring associated with many psychiatric conditions or no disorder at
all, and depersonalization as a syndrome. In their detailed description
of the symptoms of depersonalization disorder, based on classic
descriptions from authors in the 19th and early 20th centuries, Sierra
and Berrios (2001) have listed the following four symptoms as most
prevalent for diagnosis: emotional numbing, changes in visual
perception, changes in the experience of the body and loss of feelings
of agency. In a more recent study, Simeon et al. (2008) demonstrated
that the Cambridge Depersonalization Scale (Sierra and Berrios, 2000)
yielded five factors: numbing, unreality of self, perceptual
alterations, unreality of surroundings and temporal disintegration. In
addition, patients with depersonalization appear to have impaired
ability to generate visual imagery compared with normal control
subjects. However in these individuals with impaired imagery, there was
no associated abnormality of perceptual processes as measured by a
battery of visual perception tests (Lambert et al., 2001). These
symptoms are sometimes included with a description of depersonalization
but, for the sake of clarity, should be separated and regarded as
different psychopathologic phenomena. Disturbances of body image or
schema, disorder of subjective time sense, hypochondriacal
preoccupation, déjà vu phenomena or metamorphopsia (the distortion of
visually perceived objects) may be described by the same individual and
may occur as symptoms of depersonalization syndrome. Langfeldt's (1960)
inclusion of schizophrenic passivity experiences within the term
depersonalization is confusing, and these experiences should be excluded
from depersonalization, both as a symptom and as a disorder. SUBJECTIVE
EXPERIENCE OF DEPERSONALIZATION Depersonalization is difficult for the
doctor to portray; more important, it is also extraordinarily difficult

for the patient to describe. They often preface their attempts at
description by embarrassed statements such as 'sometimes I think I must
be going mad' or 'you will think me very peculiar when I tell you this
doctor, but ...' Then follows a halting and perplexed list of
disjointed, unpleasant experiences that the patient feels to be unique
and for which they are unable to construe metaphors that satisfy them.
Because of their failure in description, they believe that others will
find these symptoms either bogus or clear evidence of imminent madness,
so they omit them from their initial account even though such symptoms
are common among psychiatric patients and cause enormous suffering.
Depersonalization is the symptom the patient has when they experience
themself as being altered or deficient in some manner; derealization is
its equivalent with regard to their experience of things outside
themself, that is, of the external world. Because there is no definite
and easily ascertained boundary containing self, it is not always easy
to decide whether the disorder is depersonalization or derealization.
Neither is this important: they merge and overlap and are often simply
included within the term depersonalization. The hallmark of
depersonalization is the 'as if' quality of the experience. This is best
understood as the patient's attempt at describing an anomalous
experience that is difficult, if not impossible, to capture in language
such that the patient is forced to use tentative terms such as seem
like, feel like and as if to introduce some analogy to best represent
the experience. There is always a change in mood with depersonalization:
the patient loses the feeling of familiarity they have for themself or
for the world outside themself. They may describe themself as feeling
like a puppet: hollow, detached and strange; on the outside; uninvolved
with life; not themself; like a ghost, not solid; a stranger to
themself. They experience a loss of emotion. Similarly, with
derealization they may describe their environment as flat, dim in
colour, smaller, distant, cloudy, dream-­like, still, 'nothing to do with
me' and also lacking in emotional significance. Depersonalization is
common but yet to the patient so obscure and unpleasant that, whenever
the description of symptoms is interrupted by the patient's baffled
hesitancy, they should be questioned with possible depersonalization
symptoms in mind. Their relief at finding someone prepared to listen,
and even perhaps

13

understand, is often enormous. Schilder (1935) has described these
symptoms as follows: In a case of depersonalization the individual feels
completely changed from what he was previously. This change is present
in the ego (self) as well as in the outside world and the individual
does not recognize himself as a personality. His actions appear to him
as automatic. He observes his actions and behaviour from the point of
view of a spectator. The outside world is foreign and new to him and is
not as real as before. Schilder is using the word personality here to
refer to the whole person, not only personality in the modern sense of
the word. This changed awareness of self and its relationships with the
environment is always experienced as being intensely unpleasant. The
localization of this symptom to an individual organ is called
desomatization. There are many different possible parameters in the
awareness of different organs: changes of size or quality---for example,
appearing large or tiny, empty, detached or filled with water or foam.
Sometimes the body or parts of it may be experienced as nonexistent: 'I
do not feel I have a body'. The patient may have a feeling of their legs
being weightless, of floating or of simply being unfamiliar. Koro, a
culture-­bound disorder described by Yap (1965) (see also Chapter 8 of
this volume), is sometimes described as an example of depersonalization.
It is probably best to regard this condition as a culture-­ specific
manifestation of acute anxiety in which the patient believes their penis
is shrinking and fears that it will ultimately disappear. Although there
may be associated feelings of unreality and watching the drama as a
spectator, the primary underlying abnormality is one of intense anxiety.
There are reports of a loss of the feeling of agency, that is, as if
actions occur as a mechanical process unrelated to the patient. In some
patients there are also reports of heightened self-­scrutiny (Sierra,
2009). Change of feeling concerning the body or depersonalization may be
associated with distortion of time sense, when the passage of time
appears altered in some way: 'time, both past and present, seems quite
unreal to me, as if it had never happened and was never going to
happen'. Sometimes, the complaint is that memories of events seem to
have happened

Depersonalization

201

to somebody else. Deaffectualization has been used to describe the
consistent loss of the capacity to feel emotion, so that the person
seems unable to cry, love or hate (Anonymous, 1972). Indeed, some
patients are unable to have an emotional response to music or retain
empathy for the suffering of others. A patient says, 'I am going mad
inside my head'; on further questioning, they are describing finding
their own mental processes to be strange. The feeling of familiarity
that occurs when a person perceives previously known objects (opening
the front door at home and looking inside) also occurs when one
introspects into one's own thinking (remembering or fantasizing my front
hall). I know what is there in my thoughts; I know what I will think
about any particular object, because it is unlikely to be very different
from what I thought about it last time. I also know, in general terms,
what I will think about myself because of past experience. It is this
assumed certainty that disappears; the loss of familiarity of oneself
occurring in depersonalization, or of outside self in derealization, is
similar to the abnormality of the feeling of familiarity occurring in
jamais vu (when there is no sense of previously having seen a well-­known
object) and its opposite, déjà vu (when an unfamiliar object or
experience seems to be familiar). This association between the
subjective experiences in depersonalization and déjà vu phenomena
(including jamais vu) and commonality in alteration in the feeling of
familiarity has been known since the work of Heymans at the beginning of
the 20th century (Sno and Draaisma, 1993). Like other aspects of
self-­experience, depersonalization has social and situational aspects.
Frequently, the person feels that they are less able to accept themself,
their personality, their behaviour than other people accept their own.
They consider that their feelings about themself, their loss of reality,
is unique. This is a barrier to their giving an account of their
symptoms, and this in its turn is a barrier to communication in all
areas of life. They feel themself to be different, isolated and
estranged from others. Depersonalization is an experience within an
individual, but it has considerable social consequences. It frequently
occurs in attacks that may be of any duration, from seconds to months.
Typically, in depersonalization disorder the altered state lasts for a
few hours, in temporal lobe epilepsy for a few minutes and

202

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

in anxiety disorder for a few seconds. Improvement is usually first
manifested in a gradual increase in time free from symptoms rather than
a reduction in the symptoms themselves when present. However, it can
present as with a chronic nonremitting course. Onset may be insidious
and with no known initiating cause, or it may be in response to a
trigger. The most common immediate precipitants are severe stress,
depression, panic and marijuana ingestion (Simeon et al., 2003). A
middle-­aged man who described his depersonalization 'like something
supernatural---my body separated from me---a lost feeling' vividly
recalled his first attack at the age of 11, when undergoing anaesthesia
for the reduction of a fracture. Subsequent attacks felt similar despite
the absence of provocation. He had also experienced attacks of sleep
paralysis since age 25 and had discovered that by keeping himself awake
until very tired, he would fall asleep more quickly and thus avoid it.
Another man was severely stressed by his quite unreasonable working
conditions, hours of work, unsympathetic employer and difficult car
journeys in the course of his work. Early one winter morning, he had an
appalling journey through fog along crowded motorways blocked by
accidents, and ultimately suffered a lapse of recall for 24 hours in
which he remembered nothing of driving to another town, registering
himself into a hotel, ordering a meal, hanging up his clothes tidily and
going to bed. His next memory was arriving at a local hospital the next
day. He remained depersonalized for years subsequently, and his wife
described this as 'he's not the man I married; it's like his twin
brother'. Depersonalization is frequently situational, both in its
original context and in its repeated occurrences. Factors commonly
associated with symptom exacerbation are negative affects, stress,
perceived threatening social interaction and unfamiliar environments
(Simeon et al., 2003). Many policemen who were involved in a major
disaster at a football ground described depersonalization among other
symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder, sometimes lasting for years
subsequently (Sims and Sims, 1998). One man described feeling 'switched
off ... I felt I wasn't on this planet any more'. Because
depersonalization occurs at times of great stress, it may occur in the
perpetrator of antisocial behaviour (e.g., violent crime), as well as in
the victim. Rix and Clarkson (1994) give an account

of a man who savagely assaulted his wife with a large spanner: 'It was
as if it was a dream or a nightmare. I realized later what I had done
but at the time it was as if I wasn't there'. It was considered that
depersonalization in this case was linked to dissociation, that although
it represented a change in the individual's self-­experience it did not
affect his volition or intent. Although in the two preceding cases
depersonalization was associated with dissociation, it is important to
regard these experiences as distinct phenomena. Empirical evidence also
suggests that these experiences, even when associated, are different and
do not lie on a continuum (Putnam et al., 1996; Simeon et al., 1998).
Neither does depersonalization occur with any greater frequency in
chronic dissociative disorders such as dissociative identity disorder
(Ross, 1997). Self-­induced episodes of depersonalization, as an
unpleasant symptom, have been recorded after particular patterns of
behaviour. Thus Kennedy (1976) described self-­induced depersonalization
persisting as a complaint after transcendental meditation and yoga.

Organic and Psychological Theories Theories accounting for the
occurrence of depersonalization, including organic, psychological,
psychoanalytical and those linking it with schizophrenia, were reviewed
by Sedman (1970). Depersonalization is regularly cited as a common
symptom associated with organic states, especially temporal lobe
epilepsy (Sedman and Kenna, 1965). This is based on the contention of
Mayer-­Gross (1935) that depersonalization is a preformed functional
response of the brain, that is, a nonspecific mechanism resulting from
many influences on the brain, occurring in an idiosyncratic way in
individuals in a similar manner to epileptic fits or delirium. He was,
in this, following the neurophysiologic hierarchical concepts of
Hughlings Jackson (1884), who considered that the highest levels of
cerebral function were lost first, leaving uninterrupted the activity of
lower levels. Organic theories purporting to account for
depersonalization would suggest that alteration of consciousness acts as
a release mechanism. However, Sedman (1970), in reviewing the
literature, showed that, even in various forms of organic
psychosyndromes, the incidence of depersonalization phenomena was
similar to

13

that found in the general population, at between 25% and 50%; in more
severe chronic organic psychosis, the rate was lower. From a variety of
studies, no quantitative relationship had been demonstrated between the
degree of torpor (i.e., the stage on the continuum from full alertness
to unconsciousness) and the development of depersonalization. On
studying the performance of depersonalized subjects on psychosomatic
tests, there did not appear to be evidence to support a specific
relationship between clouding of consciousness and depersonalization.
There appeared to be many individuals who, despite various types of
assault on their brains, never developed depersonalization. From this
information, Sedman (1970) concluded that: there may well be a built in
preformed mechanism in approximately 40 per cent of the population to
exhibit depersonalization; that the factors which initiate such a
response are not specifically those associated with clouding of
consciousness; or where clouding of consciousness appears to be playing
a part, it may well be the presence of another common factor that is
more relevant. Thus the relationship between depersonalization and brain
pathology remains unclear. Depersonalization is certainly not
pathognomonic of organic diseases; in fact, there is no organic or
psychotic abnormality in the vast majority of sufferers. The state of
increased alertness observed in depersonalization is considered by
Sierra and Berrios (1998) to result from activation of prefrontal
attentional systems and reciprocal inhibition of the anterior cingulate,
leading to experiences of 'mind emptiness' and 'indifference to pain'.
The lack of emotional colouring, reported as feelings of unreality,
would be accounted for by a left-­sided prefrontal mechanism with
inhibition of the amygdala. Some authorities describe left-­ hemispheric
frontotemporal activation coupled with decreased left caudate perfusion
(Hollander et al., 1992; Phillips and Sierra, 2003), while others'
reports emphasize the role of anxiety and the consequent downregulation
of emotional processing in the limbic system (Sierra and David, 2011).
There are reports of functional imaging abnormalities in regions
involved in integration of sensory perception such as the inferior
temporal sulcus and right posterior cingulate

Depersonalization

203

(Sierra et al., 2014), which align contemporary developments with
Ackner's (1954b) original hypothesis that depersonalization is a problem
of integration of experience rather than one of perception.
Depersonalization is sometimes associated with self-­induced organic
states. Thus it occurs after the ingestion of alcohol or drugs,
especially psychomimetics such as lysergic acid diethylamide (Sedman and
Kenna, 1964), mescaline, marijuana or cannabis (Szymanski, 1981; Carney
et al., 1984; Simeon et al., 2009) and with sensory deprivation. It is
also described as a side effect with prescribed psychotropic drugs such
as the tricyclic antidepressants, but because of the common association
between depersonalization and depression, it may be difficult to
attribute causation. Neurochemical findings have identified possible
involvement of serotonergic, endogenous opioid and glutamatergic
N-­methyl-­d-­ aspartic acid pathways. Additionally, there is evidence of
widespread metabolic alterations in the sensory association cortex as
well as prefrontal hyperactivation and limbic inhibition in response to
aversive stimuli (Simeon, 2004). Furthermore, there is association with
childhood interpersonal trauma, particularly emotional maltreatment
(Simeon et al., 2001; Simeon, 2004).

Depersonalization: Further Considerations Sometimes there has been
considerable confusion over whether depersonalization can be
distinguished from the disorders of self-­image described in Chapter 12
as occurring in schizophrenia. In fact, passivity experiences have even
been described as a variant of depersonalization. However, Meyer (1956),
as cited by Sedman (1970), has distinguished schizophrenic ego
disturbances from depersonalization on phenomenological grounds, that
is, on the description by the patient of their own internal experience.
It is of course well recognized that true depersonalization symptoms do
occur in patients with schizophrenia, especially in the early stages of
the illness, alongside definite schizophrenic psychopathology.
Depersonalization is commonly described in bipolar affective disorder;
however, the symptoms occur only in the depressive phase and there are
no references to depersonalization occurring in mania (Sedman, 1970).

204

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Anderson (1938) considered that ecstasy states occurring in bipolar
affective disorders were the obverse of depersonalization and that,
although the former occurred in mania, the latter occurred in
depression. Sedman (1972), in an investigation of three matched groups,
each of 18 subjects with depersonalization and depressive and anxiety
symptoms, considered that the results stressed the importance of
depressed mood in depersonalization, whereas anxiety seemed to carry no
significant relationship. Many other authors have stressed the close
association between the symptoms of depersonalization and anxiety. For
instance, Roth (1959, 1960) described the phobic anxiety
depersonalization syndrome as a separate nosologic entity, but saw it as
a form of anxiety on which the additional symptoms are superimposed in a
particular group of individuals. He considered depersonalization to be
more common with anxiety than with other affective disorders, for
example, depression. The phobic symptoms are usually agoraphobic in
nature. The patient, most often female, married and often in the third
decade of life, has a great fear of being conspicuous in an embarrassing
way in public, for example, fainting or being taken ill suddenly on a
bus or in a supermarket. Fear of leaving the house unaccompanied
develops from this, so that the patient is frightened of being at a
distance from familiar surroundings without some supporting figure to
whom she can turn. She may be unable to go out of the house at all, even
with her husband. She may feel panicky on her own at home and so keeps
her child off school, a potential precipitating factor in subsequent
school refusal. The symptom of dizziness is a very common complaint and
frequently results in referral to ear, nose and throat departments.
Fewtrell and O'Connor (1989) discuss two possible models for the
relationship of this condition to depersonalization: one that dizziness
and depersonalization are the same experience described differently; the
other, a bipolar hypothesis, proposes that the two experiences form
opposite ends of a dimension describing disturbed self--outside world
relationships. Although depersonalization is commonly described in
association with agoraphobia, other phobic states, panic disorder,
various types of depressive condition, post-traumatic stress disorder
and other nonpsychotic

conditions, it may also appear as a pure depersonalization syndrome, and
Davison (1964) has described episodic depersonalization in which other
aetiologic factors or comorbid disorders are not prominent. In
psychoanalytic theory, depersonalization has taken on a rather different
meaning, and therefore there are different explanations for its origin.
Psychoanalysts have been less concerned with describing the phenomena
than the underlying concept of the alienation of the ego. For example,
in the work of the existentialist school, as typified by Binswanger
(1963), there is discussion of the depersonalization of man. The
distressing experience of depersonalization with a feeling of unreality
remains central to the description of the disordered self. The
disturbance that causes this may be organic or environmental, psychotic
or existential. Concern about the experience of self and of the
environment most commonly occur together. REFERENCES Ackner, B., 1954a.
Depersonalization I. Aetiology and phenomenology II. Clinical syndromes.
J. Ment. Sci. 100, 838--872. Ackner, B., 1954b. Depersonalization: II.
Clinical syndromes. J. Ment. Sci. 100, 853--872. Aderibigbe, Y.A.,
Bloch, R.M., Walker, W.R., 2001. Prevalence of depersonalization and
derealization experiences in a rural population. Soc. Psychiatry
Psychiatr. Epidemiol. 36, 63--69. Anderson, E.W., 1938. A clinical study
of states of 'ecstasy' occurring in affective disorders. J. Neurol.
Psychiatry 1, 1--20. \[Anonymous\], 1972. Depersonalisation syndromes
\[leading article\]. Br. Med. J. 4, 378. Baker, D., Hunter, E.,
Lawrence, E., et al., 2003. Depersonalisation disorder: clinical
features of 204 cases. Br. J. Psychiatry 182, 428--433. Binswanger, L.,
1963. Being-­in-­the-­world. In: Selected Papers of Ludwig Binswanger (J.
Needleman, Trans, 1975). Basic Books, London. Carney, M.W.P., Bacelle,
L., Robinson, B., 1984. Psychosis after cannabis abuse. Br. Med. J. 288,
1047. Davison, K., 1964. Episodic depersonalisation: observations on
seven patients. Br. J. Psychiatry 110, 505--513. Dixon, J.C., 1963.
Depersonalization phenomena in a sample population of college students.
Br. J. Psychiatry 109, 371--375. Dugas, L., Moutier, F., 1911. La
Depersonalisation. Felix Alcon, Paris. Fewtrell, W.D., 1986.
Depersonalization: a description and suggested strategies. Br. J. Guid.
Counc. 14, 263--269. Fewtrell, W.D., O'Connor, K.P., 1989. Dizziness and
depersonalization. Adv. Behav. Res. Ther. 10, 201--218. Grigsby, J.,
Kaye, K., 1993. Incidence and correlates of depersonalization following
head trauma. Brain Inj. 7, 507--513. Heymans, G., 1904. Eine Enquête
über Depersonalisation und 'Fausse Reconnaisance. Z. Psychol. 36,
321--343. Hollander, E., Carrasco, J.L., Mullen, L.S., Trungold, S.,
DeCaria, C.M., Towey, J., 1992. Left hemispheric activation in
depersonalization disorder: a case report. Biol. Psychiatry 31,
1157--1162.

13 Hughlings Jackson, J., 1884. Croonian lectures on evolution and
dissolution of the nervous system. In: Taylor, J. (Ed.), 1958, Selected
Writings of John Hughlings Jackson, vol. 2. Staples Press, London,
pp. 3--120. Jaspers, K., 1997. General Psychopathology (J. Hoenig, M.W.
Hamilton, Trans). The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Kennedy, R.B., 1976. Self-­ induced depersonalization syndrome. Am. J.
Psychiatry 133, 1326--1328. Lambert, M.V., Sierra, M., Phillips, M.L.,
David, A.S., 2002. The spectrum of organic depersonalization: a review
plus four new cases. J. Neuropsychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 14, 141--154.
Lambert, M.V., Senior, C., Phillips, M.L., Sierra, M., Hunter, E.,
David, A.S., 2001. Visual imagery and depersonalization. Psychopathology
34, 259--264. Langfeldt, G., 1960. Diagnosis and prognosis of
schizophrenia. Proc. R. Soc. Med. 52, 595--596. Mapother, E., 1935.
Cited by Mayer-­Gross. 1935. Matthew, R.J., Wilson, W.H., Humphreys, D.,
Lowe, J.V., Weithe, K.E., 1993. Depersonalization after marijuana
smoking. Biol. Psychiatry 33, 431--441. Mayer-­Gross, W., 1935. On
depersonalisation. Br. J. Med. Psychol. 15, 103--122. Mellor, C.S.,
1988. Depersonalisation and self-­perception. Br. J. Psychiatry 153
(Suppl. 2), 15--19. Meyer, J.E., 1956. Studien zur Depersonalisation.
Monatsschr. Psychiatr. Neurol. 132, 221--232. Michal, M., Kaufhold, J.,
Grabhorn, R., Krakow, K., Overbeck, G., Heidenreich, T., 2005.
Depersonalization and social anxiety. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 193, 629--632.
Moravia, A., 1960. Boredom (A. Davidson, Trans). New York Review Books,
New York. Phillips, M.L., Sierra, M., 2003. Depersonalization disorder:
a functional neuroanatomical perspective. Stress 6, 157--165. Putnam,
F.W., Carlson, E.B., Ross, C.A., et al., 1996. Patterns of dissociation
in clinical and non-­clinical samples. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 184, 673--679.
Rix, K.J.B., Clarkson, A., 1994. Depersonalisation and intent. J.
Forens. Psychiatry 5, 409--419. Ross, C., 1997. Dissociative Identity
Disorder: Diagnosis, Clinical Features and Treatment of Multiple
Personality. John Wiley, New York. Roth, M., 1959. The phobic
anxiety--depersonalization syndrome. Proc. R. Soc. Med. 52, 587--595.
Roth, M., 1960. The phobic anxiety--depersonalization syndrome and some
general aetiological problems in psychiatry J. Neuropsychiatr. 1,
292--306. Scharfetter, C., 1980. General Psychopathology: An
Introduction. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Schilder, P., 1920.
Medizinische Psychologie (D. Rapaport, Trans, 1953, as Medical
Psychologie). International Universities Press, New York. Schilder, P.,
1928. Depersonalisation. In: Introduction to Psychoanalytic Psychiatry
Nervous and Mental Disease Monograph, Series 50. W.W. Norton, New York.
Schilder, P., 1935. The Image and Appearance of the Human Body: Studies
in the Constructive Energies of the Psyche. Kegan Paul, London.
Schneider, K., 1958. Clinical Psychopathology, fifth ed. (M.W. Hamilton,
Trans). Grune and Stratton, New York. Sedman, G., 1966.
Depersonalization in a group of normal subjects. Br. J. Psychiatry 112
(490), 907--912.

Depersonalization

205

Sedman, G., 1970. Theories of depersonalisation: a reappraisal. Br. J.
Psychiatry 117, 1--14. Sedman, G., 1972. An investigation of certain
factors concerned in the aetiology of depersonalisation. Acta Psychiatr.
Scand. 48, 191--219. Sedman, G., Kenna, J.C., 1964. The occurrence of
depersonalisation phenomena under LSD. Psychiatr. Neurol (Basel). 147,
129--137. Sedman, G., Kenna, J.C., 1965. Depersonalisation in temporal
lobe epilepsy and the organic psychoses. Br. J. Psychiatry 111,
293--299. Sierra, M., 2009. Depersonalization: A New Look at a Neglected
Syndrome. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Sierra, M., Berrios,
G.E., 1997. Depersonalization: a conceptual history. Hist. Psychiat. 8,
213--229. Sierra, M., Berrios, G.E., 1998. Depersonalization:
neurobiological perspectives. Biol. Psychiatry 44, 898--908. Sierra, M.,
Berrios, G.E., 2000. The Cambridge Depersonalization Scale: a new
instrument for the measurement of depersonalization. Psychiatry Res. 93,
153--164. Sierra, M., Berrios, G.E., 2001. The phenomenological
stability of depersonalization: comparing the old with the new. J. Nerv.
Ment. Dis. 189, 629--636. Sierra, M., David, A.S., 2011.
Depersonalization: a selective impairment of self-­awareness. Conscious
Cog. 20 (1), 99--108. Sierra, M., Nestler, S., Jay, E.L., Ecker, C.,
Feng, Y., David, A.S., 2014. A structural MRI study of cortical
thickness in depersonalisation disorder. Psychiatry Res. 30, 224
(1),1--7. Simeon, D., 2004. Depersonalization disorder: a contemporary
overview. CNS Drugs 18, 343--354. Simeon, D., Knutelska, M., Nelson, D.,
Guralnik, O., 2003. Feeling unreal: a depersonalization disorder update
of 117 cases. J. Clin. Psychiatry 64, 990--997. Simeon, D., Kozin, D.S.,
Segal, K., Lerch, B., 2009. Is depersonalization disorder initiated by
illicit drug use any different? A survey of 394 adults. J. Clin.
Psychiatry 70, 1358--1364. Simeon, D., Guralnik, O., Schmeidler, J.,
Sirof, B., Knutelska, M., 2001. The role of childhood interpersonal
trauma in depersonalization disorder. Am. J. Psychiatry 158, 1027--1033.
Simeon, D., Gross, S., Guralnik, O., Stein, D.J., Schmeidler, J.,
Hollander, E., 1997. Feeling unreal: 30 cases of DSM-­IIIR
depersonalization disorder. Am. J. Psychiatry 154, 1107--1113. Simeon,
D., Guralnik, O., Gross, S., Stein, D.J., Schmeidler, J., Hollander, E.,
1998. The detection and measurement of depersonalization disorder. J.
Nerv. Ment. Dis. 186, 536--542. Simeon, D., Kozin, D.S., Segal, K.,
Lerch, B., Dujour, R., Giesbrecht, T., 2008. De-­constructing
depersonalization: further evidence for symptom clusters. Psychiatry Res
157, 303--306. Sims, A., Sims, D., 1998. The phenomenology of
post-­traumatic stress disorder: a symptomatic study of 70 victims of
psychological trauma. Psychopathology 31, 96--112. Sno, H.M., Draaisma,
D., 1993. An early Dutch study of déjà vu experiences. Psychol. Med. 23,
17--26. Stewart, W.A., 1964. Panel on depersonalization. J. Am.
Psychoanal. Assoc. 12, 171--186. Szymanski, H.V., 1981. Prolonged
depersonalization after marijuana use. Am. J. Psychiatry 138, 231--233.
Yap, P.M., 1965. Koro---a culture-­ bound depersonalisation syndrome. Br.
J. Psychiatry 111, 43--50. Zikić, O., Cirić, S., Mitković, M., 2009.
Depressive phenomenology in regard to depersonalization level.
Psychiatr. Danub. 21, 320--326.

This page intentionally left blank

     

Chapter 14

Disorder of the Awareness of the Body Chapter Outline Summary The Body
in Psychopathology Classification Disorders of Beliefs About the Body
(Bodily Complaint Without Organic Cause) Hypochondriasis Disorders of
Bodily Function---Conversion and Dissociation Disorders of the Physical
Characteristics and Emotional Value of the Body (Dislike of the Body)
Disorders of the Physical Characteristics of the Body Disturbance of
Shape Experience Reduplication of the Body or Its Parts Dysmorphophobia
(Body Dysmorphic Disorder) Body Integrity Identity Disorder Disturbance
of Eating and Body Size Disorders of the Sensory Awareness of the Body
(Organic Changes in Body Image) Pathologic Accentuation of Body Image
(Hyperschemazia) Diminished or Absent Body Image (Hyposchemazia,
Aschemazia) Distortion of the Body Image (Paraschemazia) Culture-­Bound
Disorders of Body Image

KEYWORDS Hypochondriasis Disgust Dysmorphophobia Body integrity identity
disorder Anorexia nervosa Muscle dysmorphia

Summary The body is the physical manifestation of the individual being.
It is the material, corporeal interface with the external world. The
world is experienced through the body's senses. The body, also, is
itself experienced as an object in the world. In this chapter, we
examine the following: •  disorders of beliefs about the body including
beliefs of illness, disease and death, •  disorders of bodily function,
including the loss of sensory, motor or cognitive function that occur in
the conversion and dissociative disorders, • disorders of the experience
of the physical characteristics of the body and of the emotional and
aesthetic value, and • complex disorders of the sensory awareness of the
body that almost exclusively derive from neurologic lesions. Even though
these abnormal experiences are disparate, what binds them together into
a coherent aspect of psychopathology is that the body as experienced is
at their heart. Beside fear and sorrow, 'sharp belchings, fulsome
crudities, heat in the bowels, wind and rumblings in the guts, vehement
gripings, pain in the belly and stomach sometimes after meat that is
hard of concoction, much watering of the stomach, and moist spittle,
cold sweat.' Robert Burton (1577--1640), The Anatomy of Melancholia
(1628)

207

208

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

with an attitude: they appraise bodies with a set of beliefs and
expectations, form judgements and act towards bodies with approval or
disapproval.

To some, ill health is a way to be important, Others are stoics, a few
fanatics, who won't feel happy until they are cut open.

The Body in Psychopathology W.H. Auden (1969)

The physicality of the body is ever present: there is density, mass,
movement, action, speed, position, heat, cold and various degrees of
touch, pain and so on. Since Descartes (1596--1650), the relationship
between mind and body has stimulated much investigation and discussion.
Descartes' original claim was that the mind and body are distinct and
different; furthermore, that the mind can exist without the body. There
are other theories that attempt to account for the nature of mind and
body. Materialist theories propose that the body is all there is, and
variations of these theories account for mind in different ways, whereas
idealist theories make the opposite claim that the mind is all that
exists. The fact that many descriptions of mood, cognition, volition and
other psychological functions are expressed in physical terms---a heavy
heart, bone-­ headed, guts and determination, a pain in the neck---
underlines the inextricable relationship between mind and body and
emphasizes the degree to which the body can become a means of
communicating distress and bodily metaphors used to consciously or
unconsciously express feelings. Whether these metaphors originally
derive from the physical manifestations of emotional distress or whether
the language, that is, the metaphor, structures the experience is a moot
point. What is clear is that there is no ready division between the
subjective experience of self and body. A 10-­year-­old girl put this
relationship thus: 'You feel better if you've done your homework; if you
haven't you get a horrible pain in your stomach'. Finally, because the
body is itself an object in the world, it inhabits a world of values and
norms such that there are 'good' and 'bad' bodies, 'desirable' and
'undesirable' bodies. In addition, a subset of values is aesthetics, so
that there are 'beautiful' and 'ugly' bodies. This means that
individuals approach both their own and other people's bodies

Our bodies have an objective physicality like all other material objects
in the world. However, there is also the subjective, animated body that
is alive and with which we deeply identify. These two aspects of our
bodies have different words in German that denote them: Körper refers to
the body as an object and Leib to the subjectively experienced body.
Pollio et al. (2008) conducted a phenomenological investigation of
adults' intuitions of their daily-­embodied experiences. The
participants' responses focused on eight situations: 1. Awareness of the
body when engaged in an activity; 2.  Awareness of the body when
experiencing aches, pains, illness and fatigue; 3. Awareness of the body
as presented to other people in posture and dress; 4. Awareness of the
body during pregnancy and during sexual intimacy and arousal; 5.
Awareness of changes in the body over time; 6. Awareness of the body as
an aspect of identity, for example, as a Christian; 7. Awareness of the
presence or absence of others; and 8. Awareness of strong emotions. In
addition to awareness of the body in these situations, the respondents
also had three unique modes of experiencing their bodies. These modes
include the experience of engagement, corporeality and interpersonal
meaning. Experience of engagement was subdivided into (1) body in
vitality during episodes the person is fully engaged in the world with
no sense of the body as physical, but there is a consciousness of
well-­being and (2) body in activity during activities when the person
experiences the concrete movements as central to the experience, for
example, during running. Experience of corporeality includes (1) the
body as instrument, that is, as a tool, and (2) as an object that has
limits and that can be impaired by illness. Finally, experiences of

14 Disorder of the Awareness of the Body

interpersonal meaning refer to the social and symbolic meaning of our
bodies. The experience of interpersonal meaning of our bodies is dealt
with in studies of the sociology of the body. We engage with others and
interact with them from the first-­person perspective of a person who is
embodied. The physical characteristics of our bodies including size,
shape, mannerisms, gait and so on significantly influence our
relationships, perceptions of others and how we too are perceived.
Furthermore, our bodily conduct, how we control our bodily urges, the
quality and standard of self-­grooming and personal hygiene contribute to
our identity and personal characteristics and define how others appraise
us. In short, the body in society has profound implications for issues
relating to health, gender, sexual preference, ethnicity, disability,
social status and politics. It is therefore self-­evident that any
description of abnormalities of body awareness will have implications
far beyond the scope of medicine or psychiatry. For a detailed
examination of these matters, see Howson (2013). Finally, the body is
central to Merleau-­Ponty's (1962) phenomenology. His claim is that
although the body is an object, it is like no other object because it is
the medium by which we experience all other objects. He writes, 'I
observe external objects with my body, I handle them, examine them, walk
round them, but my body itself is a thing which I do not observe: in
order to be able to do so, I should need the use of a second body which
itself would be unobservable'. These ideas have been further developed
in more modern studies---and the suggestion is not merely that our
bodies are central to our experience of the material world but that such
brain functions such as perception, memory, concept formation, language
and so forth are influenced by the configuration and activities of our
bodies. Gibbs (2005) exemplifies this point: Perception cannot be
understood without reference to action. People do not perceive the world
statically, but by actively exploring the environment. For instance, if
I move closer to the table in front of me, I see the textured lines in
the wood surface better. If I turn my head, I distinctly hear the music
playing softly on the stereo behind me. If I move to the steaming cup of
coffee on

209

the counter, and lean over close by, I clearly smell the scent of coffee
beans. Each bodily movement enables my sensory organs to do their work
depending on my motivations and goals. It is obvious from the foregoing
that the body and self are conceptually linked and that brain functions
depend on the body in action. The separation of abnormalities of self
and of body in distinct chapters are merely for convenience and by
convention. To form a cohesive framework for conceptualizing the
disorders of self and the diverse abnormalities of body image, one needs
to apply the methods of descriptive psychopathology. In Chapter 12, the
nature of self and the pathology of the experience of self were
discussed. In this chapter, disorders of the awareness of body are
discussed.

Classification Cutting (1997) gives a good outline of the classification
of disorders of awareness of the body, which has been adapted for this
chapter (Table 14.1). There are disorders of beliefs about the body,
including beliefs of illness, disease and death (discussed
subsequently). In this group are also the disorders of dissatisfaction
with the body, which occur in eating disorders. These dissatisfactions
with the body are best understood as arising from negative cognitive
evaluations, that is, beliefs about the body. Next, there are disorders
of bodily function, including the loss of sensory, motor or cognitive
function that occurs in the dissociative disorders. There are disorders
of the experience of the physical characteristics of the body. These
include disorders of the experience of the size, shape, structure or
weight of the body. Finally, there are complex disorders of the sensory
experience of the body that almost exclusively derive from neurologic
lesions.

Disorders of Beliefs About the Body (Bodily Complaint Without Organic
Cause) Classification of these disorders is difficult, partly because
the symptoms are obscure in origin and

210

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

TABLE 14.1 Classification of Disorders of Awareness of the Body
Classification

Details

Beliefs About the Body Illness and disease Body dissatisfaction

Hypochondriacal symptoms Real and ideal body weight discrepancy

Function of the Body Sensory deficits

For example, dissociative sensory loss (blindness)

Experience of Physical Characteristics of the Body Size

Shape Colour Structure Weight

Microsomatognosia, macrosomatognosia and body image disturbance 'My jaws
are misshapen' Skin colour may be experienced as lighter 'My lungs are
connected to my abdomen' Feelings of lightness or heaviness

Experience of Emotional Value of the Body Anosognosic overestimation
Misoplegia Dysmorphophobia

Exaggeration of body's strength Hatred of body part Feeling of ugliness
or defect of body or one of its parts

Experience of Sensory Awareness of the Body and the World Palinaptia

Exosomesthesia Alloaesthesia

Persistence of sensation beyond the duration of contact with stimuli
Cutaneous sensation in extra-­ personal space Experience of sensation on
contralateral side to stimulation

  

After Cutting, J., 1997. Principles of Psychopathology. Oxford
University Press, Oxford., p. 317, with permission of Oxford University
Press.

partly because there are different theoretical bases for the words used.
For example, conversion hysteria was used as a term that referred to the
presumed unconscious conversion of an unacceptable affect into a
physical symptom. Hypochondriasis refers to a concern with symptoms and
with illness that the outside observer regards as excessive; the same
amount

of concern or complaint associated with pathology that the doctor
regards as justifying it would not be deemed hypochondriacal.
Dysmorphophobia is a phenomenological term and refers to the subjective
experience of dissatisfaction with bodily shape or form (Fig. 14.1).
HYPOCHONDRIASIS Hypochondriasis describes the subjective and undue
awareness of physical symptoms, which are interpreted as signalling
serious illness. It is a symptom and not a disease. There are many
different modes of expression: minor pain and discomfort dominate the
person's life and occupy their attention; they may have unreasonable
fears about the likelihood of developing serious illness and feel a need
to take excessive precautions; they may misinterpret benign blemishes as
having sinister pathologic significance. These expressions of
dissatisfaction may occur on their own or in any combination, and they
can affect any bodily system or psychological process. Hypochondriacal
symptoms are common and usually transient. Only a minority come to
medical attention, and only a selected atypical proportion of these are
seen by psychiatrists. There is a distinction between illness fears,
when there are no bodily symptoms, and the fears and distress, which are
not associated with bodily symptoms but merely arise out of the
possibility of serious illness. This shows the overlap between illness
phobias (unreasonable fear of developing illness) and hypochondriasis
(preoccupation with symptoms). There is often difficulty in diagnosis
when a person with demonstrable physical pathology complains excessively
about their symptoms; their complaints appear to be out of proportion to
the anticipated suffering and disability of the illness. Necessary and
entirely routine medical examination and investigation tend to reinforce
the patient's symptoms. Somatic symptoms without organic pathology are
extremely common and may result from misunderstanding the nature and
significance of physiologic activity aggravated by emotion (Kellner,
1985). The mechanisms underlying hypochondriacal symptoms include
misinterpretation of normal bodily sensations; conversion of unpleasant
affect, especially depression, into physical symptoms; and the

14 Disorder of the Awareness of the Body

211

Undue concern with illness -- hypochondriasis

Undue concern with appearance -- narcissism

Actual physical illness

Dislike of body -- dysmorphophobia, transsexualism

Actual physical deformity

Distortion of body image -- anorexia nervosa, obesity Fig. 14.1
Disorders of bodily complaint.

experience of autonomic symptoms directly caused by disorder of mood.
Explicit in the identification of hypochondriasis is the condition of
the patient themself. Implicit, however, is the doctor who labels their
patient hypochondriacal and deems them sick. In a society that is so
conscious of physical health and external physical appearance, the
patient may have to shout 'hypochondriacally' because the doctor will
only listen out for physical complaints. What the symptoms communicate
to other people is an important component of all disorders of bodily
awareness; concentration on the subjective aspects of symptoms should
not detract from their social implications. Hypochondriasis is not
uncommonly an iatrogenic condition induced by the doctor's failure to
listen to their patient's story and inability to give appropriate weight
to psychological aspects contributing to symptoms. What Is
Hypochondriasis?

By derivation, the word hypochondrium refers to the anatomic area below
the rib cage (Fig. 14.2) and hence dysfunction of the liver or spleen.
Such words as atrabilious or melancholia refer to the black bile that
was considered to be associated with hypochondriacal complaint and
depressed mood. Kenyon (1965) has defined hypochondriasis as morbid
preoccupation with the body or state of health.

Hypochondria

Epigastric

Lumbar

Umbilical

Iliac

Lumbar

Iliac Hypogastric

Fig. 14.2 The hypochondrium.

Is hypochondriasis a separate condition---a symptom or a syndrome, a
noun or an adjective? It is best to regard hypochondriasis as a symptom
rather than a distinct condition. It is not unitary as a condition but a
disorder of content rather than of form. The content is the excessive
concern with health, either physical or mental, and the interpretation
of subjective experience

212

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

as deriving from serious illness. The form of the condition may be quite
variable. Even though the term hypochondriacal is best retained as
description rather than as a discrete disease entity (Kenyon, 1976),
current classification systems have a purely hypochondriacal disorder.
Barsky and Klerman (1983) have considered that the word hypochondriasis
is used to describe four quite distinct concepts: 1. It describes a
psychiatric syndrome characterized by physical symptoms disproportionate
to demonstrable organic disease, fear of disease and the conviction that
one is sick, preoccupation with one's body and pursuit of medical care.
2. Hypochondriasis is seen psychodynamically as a derivative of
aggressive or oral drives or as a defence against guilt or low
self-­esteem. 3. It results from a perceptual amplification and
augmentation and a cognitive misinterpretation of normal bodily
sensations. 4. It is a socially learned illness behaviour to which the
philosophy and practice of the medical profession lends support. Only
the first of these is psychopathologic in nature. These concepts are not
alternatives but are all present to a different extent in the individual
sufferer. Some individuals use a somatic style to describe their
perception of internal discomfort. Appleby (1987) points out that closer
examination reveals a descriptive triad of the patient being convinced
that they have a disease, fearing the disease and being preoccupied with
their body. He emphasizes that the patient needs to understand their
symptoms before any improvement can be expected. Bridges and Goldberg
(1985) have assessed somatic presentation of psychiatric disorder in
primary care in a series of 500 inceptions to illness among 2500
attendees. Their operational criteria for somatization were as follows:
• Consulting behaviour: Seeking medical help for somatic manifestations
and not presenting psychological symptoms. • Attribution: The patient
considers somatic manifestations to be caused physically. • Psychiatric
illness: Psychiatric diagnosis justified by psychiatrists.

• Response to intervention: The research psychiatrist is of the opinion
that treatment of the psychiatric disorder would benefit somatic
symptoms. These authors consider that somatization is a common mode of
presentation of psychiatric illness and partly explains the failure of
family doctors to detect psychiatric disorders in primary care. Trying
to distinguish between organic and psychological elements of disease or
between mental and physical illness is a fruitless task based on an
outmoded and misleading linguistic distinction (Kendell, 2001).
Psychological conflict may be mediated via physical illness, and a
physical illness results in psychosocial sequelae. Both somatic and
psychological symptoms occur, and it is perfectly possible for a patient
to have a hypochondriacal reaction to a clearly defined organic illness.
A patient who regards themself as having symptoms of illness
communicates this to relatives and also to the doctor in a tacit request
for both help and labelling (Parsons, 1951). To come to medical
attention, the person has to carry out a particular set of actions, that
is, undertake illness behaviour (Mechanic, 1962, 1986). Illness
behaviour includes the manner in which symptoms are differentially
perceived, evaluated and acted upon by different kinds of people and in
different social situations. Whereas some people may be able to make
light of symptoms, shrug them off and avoid seeking medical attention,
others may respond to trivial pain and discomfort by readily seeking
care. It is clear, therefore, that individual characteristics as well as
social cultural ones determine how any one individual will respond to
symptoms. Individual determinants of hypochondriasis seem to include
preoccupation with bodily functions or with the idea of harbouring an
illness, rumination about illness, suggestibility, unrealistic fear of
infection, fascination with medical information and fear of prescribed
medication (Fink et al., 2004). Fear of death also seems to be an
integral aspect of hypochondriasis (Noyes et al., 2002b), and childhood
adversity (including traumatic events and serious illness and injury)
and parental modelling of illness behaviour in childhood are
vulnerability factors (Noyes et al., 2002a; Kirmayer and Looper, 2006).
Anxiety (Olatunji et al., 2009) and disgust (Davey, 2011) also appear to
underlie hypochondriasis. Disgust,

14 Disorder of the Awareness of the Body

in this context, is conceived of as a disease-­avoidant emotion, and
disgust propensity and sensitivity are regarded as vulnerability factors
for a number of disorders including blood-­ injection-­ injury phobia and
hypochondriasis. Cyberchondriasis, a term referring to excessive and
repeated health-­related searches on the Internet, reveals aspects of
hypochondriasis that may have remained covert, namely, that behavioural
aspects include searching for health information on diagnosed and
undiagnosed disorders, seeking out descriptions of other people's
experience of illness and using message boards and support groups.
However, these behaviours only provoke more distress and anxiety (Muse
et al., 2012; Starcevic and Berle, 2013). There are very marked cultural
differences in the presentation of symptoms of disordered mood;
somatization of emotional distress applies to both anxiety and
depression (Rack, 1982). The predominance of description of somatic over
mood symptoms in depressive illness has been reported from India,
Pakistan, Bangladesh, Hong Kong, the West Indies and various African
countries. The reasons for this include the expectations the patient has
of what the doctor can do, the use of somatic symptoms as metaphor for
distress and the social unacceptability of psychological symptoms. The
Bradford Somatic Inventory has been devised for a multiethnic comparison
of the frequency of somatic symptoms, their anatomic localization and
their association with psychiatric disorder (Mumford et al., 1991).
Immigrant populations from Pakistan in the United Kingdom demonstrate
more somatic symptoms on the Bradford Somatic Inventory compared with
the native population. These symptoms are associated with recognizable
anxiety and depression as measured by validated questionnaires (Farooq
et al., 1995). Psychopathology of the Hypochondriacal Patient

The content of hypochondriasis is the excessive concern with health,
either physical or mental. Possible forms of the condition are listed
below. These forms of the content of concern about cancer can include
the following: • A hallucinatory voice may say to the patient, 'You have
cancer, you are moribund'. • A secondary delusion associated with
affective illness may occur in which the patient unreasonably

213

believes they have cancer; they are quite unable to accept their
doctor's reassurance. The belief is understandable in relation to the
patient's overall depressed mood state. That such secondary delusions
could be associated with affective psychoses was clearly described by
Cotard (1882): 'she blamed herself and felt guilty. After some months
she entertained hypochondriacal delusions, believing that she had no
stomach and that her organs had been destroyed; she attributed these
beliefs to the effects of an emetic which she had, in fact, been given'.
This association of hypochondriacal and nihilistic delusions with
depressive psychosis in the elderly has been called Cotard's syndrome. •
The delusion may be primary in nature. A patient with schizophrenia
believed that he had been inoculated under a general anaesthetic with a
transmissible cancer because others believed him to be homosexual. •
Hypochondriasis often manifests as an overvalued idea. Such a person is
constantly worried and concerned about the risk of illness and the need
to take precautions in ways that their friends find ridiculous, for
instance, in the lengths that they will go to avoid a possible
carcinogen. They consider it perfectly reasonable that they should take
due care to maintain their health, but they agree that their measures
are excessive. They cannot stop themself, night or day, from thinking,
worrying and trying to prevent illness. Such an overvalued idea is found
reasonable or at least not alien to the person's nature but preoccupies
the mind to an unreasonable extent in that the whole energy and being
becomes directed towards this single idea. • The hypochondriacal idea
may take the form of an obsessional rumination in which the possibility
of a particular illness or a form of words, as 'I have cancer', may
recur. This is recognized as being both 'alien to my nature' but also
'coming from inside myself'. It is resisted yet occurs repetitively. •
Without its amounting to a delusion, patients may often have
hypochondriacal symptoms of a nonspecific nature in the course of a
depressive illness. It may be possible to reassure them

214

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

concerning any particular symptom, but this does not make them feel
better in their mood nor does it prevent the occurrence of further
hypochondriacal symptoms in the form of depressive ruminations. • In the
context of acute or chronic anxiety, the patient may be prone to
multitudinous worries concerning illness and fears of illness. The
normal sensorium is interpreted as symptoms; symptoms are interpreted as
serious illness. Most hypochondriacal symptoms occur in relation to
anxiety and depression; the other forms of disorder are much less
frequent. The commonest bodily symptoms implicated in hypochondriasis
are musculoskeletal; gastrointestinal, including indigestion,
constipation and other preoccupation with malfunction; and central
nervous system, including headache (Kenyon, 1964). The most commonly
affected parts of the body are head and neck, abdomen and chest. In 16%
of patients, symptoms are predominantly unilateral, and of these, 73%,
according to Kenyon, were left-­ sided. There was no significant physical
abnormality found in 47% of those admitted to a psychiatric ward for
hypochondriasis. Pain was prominent in 70% of patients. Hypochondriasis
may be associated with smell; bodily appearance; sexual hypochondria;
ear, nose and throat symptoms; and ophthalmologic abnormalities
(Karseras, 1976) such as asthenopia, which includes such complaints as
ocular discomfort, aching eyes, soreness, pressure in or around the
eyes, tiredness of eyes, grittiness, chronic redness, feelings that the
eyes are pushed out on stalks, tightness of the skin across the bridge
of the nose or pricking of the skin around the eyes. Photophobia is a
common hypochondriacal complaint, as are 'floaters'---muscae volitantes,
photopsia and sometimes diplopia. Hypochondriacal complaints may relate
to psychological symptoms and the fear of mental illness. In this
context, sleep is often involved, with subjective feelings of sleep not
occurring at all, not occurring in sufficient amount or not being of
satisfactory quality. Fear of madness and inevitable psychiatric
deterioration is commonly associated with acute anxiety disorders and
with depressive illness.

Disorders of Bodily Function--- Conversion and Dissociation
Psychopathology has, as its subject matter, actual conscious
psychological phenomena. Although our main concern is with pathologic
phenomena, it is also necessary to know what people experience in
general and how they experience it; in short, psychopathology is
interested in the full range of conscious psychological phenomena. The
foregoing raises the question of whether experiences that are not in
conscious awareness, such as those that are the subject of this section,
can ever be the proper subject of psychopathology because these
experiences are not in conscious awareness. These experiences and
behaviours have an antique pedigree and were, until recently, described
by the term hysteria. The meaning and validity of the term hysteria has
been argued about for centuries (Veith, 1965). Slater (1965) wished to
reject the diagnosis of hysteria while retaining the word as an
adjective to describe certain types of symptoms and personality. Lewis
(1975) summarized this controversy: 'The majority of psychiatrists would
be hard put to it if they could no longer make a diagnosis of 'hysteria'
or 'hysterical reaction'; and in any case a tough old word like hysteria
dies very hard. It tends to outlive its obituarists.' Classically,
physical symptoms, usually mimicking neurologic disturbances such as
seizures, paralysis, tremors, blindness and gait abnormalities occur in
the setting of psychological distress without accompanying expected
physical findings on examination. The term conversion was used to denote
the fact that emotional distress or psychological conflict had been
converted into physical complaints. A related term is dissociation,
referring to the disturbance of the basic unity of the self, resulting
in the apparent separation of aspects of the self from one another. For
example, a seemingly conscious individual may report that they are
unable to recall vital aspects of their biography despite having no
demonstrable abnormalities of memory. It is obvious that the term
dissociation is merely a descriptive concept for something factually
experienced and encountered in clinical practice, as well as a theory
for what happens in the particular state, and thus it provides the
hypothesis for explaining an observed clinical fact. It is a concept
that does not describe anything uniform

14 Disorder of the Awareness of the Body

but touches on modes of extra-­conscious explanatory mechanism. The
implications that may be drawn from the conceptualization of conversion
and dissociation are as follows: 1. The presenting symptoms are
psychologically determined despite being physical in nature; 2.
Causation is thought to be unconscious and hence the patient is not
aware of the psychological determinants; 3. Symptoms may carry some sort
of advantage to the patient, the so-­called primary or secondary gain;
and 4. The symptoms occur by the mediation of the putative explanatory
but ill-­defined processes of conversion or dissociation. At 10-­year
follow-­up of patients diagnosed with hysteria at a neurologic hospital,
many were found to have subsequently developed a serious physical or
psychiatric illness, and for this reason, the existence of hysteria as a
diagnostic category was questioned (Slater and Glithero, 1965).
Follow-­up of 113 patients diagnosed as hysterical by psychiatrists
revealed 60% with evidence of affective disorder and only 13% with a
consistent picture of hysteria (Reed, 1975). However, Merskey and
Buhrich (1975) carried out a follow-­up on patients diagnosed as having
motor conversion symptoms at a neurologic hospital and a control group
of other patients from the same clinical setting. They found a higher
rate of organic symptoms at follow-­up in the control group. From
follow-­up studies of neurologic or psychiatric patients, when the
diagnosis of hysteria has been highly inclusive, other organic and
psychiatric conditions have commonly manifested, but 15% to 20% still
retain the diagnosis of hysteria. For a diagnosis of dissociative
disorder or functional neurological symptom disorder to be made,
positive psychological features must be present and characteristic
organic features should be absent. It is important to emphasize the
danger of misidentifying genuine physical illness as functional
disturbance. Thus for astasia-­abasia (Fig. 14.3) for example to be
considered dissociative, the symptoms should have psychogenic aetiology;
the patient is unaware of this, and the symptoms can be seen to be a way
of dealing with stress. If symptoms are clearly consciously produced,
deliberate disability, malingering or artefactual illness is present.

215

Fig. 14.3 Astasia-­abasia. (From Merskey, H., Buhrich, N.A., 1975.
Hysteria and organic brain disease. Br. J. Med. Psychol. 48, 359--366.)

One may have to distinguish between the symptoms of the original
illness---for example, head injury---and a secondary hysterical reaction
(Sims, 1985). Epidemic, communicated or mass hysteria now commonly
termed mass psychogenic illness or mass sociogenic illness has been
known and described from earliest times, for example, the physical
symptoms of conversion type associated with the millennialist movements
of the Middle Ages (Cohn, 1958), in a closed female community in a
French 17th-­century convent (Huxley, 1952), and among Lancashire mill
girls (St Clare, 1787). A rather similar epidemic spread through a
school in Blackburn 180 years later, with symptoms of overbreathing,
dizziness, fainting, headache, shivering, pins and needles, nausea, pain
in the back or abdomen, hot feelings and general weakness (Moss and
McEvedy, 1966). The spread of such epidemics has been described: they
almost always occur in young females; they often start with a girl of
high status in her peer group who is unhappy; they tend to occur in
largest numbers in the younger children in a secondary school, that is,
just after the

216

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology L

60

70

80

90

R

100

110

50

120

60

130

40

80

90

100

110

50 140

30

70

120 130

40

150

140

30

150

20

160

20

160

10

170

10

170

0

180

0

180

350

190

350

190

200

340

340 330

210

320

220 310 300

230 290

280

270

260

250

240

200

330

210

320

220 310 300

230 290

280

270

260

250

240

Fig. 14.4 Visual fields of a hysterical patient.

age of puberty; they appear to affect most severely those who on
subsequent testing are found to be the most unstable. What seems to
characterize these outbreaks are symptoms occurring among people with
shared beliefs about the relevant symptoms in the absence of
identifiable environmental cause and little clinical or laboratory
evidence of disease. Often symptoms spread by 'line-­of-­sight'
transmission and may escalate with vigorous or prolonged emergency or
media response (Jones, 2000). The outbreaks also seem to mirror
prominent social concerns, changing in relation to context and
circumstance. From the late 20th-­century onwards, symptoms appear to be
triggered by sudden exposure to an anxiety-­generating agent, most
commonly an innocuous odour or food poisoning rumours or chemical and
biological terrorism themes (Bartholomew and Wessely, 2002). Reports
continue to be published (Aldous et al., 1994; Chowdhury and Brahma,
2005; Kharabsheh et al., 2001; Kokota, 2011). It would be unrewarding to
list all the possible symptoms that may be of conversion or dissociative
origin: motor, sensory, pain and alterations in consciousness. With the
use of skilled examination and additional neurophysiologic techniques,
for example, in the investigation of dissociative blindness, it is often
possible to demonstrate discrepancy between the severity of symptoms and
physiologic dysfunction, which may be minimal or absent. The physiologic
impossibility of these symptoms is well demonstrated

in Fig. 14.4, which shows the visual field of a patient complaining of
impaired vision. It is important to take into account the effect these
symptoms have on other aspects of a patient's behaviour and social
relationships. Symptoms result in the patient being regarded as ill or
disabled, and this alters the way they are perceived both by relatives
and friends and by the medical and related professions. There may be
long-­ term physical consequences of motor symptoms, for example,
contractures; this is the ultimate mimicry that conversion symptoms show
of organic conditions. Classically, mood in these conditions is
described as belle indifference. Such a mood occurred in a girl aged 20
with severe disability that had entailed her using crutches for the
previous 2 years. She smiled with sublime resignation at her unfortunate
situation, and everyone around her was relieved that she accepted her
symptom so stoically! However, some patients with conversion symptoms
show higher autonomic arousal than do anxious and phobic patients (Lader
and Sartorius, 1968).

Disorders of the Physical Characteristics and Emotional Value of the
Body (Dislike of the Body) This section deals with how the body is
subjectively experienced as a physical object that has both symbolic and
aesthetic value to the individual. These two aspects of a person's
attitude towards their own

14 Disorder of the Awareness of the Body

body are distinct but interrelated. A distorted subjective experience of
the body, the so-­called distortion of body image, may occur
independently of approval or disapproval or indeed of dislike of the
body. Furthermore, the body can be appraised as ugly, that is, as
aesthetically unattractive, in the absence of demonstrable abnormality
of body image. Firstly, there are those abnormalities that derive from
psychiatric disorders and are discrete but yet not pure as they are
transdiagnostic in nature. Then there are the conditions such as
dysmorphophobia and anorexia nervosa that are treated as disorders in
their own right.

Disorders of the Physical Characteristics of the Body DISTURBANCE OF
SHAPE EXPERIENCE Luckianowicz (1967) described a number of conditions
including zoophilic and sexual metamorphosis, and loss of bodily shape.
Zoophilic metamorphosis is often based on a combination of bodily
sensations and hallucinatory experiences. A labourer of 53, suffered
from recurrent depression. He complained: 'For some weeks... I felt that
my face was getting smaller and pointed, like in a dog. I also noticed
that my children and wife had their faces slowly changing into dog's
faces.' He further detected the smell of a dog from his body and 'my
urine smelt like dog's water'. Sexual metamorphosis entails complex
sensory experience of transformation into the other sex: A 30-­year-­old,
single clerk, complained: 'For some time I had a feeling that my breasts
became large and full, and my buttocks became plum, like in a woman. I
can see in a mirror that it is not so, but still I have this strange
sensation in the corresponding parts of my body. I don't know how to
describe it. It is a sort of pressure from the inside upon my skin,
pushing it out, and stretching. The feeling you have when your body
becomes swollen \[...\]' Loss of bodily sensation is akin to Cotard
syndrome but distinct and is often associated with epilepsy and is
described in a case recovering from insulin coma therapy:

217

It is most frightening and distressing. Each time I come around it's the
same: there is vast black ocean of nothingness, from which I, a tiny
speck of light emerge. Slowly I become aware of myself. But I have no
shape, no weight, no mass. I am just a spot of light floating in the
vast ocean of darkness. It is a most frightening experience and I always
lose consciousness again. I just can't stand this distressing feeling of
formless and timeless existence for long. I may have this awful
experience several times before I regain my shape and become myself
again. REDUPLICATION OF THE BODY OR ITS PARTS In addition to the
abnormalities of shape experience Luckianowicz (1967) also described
experiences of body reduplication. These experiences involve
reduplication of the body and its part. Often these conditions are
described in the context of migraine left-­sided hemispheric lesions but
can also be seen in schizophrenia: I often feel that I have two bodies,
one outside the other, only a little larger than my actual body. I feel
that the 'inner' body is the real one, and the 'outer' is more like
something artificial, a sort of shell over a hermit crab although it has
the shape and appearance of my 'real' body. In some cases, the body is
experienced as split into two halves: A married woman of 58, when
depressed, often had the feeling 'as if my body was split into two
halves, like a stem of a tree struck by lightning. They both feel a few
inches apart and there is nothing between them, but a black, empty hole;
black and empty and dead.' Some patients describe additional body parts.
A patient with a diagnosis of schizophrenia described the following:
Every night I have intercourse with the Devil. Sometimes he forgets his
penis in my privates and then I feel it there all day long. It is like a
stiff piece of wood. Sometimes it burns and feels like hot iron. I
always feel two small horns on my head and my feet feel like a goat's
hooves.

218

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

DYSMORPHOPHOBIA (BODY DYSMORPHIC DISORDER) Many people are dissatisfied
with the way they look and, of course, this does not of itself
constitute a psychiatric symptom. However, unreasonable loathing or
excessive preoccupation with a disliked feature may result in
psychiatric referral. Such people may show generalized disapproval of
their appearance, or it may be concentrated on one feature.
Dysmorphophobia was first defined by Morselli (1886) as 'a subjective
feeling of ugliness or physical defect which the patient feels is
noticeable to others, although his appearance is within normal limits'.
As the meaning of the term phobia has changed in the past century,
Berrios (1996) considers that dysmorphophobia is at least as
satisfactory a term as modern equivalents such as body dysmorphic
disorder. According to Andreasen and Bardach (1977), the primary symptom
of dysmorphophobia is the patient's belief that they are unattractive.
Dysmorphophobia has been defined, more inclusively, as the primary
complaint of some external physical defect thought to be noticeable to
other people, but, objectively, its appearance lies within normal limits
(Hay, 1970). Patients presenting to a plastic surgeon for cosmetic
rhinoplasty were examined psychiatrically. They were, as a group, more
disfigured than a control group, and they showed some psychological
disturbance in that 40% showed disorder of personality. There was,
however, no relationship between the degree of deformity and the amount
of psychological disturbance. Hay and Heather (1973) commented that when
surgery was carried out, those patients with minimal disfigurement did
as well as those with more marked defects, both subjectively in
description of their self-­image and on psychological testing. They
considered that the degree of deformity was not of major importance in
coming to a decision with regard to operation. Patients reported marked
improvement in their appearance 6 months after rhinoplasty, and this was
associated with reduction of psychiatric symptom scores (Robin et al.,
1988). Body dysmorphic disorder occurs most frequently in late
adolescence; three-­ quarters of patients are female, and most are either
single or divorced (Veale et al., 1996). There is frequent comorbidity
with mood

disorder, social phobia and obsessive compulsive disorder, and 72% of
cases manifested personality disorder, usually of paranoid, avoidant or
obsessive ­compulsive type. Twenty-­four percent of this group of patients
had attempted suicide. In a similar American study, 73% of patients
reported excessive mirror checking, 63% reported attempts to camouflage
their 'deformities' and others reported grooming or skin picking
(Phillips et al., 1993, 2005). Almost all had severe limitations of
their social activities. Most patients had suffered from a major mood
disorder, and 17% had made suicide attempts. The most frequently
reported body parts, in order of concern, are skin, hair, nose, stomach,
teeth, weight, breasts, buttocks, eyes, thighs, eyebrows, legs, face
size or shape, chin, lips, arms, hips, cheeks and ears (Phillips et al.,
2005). Those complaining about their face, and especially their nose, do
so in extreme and exaggerated terms despite the deformity often being
relatively slight. The dissatisfaction with their appearance and the
extent to which they feel others are aware of their disfigurement are
quite out of proportion, as are the discomfort and disturbance in
function: 'agonising pain' and 'total inability to breathe'. At the same
time, the actual description is often quite imprecise: 'the skin under
my eyes joins my nose in a funny way' (Birtchnell, 1988). Because of the
extreme degree of reaction they show, they may contemplate radical
remedies, for example, wishing to have their nose amputated or
threatening to kill themselves. Dysmorphophobia is a relatively common
disturbance of self and usually takes the psychopathologic form of an
overvalued idea. The complaint of dysmorphophobia is made by the subject
in relation to others but is not usually based on the opinion of others.
So a patient complains of his nose, or the small size of her breasts,
and considers that others will regard them as ugly or unattractive.
Often the appearance is well within normal limits, with no deformity,
but the patient is convinced that surgery will be beneficial. Patients
often present in their late teens or early 20s. There is quite often
underlying personality disorder of anankastic or dependent types; there
may be depressed mood disturbance as a reaction to the complaint, and
such patients not infrequently talk of, and attempt, suicide. A female
student, aged 20, was referred to the psychiatric clinic after
self-­poisoning. When asked her

14 Disorder of the Awareness of the Body

219

problem, she burst into tears and said, describing the small size of her
breasts:

shapelier. My figure will change from 33″ 24″ 35″ to 38″ 18″ 36″.

Basically there is a big difference between me and other girls. I've
always been self-­conscious. I used to pad myself. Even my mother made
fun of me. I've tried to convince myself I would change physically. I
don't feel like a total woman. I have to buy clothes that look
ridiculous on top. My present boyfriend I have been going out with for
over a year always talks about other girls he has. He went to a dance
and danced with another girl, I knew that it was because she was
bigger-­busted than me. I was always aware of my figure, that I am not
attractive ... I detest myself, I hate my body ... I don't like my
boyfriend touching me there, I can't wear nice clothes, I can't make the
best of what I already have ... even my little sister of 16 has more
than I have ever had.

There is emerging evidence that visual processing of faces and objects
may be impaired in individuals with body dysmorphic disorder.
Abnormalities include inability to identify faces with emotional
expressions under experimental conditions (Feusner et al., 2010a) and
the use of greater detail-­orientated and piecemeal processing of faces
compared with controls (Feusner et al., 2010b). Impairments of face
processing appear to correlate with demonstrable abnormalities in
frontostriatal systems (Feusner et al., 2010c), and regional brain
volumes of the left inferior frontal gyrus and amygdala are positively
correlated with severity scores of dysmorphic disorder (Feusner et al.,
2009). These findings suggest that, despite the absence of gross
abnormalities of perception, face and visual object processing
impairments may underlie the negative evaluations of the body that are
characteristic of dysmorphophobia.

It is of interest to note that surgery can result in restitution of
normal body image. In a study of 11 young women with no other disease
and breast size not grossly inappropriate for body size requesting
reduction mammoplasty, Hollyman et al. (1986) found that, after surgery,
body image had returned to normal; self-­confidence, feelings about
femininity and sexual attractiveness were also enhanced. Symptoms of
dysmorphophobia are sometimes described by patients with schizophrenia.
It may occur as the first symptom as the condition develops, and the
clinician should therefore look carefully for suggestive symptoms. It
may also be present in the established case and will then show
characteristic schizophrenic symptomatology. A 19-­year-­old African-­
Caribbean girl, previously diagnosed with schizophrenia, said: The
Spirit is a man, he feels warm and moves in me. I can't feel yet. I've
got to pray for my new body. I'll have it in March. I will have to look
beautiful, I don't feel beautiful at the moment, I don't look nice
enough. I'll have a nice face, nice teeth, red eyebrows, red eyes,
pupils red and smooth red lips. My skin will be light and I'll have long
fair thick hair down to my knees. My voice will be different and I'll
have a new tongue. I'll speak many languages. I'll sing too. My brain
and my mind will be the same. I'll have long fingernails, a smaller
waist, bigger breasts and my legs will be a bit

BODY INTEGRITY IDENTITY DISORDER This is a rare condition in which there
is an apparent mismatch between the body image and the physical body.
Patients have a strong desire to change the physical body so that it
coincides with the body image. The most common desire is to amputate a
major limb or to sever the spinal cord to become paralysed. Patients are
reported as saying, 'I can feel exactly where my leg should end and my
stump should begin. Sometimes this line hurts or feels numb' or 'my
limbs do not feel like they belong to me, and should not be there' (Blom
et al., 2012). Reports suggest that surgery is followed by a feeling of
completeness, wholeness and satisfaction. It is perhaps significant that
approximately half of a cohort of patients studied said that they felt
sexually aroused when they saw a disabled person resembling their own
desired disability or felt sexually aroused when imagining themselves
being disabled (Blom et al., 2012). DISTURBANCE OF EATING AND BODY SIZE
Disturbance of eating occurs with various conditions in which alteration
of body image either causes eating

220

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

disorder or results from it. Two conditions are discussed: anorexia
nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Once again, it is the subjective aspects,
the effect on self-­image, that concerns us here and not the physical
aspects. Anorexia Nervosa

This is a condition that in the past was misplaced diagnostically;
initially, sufferers were usually thought to be physically ill. Marcé
(1860), however, considered it to be one form of hypochondriasis.
Anorexia nervosa is an illness that occurs mainly in young women; the
proportion of male cases seen ranges from 1 in 20 to about 1 in 10 in
different series (Dally and Gomez, 1979), and the proportion of boys is
higher in childhood. There is a failure to eat, low body weight and
amenorrhoea. It has been considered by Crisp (1975) that the disorder is
primarily a weight phobia, a fear of increasing body weight, and not
only a feeding disorder similar to those of childhood. Prominent is the
fear of loss of control; if one eats normally, one will be unable to
stop and therefore become fat. As well as an abnormal self-­image, there
are also abnormal attitudes towards food, gender and sex. How does the
patient with anorexia nervosa see herself? It is in part a narcissistic
disorder according to Bruch (1965), who has called it 'the pursuit of
thinness'. In the definition in International Classification of Diseases
(10th revision), body image distortion is one of five essential
features: 'There is body image distortion in the form of a specific
psychopathology whereby a dread of fatness persists as an intrusive,
overvalued idea and the patient imposes a low weight threshold on
himself or herself' (World Health Organization, 1992, p. 177). The other
features are: • body weight at least 15% below that expected, • weight
loss is self-­induced, • amenorrhoea, and • delayed or arrested puberty.
Anorexia nervosa became more common in the United Kingdom in the latter
part of the 20th century (Kendell et al., 1973). It is much rarer in,
for example, India and other developing countries. This apparent
difference in prevalence suggests that it may well be linked to social
attitudes towards thinness, dieting and slimming. In the Western world,
slimness is regarded as beautiful, and dieting may become a social norm
that acts as a persuasive pressure on an impressionable

adolescent female whose body weight has increased a little more than
average at puberty. If there are other psychological difficulties and
social conflicts, the slimming may get out of control. In other parts of
the world where the aesthetic norms of feminine beauty are based on a
fulsome body, the pressure towards thinness is less but the pressure
towards obesity may be greater. Even in Western society, the prevalence
of anorexia nervosa is not uniform within society but rather is
determined by gender, age, socioeconomic class and ethnicity. Patients
with anorexia nervosa often deny their thinness and sometimes claim to
be too fat. Because of their extreme concern over their physical size
and weight, a technique was devised by Slade and Russell (1973) to
investigate bodily perception in anorexics. This involved comparing real
size in subjects (measured by an anthropometer) and perceived size,
which was measured by the observer moving horizontal lights to a
distance that the subject estimated as the width across four body
regions: face, chest, waist and hips. Compared with an age-­matched
normal control group, anorexic patients significantly overestimated
their own perceived width at all regions, with the face being
overestimated by more than 50%. Although actually thinner at the chest,
waist and hips, anorexic patients saw themselves as fatter than normal
women. The body image disturbance could not be accounted for by a
general perceptual disorder because anorexics were fairly accurate at
the measurement of width of wooden blocks and also extremely accurate at
measuring physical height. They tended to overestimate the width of
other people, but not by as much as themselves. The body image
distortion tended to lessen as patients put on weight, especially if
they did so slowly. It was shown that a greater degree of body image
disorder held a worse prognosis. Slade and Russell (1973) considered
that 'patients with anorexia nervosa show a faulty appreciation of their
own body image in the sense that they perceive their bodies as
possessing an exaggerated girth'. It was found by Garfinkel et al.
(1979) that some anorexic subjects tend to overestimate body size and
that this overestimate was stable over a year and not affected by weight
change. Experimental work by Button et al. (1977) called into doubt the
findings that anorexics alone overestimate their size and normal females
are more

14 Disorder of the Awareness of the Body

accurate and that disturbance of body perception is variable among
anorexic patients. This finding has now been confirmed in a large
meta-­analysis by Cash and Deagle (1997). Body image disturbance does not
appear to be associated with other features of either anorexia nervosa
or bulimia nervosa and does not help to differentiate normal women from
patients with eating disorder. Furthermore, attitudinal body
dissatisfaction as measured by questionnaires or self: ideal discrepancy
best differentiated the patients from the normal control subjects. Thus
the role of perceptual size estimation inaccuracy, the formal measure of
body image distortion, as a diagnostic criterion of anorexia nervosa has
to be called into question. Slade (1988) has also shown that nonanorexic
subjects overestimate the dimensions of their body, especially normal
females, neurotic subjects, those who are pregnant and patients with
secondary amenorrhoea. He has contrasted the use of full body techniques
(with distorting mirrors, photographs, television images) for
investigating this with part of body methods (visual size estimation,
callipers) and has shown that relatively fixed cognitive attitudes
towards body size with the former demonstrate irrational beliefs about
body shape, whereas a more fluid state of the estimation of body size
depends more on emotional factors that change over time. He has also
shown that the more 'overfat' the individual considers herself to be,
the more dissatisfied she will be. Many recent studies have been carried
out in supposedly normal populations. Strauman et al. (1991) studied the
views of self in a large number of female undergraduates for the factors
they described as 'actual:ideal self-­ discrepancy' and 'actual:ought
discrepancy'. They showed that the actual:ideal discrepancy correlated
with body shape dissatisfaction. The actual:ought discrepancy was
associated with what they described as anorexic-­related attitudes and
behaviours and actual:ideal discrepancy with bulimic-­ related attitudes
and behaviours. Gustavson et al. (1990) investigated body image
distortion and showed differences between normal students and those
suffering from eating disorders. Moore (1988) surveyed 854 females aged
between 12 and 23 years from outpatient clinics; 67% were found to be
dissatisfied with their weight and 54% with their shape.

221

Zellner et al. (1989) studied the effects of eating abnormalities and
gender on the perception of desirable body shape, using figure drawings
by their subjects. They found that women desire to be thinner than they
think they are and that women with eating disorders desire to be thinner
than that degree of thinness that they think that men will find
attractive. Steiger et al. (1989) found that anorexics, but not
bulimics, exhibited body image distortion and that body weight predicted
the degree of body image disturbance. Dolan et al. (1990) demonstrated
differences between white, African-­Caribbean and Asian British women for
some of the symptoms of eating disorders but no differences for body
image disorder. Supported by these studies is the finding of a clear
association between body image disturbance and eating disorder. This is
related inversely to weight---that is, the lower the weight, the greater
the degree of body image abnormality. Thus, in general, those with
anorexia are more affected than those with bulimia nervosa. A perpetual
question is the degree to which culture influences body image and to
what extent the social environment has a significant impact on body
image. There is evidence that body dissatisfaction is prevalent in
females across ethnic groups in the same country and across national
boundaries (Angelova and Utermohlen, 2013; Baillie and Copeland, 2013;
Demuth et al., 2013; Santana et al., 2013). There are factors unique to
particular settings. So in the Bulgarian context, faith and traditional
fasting differentially affected the behaviours of women depending on
their pre-­existing predisposition to disordered eating. For vulnerable
women, fasting acted via reinforcement of asceticism and dietary
restraint to induce weight management to achieve a desired thin figure
consistent with sociocultural norms (Angelova and Utermohlen, 2013). In
the United States, European American women endorsed 'a curvy-­thin or
athletic ideal body', whereas African American women 'resisted notions
of a singular ideal body' (Webb et al., 2013). In an elegant study,
Bagrowicz et al (2013) investigated a sample of Japanese students who
had recently arrived in New York City to see what the influence of
endemic obesity was. After 2 months in New York, the Japanese students
had thinner self-­image but 'a fatter ideal-­image' and consequently less
body dissatisfaction. This study

222

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

suggests that social environment rapidly influences ideal body size. It
does seem that abnormality of self and body image is universal in eating
disorders: 'I eat therefore I am'. There are associations between
abnormal eating, especially in anorexia nervosa, and low body weight,
with a belief or fear that 'I am too fat' and with a more pervasive
denial of self. In attempting to investigate the factors that influence
this overestimation of their body size by anorexic and bulimic women,
Hamilton and Waller (1993) studied the influence of media portrayal of
idealized female bodies. They concluded that women with eating disorders
overestimated themselves substantially more after seeing such images
than after seeing photographs of neutral objects. Such images in the
media do appear to influence female behaviour, at least in some
vulnerable people. Strober et al. (1979) assessed perception of body
size, subjective experience of body image distortions and
differentiation of body concepts by asking adolescent anorexic patients
and controls to draw the human figure soon after their hospital
admission and 6 months later. Both groups tended to overestimate size at
both times, but experiences denoting estrangement from the body,
insensitivity to body sensations and weakness of body boundaries were
more prevalent in anorexics, and they persisted at high levels after
frank symptoms of weight and eating disorder had subsided. There was a
greater degree of a more persistent body image distortion in those who
vomited. These authors considered that 'defects in body image formation
render the anorexic vulnerable to their manifest pathology, which is
itself activated by maturational conflicts unique to adolescence'. The
underlying fear of loss of control and the incessant need for vigilance
concerning any calorie that enters the mouth influence all other areas
of the patient's life. Obsessional tidiness and cleanliness may be
manifested, as well as attempts to control the behaviour of other people
at home. An anorexic patient controlled the behaviour of her parents and
twin sister by threatening to starve herself yet further if they would
not cooperate. She weighed not only her own food but that of all the
other members of the family. Before her illness, she and her sister both
weighed about 57 kg, but as her anorexia progressed, she insisted on her
twin eating her food also, which the patient cooked.

As a result, the patient dropped in weight to about 32 kg, while her
sister reached 83 kg. The role of chemosensory function in eating
disorders and in anorexia nervosa in particular is only starting to be
investigated and explored (Leland et al., 2021). There is a growing body
of evidence that patients with anorexia nervosa salivate less than
controls in response to olfactory stimuli, whereas patients with bulimia
salivate more. Furthermore, patients with anorexia nervosa have impaired
identification and threshold functions for taste compared to controls,
and this was also true for patients with bulimia nervosa. These changes
improved with treatment, but there remained residual impairment.
Impairment of olfaction was equivocal. Bulimia Nervosa

This condition was first described by Russell in 1979. Although the
patient is currently of normal or near-­ normal weight, there is often a
history of anorexia nervosa with weight loss (Fairburn and Cooper,
1984). Body image distortion is also a feature of the condition, with
the patient believing herself to be too fat and too heavy. The
characteristic eating disorder is of gross preoccupation with food, with
episodic binge eating or gorging. This is frequently countered with
self-­induced vomiting and other methods of weight reduction such as
abuse of drugs, such as laxatives or amphetamine-­ like drugs, or
voluntary starvation. Weight is thus maintained with a fragile
stability; sometimes weight loss may reach anorexic proportions, and
sometimes there may be mild obesity that is associated with feelings of
guilt. The fear of putting on weight and the dominating preoccupation
with food is an overvalued idea. There is marked dissatisfaction with
the body in bulimia nervosa that is similar to that in anorexia nervosa
(Cash and Deagle, 1997). There is evidence that the dissatisfaction with
the body derives from cognitive evaluative dissatisfaction and is not
dependent on sensory perception, although it may be influenced by mood
(Gardner and Bockenkamp, 1996). Various abnormal behaviours may occur,
including alcohol abuse, shoplifting (especially involving stealing
food) and deliberate self-­harm. A variety of serious physical
complications may result from rigorous self-­induced vomiting or purging.

14 Disorder of the Awareness of the Body

Underlying factors are particularly centred on doubts concerning
femininity (Lacey et al., 1986). Poor relationships with parents,
academic striving, parental marital conflict and poor relationships with
the patients' own peers also occur. These patients described major life
events in the areas of sexual conflict, major changes in life
circumstances and experience of loss. Muscle Dysmorphia

Muscle dysmorphia is a term used to describe the pathologic
preoccupation with muscularity. It is characterized by preoccupation
with (1) muscle size and build, (2) the belief that one's muscles are
too small, (3) excessive time spent in the gymnasium weightlifting, (4)
use of anabolic steroids and bulking diets and (5) in extreme form,
cosmetic surgery including pectoral implants. It is sometimes referred
to as reverse anorexia or bigorexia (Pope et al., 1997; Choi et al.,
2002). The exact nosologic status of muscle dysmorphia is uncertain.
Some authors have described it as a variant of body dysmorphic disorder
(Choi et al., 2002), others as a male variant of anorexia nervosa
(Murray et al., 2010), and others have commented on the relationship
with obsessive compulsive disorder (Chung, 2001). It is probably best in
the current state of knowledge to regard it as a phenomenon that can
occur in a variety of psychiatric disorders rather than as a disorder in
its own right. Mitchison et al. (2021) report a point prevalence of
muscle dysmorphia of 2.2% in adolescent boys and 1.4% in adolescent
girls and conclude that the condition is relatively common in early to
late adolescence. In boys it is associated weightlifting regime that
interferes with life, whereas in girls they are more likely to report
discomfort with body exposure. There is consistent evidence that men
with muscle dysmorphia have disturbed body image, disordered eating and
excessive exercising (Murray et al., 2012). In weightlifters, its
prevalence has been reported as 13.6% (Behar and Molinari, 2010). Body
checking, which can be construed as evidence of body dissatisfaction, is
common in muscle dysmorphia (Cafri et al., 2008; Walker et al., 2009).
In comparison to weightlifters without muscle dysmorphia, patients with
muscle dysmorphia were more likely to have body dissatisfaction,
abnormal eating attitudes, use anabolic

223

steroids and have a history of anxiety or depression. They also
complained of shame and embarrassment, poorer quality of life and
previous attempted suicide, and there was evidence of impaired
occupational and social functioning (Olivardia et al., 2000; Pope et
al., 2005). There is evidence that men with muscle dysmorphia have
attentional biases towards subjectively negative areas of their own
bodies and towards positive areas of hypermuscular bodies of others
accompanying with significant deterioration in their body image and
affect. It is thought that these attentional biases may serve to
maintain severe muscularity dissatisfaction (Waldorf et al., 2019).

Disorders of the Sensory Awareness of the Body (Organic Changes in Body
Image) Disease of, and trauma to, the brain alter the body image in a
variety of ways. This is either because of damage of the conceptualized
object, for example, amputation with phantom limb or blindness
necessarily altering the way one perceives oneself, or damage to the
process of conceptualization itself, for example, damage to a section of
the corpus callosum. Often, of course, there is scattered damage, as
with arteriopathy or multiple sclerosis, and these two features cannot
be separated. The expression body image as used in neurology was defined
by Critchley (1950) as the mental idea that an individual possesses
about his own body and its physical and aesthetic attributes. Visual
sensation, tactile impulses and proprioceptive stimuli contribute to the
formation of body image but are not essential; after the amputation of a
limb, a phantom limb retaining the integrity of the body image occurs in
the majority of cases. The body image 'lives on the fringe of awareness
and is by no means obtrusive in ordinary circumstances. It is however
available and can be brought into consciousness as soon as the stream of
attention voluntarily or involuntarily focuses upon it' (Critchley,
1950). Morbid changes in the body image may show enhancement, diminution
(or ablation) or distortion. In neurology, the term body schema is used
for the awareness of spatial characteristics of one's own body,
involving current and previous sensory information, whereas body
experience is more comprehensive, including

224

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

psychological and situational factors also (Cumming, 1988). The parietal
lobes play a major role, but the somatoaesthetic afferent system and the
thalamus are also involved. PATHOLOGIC ACCENTUATION OF BODY IMAGE
(HYPERSCHEMAZIA) Pain or discomfort causes the affected part of the body
to loom large. After dropping a heavy weight on his great toe, a man
felt his body to be 'an insubstantial shell around a huge throbbing
toe'. Such a description of the painful organ seeming larger in size is
frequent after surgery and traumatic injury. When size is affected, the
body may feel larger (macrosomatognosia). Critchley gives several
examples of neurologic lesions causing enhancement of an organ. • With
partial paralysis of a limb, the affected segment gives the impression
of being too heavy and too big; for example, with Brown-­Séquard
paralysis (unilateral lesion of the spinal cord), the side with the
pyramidal signs is hyperschematic, whereas the other side, with loss of
pain and temperature sensation, is perceived as normal in body schema. •
Unilaterally, after thrombosis of the posterior inferior cerebellar
artery. • In multiple sclerosis, again unilaterally. Hyperschemazia may
also occur with peripheral vascular disease when the affected limb feels
larger and heavier. It may also occur in acute toxic states. Nonorganic
cases occur with hypochondriasis, in depersonalization states, with
dissociation (conversion disorder, e.g., pseudocyesis) and,
occasionally, in dreams. DIMINISHED OR ABSENT BODY IMAGE (HYPOSCHEMAZIA,
ASCHEMAZIA) This may occur when afferent and efferent innervation is
lost; for example, with transection of the spinal cord, the patient may
feel sawn off at the waist. Hyposchemazia or microsomatognosia may
accompany the sensory deprivation of weightlessness, for instance, under
water. With vertigo, the patient may feel excessively light, as if
floating in the air. Parietal lobe lesions may result in complicated
states of diminution of the body image. Critchley

(1950) cites a patient with embolism of the right middle cerebral
       artery: It felt as if I was missing one side of my body (the
       left), but it also felt as if the dummy side was lined with a
       piece of iron so heavy that I could not move it ... I even
       fancied my head to be narrow, but the left side from the centre
       felt heavy, as if filled with bricks. At one time he thought that
       his paralyzed leg belonged to the man in the next bed. His body
       felt to him half as wide as it should have done. Lying on the
       left side gave him the sensation that he was 'lying on a void',
       that he was at the extreme edge of the bed and would presently
       fall off. In the early days he also felt that he had no penis at
       all. On this account he was clumsy with the urinal and the bed
       was frequently soiled. His sensations of owning a penis returned
       quite suddenly one morning in association with an erection, and
       it afterwards felt quite normal. In hemisomatognosia
       (hemidepersonalization), which was described by L'Hermitte (1939)
       and is a unilateral misperception of one's own body, the patient
       behaves as though the limbs on one side are missing; this may
       occur as part of an epileptic aura or migraine. Anosognosia
       describes the lack of awareness of disability, which may, for
       instance, occur with neglect of a hemiplegic limb. Hemispatial
       neglect describes those patients who, when asked to perform a
       variety of behavioural tasks in space, neglect the hemispace
       contralateral to their lesion (Cumming, 1988). Gerstmann's
       syndrome (Gerstmann,

<!-- -->

1930) comprises finger agnosia, acalculia, agraphia and right--left
      disorientation. The most severe example of an absent body image is
      that of Ian Waterman, who at the age of 19 years suffered a total
      deafferentation of his body from the neck down, resulting in
      damage to the sensory nerves underpinning touch, the sense of
      movement and position (proprioception) but sparing sensations of
      temperature, pain and the motor nerves involved in movement. As
      Jonathan Cole describes it, 'At that point unable to feel or move,
      he felt completely disembodied, he had lost touch -- literally --
      with his own body; if he did not look, he did not know it \[his
      body\] was there. He was without body in the sense that he could
      no longer make use of it

14 Disorder of the Awareness of the Body

... He was terrified' (Cole, 2016). It took tremendous effort to move
his limbs under visual guidance, every movement was a performance: 'I
rarely touch on why I put so much effort into "performing", because I
don't want to be perceived as artificial or false'. This rare case
emphasizes the marked distinction between the body as experienced and
the self that does the experiencing. In Ian Waterman's case, he
continued to be a self even when he could not feel his body. Although,
strictly speaking, this is not the whole story because he could
visualise his body but not feel it. Again, nonorganic conditions such as
depersonalization may also show diminution of body image. An anxious and
depersonalized patient said, 'I don't feel at all the same person.
Sometimes my head feels so numb when I walk to the shops. I feel I've
left half my body behind'. This was clearly an as if experience.
DISTORTION OF THE BODY IMAGE (PARASCHEMAZIA) This may occur with
enhancement or diminution of the body image. It may occur with the use
of hallucinogenic drugs such as mescaline, marijuana and lysergic acid
diethylamide. Parts of the body may feel distorted, twisted, separated
from the rest of the body or merged with the external environment. These
experiences can affect either the whole body or part of it, such as the
limbs or head. The shape can be experienced as misshapen: 'my lower jaw
is twisted and my teeth no longer close properly' or 'my left arm is
shrunken and gnarled, a bit like a tree trunk'. When the structure of
the body is affected, often it is the internal organs that are the focus
of concern: I assert therefore that on my body, particularly on my
bosom, there are present the properties of a nervous system
corresponding to a female body and I am certain that a physical
examination would confirm this. and Food and drink taken simply poured
into the abdominal cavity and into the thighs, a process which however
unbelievable it may sound, was beyond all doubt for me as I distinctly
remember the sensation. Schreber (1955)

225

Changes in the experience of weight can involve a sense of either
heaviness or lightness. With hashish: the sensations produced were those
of exquisite lightness and airiness ... I expected to be lifted up and
carried away by the first breeze ... the walls of my frame were burst
outward and tumbled into ruin, and without thinking what form I wore...
I felt that I existed throughout a vast extent of space. The blood
pulsed from my head, sped through uncounted leagues before it reached my
extremities; the air drawn into my lungs expanded into seas of limpid
ether, and the arch of my skull was broader than the vault of heaven. I
was a mass of transparent jelly, and a confectioner poured me into a
twisted mould. Taylor (1856)

The value attached to the body can be disturbed. This disturbance can
vary from strong, positive overvaluation of the body or its parts to a
devaluation of the body extending to dislike or hatred of it. In right-­
sided hemiparesis, patients can sometimes maintain that their weak arm
is in fact stronger and more useful than before. This is referred to as
anosognosic overestimation (Cutting, 1997). Misoplegia is the hatred of
a limb and is associated with left-­sided parietal lesions (Cutting,
1997). Distortion of body image may occur with epileptic aura and,
rarely, with migraine. Phantom Limb

This occurs immediately after the loss of a limb in virtually all
patients, and it is particularly common after the traumatic loss of a
limb or if there had been a pre-­existing painful condition of the limb.
The onset appears immediately as the anaesthesia wears off in the
majority of cases but may be delayed for up to a few weeks in about 25%
of cases. The phantom may last for a few days or weeks then gradually
fades from consciousness. There are, however, cases that have persisted
for decades. As well as occurring with the loss of a limb, this type of
distortion of body image is relatively common after surgical removal of
an eye, parts of the face, breasts, the rectum or the larynx. There are
reports of phantom ulcer pains after partial gastrectomy and of
menstrual cramp after hysterectomy. If an amputee experiences a
generalized

226

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

peripheral neuritis involving sensation, paraesthesia will also occur in
the phantom limb. The amputee is aware of the phantom limb in space and
also experiences pain in the space conceived as being occupied by the
limb. With time, the limb appears to change in size. The image shrinks,
but unevenly, distal joints shrinking more slowly than proximal; this is
the so-­called telescoping phenomenon. There are several postulated
explanations for telescoping. In loss of the upper limb, telescoping is
thought to occur because there is over-­representation of the hand in the
sensory cortex, hence this is the area from which sensation survives
longest. There is also the possibility that telescoping occurs because
the representation of the limb in the primary somatosensory map changes
progressively. The posture of the phantom is often said to be
'habitual', for example, partially flexed at the elbow, with forearm
pronated. The limb can sometimes feel fixed in an awkward position, and
this can cause the patient difficulty, for instance, in walking
upstairs. The limb may feel twisted and painful. There is increasing
literature on the plasticity of the somatosensory system, using phantom
limb as a natural experiment to demonstrate deafferentation after loss
of a limb and corresponding reorganization of the somatosensory map
(Ramachandran and Hirstein, 1998). After loss of the upper limb, sensory
input from the face and upper arm have been shown to invade the hand
territory, such that sensory stimulus to the face can be mislocalized in
the phantom limb. Orbach and Tallent (1965) described the body concepts
of patients 5 to 10 years after the construction of a colostomy. These
patients had a conviction that they had been seriously damaged. They
believed that their bodily intactness and integrity had been violated.
In common with such beliefs many patients on a fantasy level perceived
the operation as a physical or sexual assault. Patients who fantasized
the surgery as a sexual assault were supported in this belief by the
colostomy stoma, a new opening in the front of the body. Most men
regarded this opening as evidence of having been feminized, whereas
women often interpreted it as the addition of a second vagina. The
bleeding from the stoma reinforced the fantasy of a second vagina
because it was interpreted as comparable to menstruation.

In one-­fifth of patients, preoccupation about the bodily processes
concerned food intake and elimination was embodied in a replacement
concept, which attempted to establish equality between intake and
evacuation by eating approximately as much as had recently been
evacuated. A majority of the remaining patients communicated a sense of
confusion about the machinery and functioning of their bodies. When
colostomy patients were initially studied and the reports published, the
constriction of activity and of the life space were emphasized. It is
now apparent that the constriction is paralleled by a body concept of
being damaged and fragile as a consequence of the injury. Mastectomy
also results in relatively severe disturbance in self-­concept and body
image. A patient described this as 'I will never be like before ... it
is like a hole, like a gap ... When I lie on that side, it's like being
a man' (Hopwood and Maguire, 1988). Body image problems result not only
from the loss of body part or disfigurement but also from the loss of
bodily function. The disorder of self-­image is frequently associated
with depressive symptoms. Phantom limb pain may be psychologically
determined (Parkes, 1976). Forty-­six amputees were studied 4 to 8 weeks
and 13 months after amputation; a third to a half showed moderate
disturbance tending to persist a year later. Body image disturbance is
not necessarily associated with abnormal sensation or perception. The
hypochondriac may believe they have cancer although they have no
physical symptoms. The transsexual experiences their body normally, but
they believe that they are in the wrong body. The narcissist is
inordinately concerned with their body; nevertheless, they are quite
accurate in their objective quantitative perception of self, that is,
they know how long their nose is or how far they can throw a cricket
ball. When sensation is abnormal or even deficient altogether in some
modality, for example, with blindness or deafness, body image is
undoubtedly altered, but this alteration does not in any way imply
mental illness; the alteration of body image is usually appropriate to
the disability.

Culture-­Bound Disorders of Body Image Various culturally determined
'hysterical' conditions have been described by Langness (1967). These

14 Disorder of the Awareness of the Body

227

TABLE 14.2 Culture-­Bound Disorders of Body Image Disorder

Diagnostic Equivalent

Location

Key Symptom(s)

Koro

Anxiety state

Southeast Asia

Frigophobia

Obsessive ­compulsive neurosis

East Asia

Latah

Hysteria

Malaysia

Evil eye

Phobic neurosis

Mexico, North Africa

Voodoo Windigo

Phobic neurosis Depressive reaction

Haiti Canada, First Nations

Amok

Dissociative state

Malaysia

Belief that the penis will retract into the abdomen and cause death
Morbid fear of the cold, preoccupation with loss of vitality, compulsive
wearing of layers of clothes Hyper suggestibility, automatic obedience,
coprolalia, echolalia, echopraxia, echomimia, altered consciousness,
disorganization, depression and anxiety Strong glances are harmful;
precautions taken to avoid or counteract evil eye Violation of taboo may
result in death Fear of engaging in cannibalism and of becoming a
sorcerer, depression of mood Neurasthenia, depersonalization, rage,
automatism and violent acts

After Kiev, A., 1972. Transcultural Psychiatry. Penguin, Harmondsworth,
with permission of Penguin.

conditions have in common a sudden, dramatic onset related in time to a
psychosocial upset. Manifestations of these conditions are grossly
unusual behaviour, volatile mood, transient occurrences of alterations
of speech, depersonalization with altered body awareness and symptoms
somewhat similar to delusions and hallucinations. The course of these
conditions is usually limited to 1 to 3 weeks, but they may recur with
further episodes. They appear to be more likely in those predisposed
with histrionic (hysterical) personalities. The precise symptoms are
often localized to that particular culture and demonstrate how neurotic
symptoms in their content comply with the expectations of the society in
which they occur. For instance, Adair, writing from Bath in 1786,
described how fashion influenced the great and opulent in the choice of
their diseases and considered that Queen Anne's nervousness resulted in
the transfer of similar symptoms 'to all who had the least pretensions
to rank with persons of fashion'. Some of the culturally localized
disorders of awareness of the body are summarized in Table 14.2 (Kiev,
1972). The variability of such syndromes is immense, but the
preoccupation with bodily organs and functions is common to many of
them. The

bizarre nature of symptoms---for example, koro in which there is fear of
the penis shrinking into the abdomen---is often explained by a faulty
knowledge of human anatomy and physiology that seems naive to doctors
practising in Europe. However, it is not generally known how ignorant
British patients are concerning the organization and functions of the
organs they cannot see. Hospital outpatients were compared with doctors
by Boyle (1970) in their understanding of commonly used medical terms.
As might be expected, the doctors were consistent in their use of terms,
but patients had enormous variation in their understanding of such terms
as piles, least starchy food, palpitation jaundice and flatulence. When
asked to detail the surface anatomy of internal organs---for example,
bladder, kidneys and thyroid gland---the patients showed great variation
and were generally quite inaccurate. There are also bizarre anomalies of
body image and function occurring in practice in the United Kingdom. A
young Lancashire woman working in a mill complained of migrainous
headaches and ascribed these to insufficiently heavy periods. This
explanation was found to be culturally acceptable to her peers.

228

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

REFERENCES Adair, J.M., 1786. Medical Cautions for the Consideration of
Invalids, Those Especially Who Resort to Bath. Dodsley and Dilly, Bath.
Aldous, J.C., Ellam, G.A., Murray, V., Pike, G., 1994. An outbreak of
illness among schoolchildren in London: toxic poisoning not mass
hysteria. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 48, 41--45. Andreasen, N.C.,
Bardach, J., 1977. Dysmorphophobia: symptom or disease? Am. J.
Psychiatry 134, 673--675. Angelova, R.A., Utermohlen, V., 2013.
Culture-­specific influences on body image and eating distress in a
sample of urban Bulgarian women: the roles of faith and traditional
fasting. Eat. Behav. 14, 386--389. Appleby, L., 1987. Hypochondriasis:
an acceptable diagnosis? Br. Med. J. 294, 857. Auden, W.H., 1969. The
art of healing: in Memoriam David Protech, MD. In: Epistle to a Godson.
Collected Poems, 1976. Faber and Faber, London, p. 626. Bagrowicz, R.,
Watanabe, C., Umezaki, M., 2013. Is obesity contagious by way of body
image? A study of Japanese female students in the United States. J.
Community Health 38, 834--837. Baillie, L.E., Copeland, A.L., 2013.
Disordered eating and body image in Chinese and Caucasian students in
the United States. Eat. Beyond Behav. 14, 314--319. Barsky, A.J.,
Klerman, G.L., 1983. Overview: hypochondriasis, bodily complaints and
somatic styles. Am. J. Psychiatry 140, 273-- 283. Bartholomew, R.E.,
Wessely, S., 2002. Protean nature of mass sociogenic illness. Br. J.
Psychiatry 180, 300--306. Behar, R., Molinari, D., 2010. Muscle
dysmorphia, body image and eating behaviours in two male populations.
Rev. Med. Chil. 138, 1386--1394. Berrios, G.E., 1996. The History of
Mental Symptoms: Descriptive Psychopathology since the Nineteenth
Century. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Birtchnell, S.A., 1988.
Dysmorphophobia -- a centenary discussion. Br. J. Psychiatry 153,
41--43. Blom, R.M., Heenekam, R.C., Denys, D., 2012. Body integrity
identity disorder. PLoS One 7, e34702. Boyle, C.M., 1970. Difference
between patients' and doctors' interpretation of some common medical
terms. Br. Med. J. 2, 286--289. Bridges, K.W., Goldberg, D.P., 1985.
Somatic presentation of DSM-­ III psychiatric disorders in primary care.
J. Psychosom. Res. 29, 563--569. Bruch, H., 1965. Anorexia nervosa and
its differential diagnosis. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 141, 555--566. Burton,
R., 1628. The Anatomy of Melancholia. Cripps, Oxford. Button, E.J.,
Fransella, F., Slade, P.D., 1977. A reappraisal of body perception
disturbance in anorexia nervosa. Psychol. Med. 7, 235--243. Cafri, G.,
Olivardia, R., Thompson, J.K., 2008. Symptom characteristics and
psychiatric comorbidity among males with muscle dysmorphia. Compr.
Psychiatry 49, 374--379. Cash, T.F., Deagle, E.A., 1997. The nature and
extent of body-­image disturbances in anorexia nervosa and bulimia
nervosa: a meta-­ analysis. Int. J. Eat. Disord. 22, 107--125. Choi,
P.Y.L., Pope Jr., H.G., Olivardia, R., 2002. Muscle dysmorphia: a new
syndrome in weightlifters. Br. J. Sports Med. 36, 375--377. Chowdhury,
A.N., Brahma, A., 2005. An epidemic of mass hysteria in a village in
West Bengal. Indian J. Psychiatry 47, 106--108. Chung, B., 2001. Muscle
dysmorphia: a critical review of the proposed criteria. Perspect. Biol.
Med. 44, 565--574.

Cohn, N., 1958. The Pursuit of the Millennium. Secker and Warburg,
London. Cole, J., 2016. Losing Touch -- A Man without His Body. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. Cotard, M., 1882. Nihilistic delusions.
Reprinted. In: Hirsch, S.R., Shepherd, M. (Eds.), Themes and Variations
in European Psychiatry. John Wright, Bristol, p. 1974. Crisp, A.H.,
1975. Anorexia nervosa. In: Silverstone, T., Barraclough, B. (Eds.),
Contemporary Psychiatry. Headley Brothers, Ashford, pp. 150--158.
Critchley, M., 1950. The body image in neurology. Lancet 1, 335-- 341.
Cumming, W.J.K., 1988. The neurobiology of the body schema. Br. J.
Psychiatry 153, 7--11. Cutting, J., 1997. Principles of Psychopathology.
Oxford University Press, Oxford. Dally, P., Gomez, J., 1979. Anorexia
Nervosa. Heinemann, London. Davey, G.C., 2011. Disgust: the
disease-­avoidance emotion and its dysfunctions. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society London. Series B. Biological Sciences
366, 3453--3465. Demuth, A., Czerniak, U., Ziółkowska-­Łajp, E., 2013. A
comparison of a subjective body assessment of men and women of the
Polish social elite. Homo 64, 398--409. Dolan, B., Lacey, J.H., Evans,
C., 1990. Eating behaviour and attitudes to weight and shape in British
women from three ethnic groups. Br. J. Psychiatry 157, 523--528.
Fairburn, C.G., Cooper, P.J., 1984. The clinical features of bulimia
nervosa. Br. J. Psychiatry 144, 238--246. Farooq, S., Gahir, S.M.,
Okyere, E., Sheikh, A.J., Oyebode, F., 1995. Somatization: a
transcultural study. J. Psychosom. Res. 39, 883--888. Feusner, J.D.,
Bystritsky, A., Hellemann, G., Bookheimer, S., 2010a. Impaired identity
recognition of faces with emotional expressions in body dysmorphic
disorder. Psychiatry Res. 179, 318--323. Feusner, J.D., Moller, H.,
Altstein, L., et al., 2010b. Inverted face processing in body dysmorphic
disorder. J. Psychiatr. Res. 44, 1088--1094. Feusner, J.D., Moody, T.,
Hembacher, E., et al., 2010c. Abnormalities of visual processing and
frontostriatal systems in body dysmorphic disorder. Arch.
Gen. Psychiatry 67, 197--205. Feusner, J.D., Townsend, J., Bystrisky,
A., Moller, H., Bookheimer, S., 2009. Regional brain volumes and symptom
severity in body dysmorphic disorder. Psychiatry Res. 172, 161--167.
Fink, P., Ørnbøl, E., Toft, T., Sparle, K.C., Frostholm, L., Olesen, F.,
2004. A new, empirically established hypochondriasis diagnosis. Am. J.
Psychiatry 161, 1680--1691. Gardner, R.M., Bockenkamp, E.D., 1996. The
role of sensory and nonsensory factors in body size estimations of
eating disorder subjects. J. Clin. Psychol. 52, 3--15. Garfinkel, P.E.,
Moldofsky, H., Garner, D., 1979. The stability of perceptual
disturbances in anorexia nervosa. Psychol. Med. 9, 703--708. Gerstmann,
J., 1930. The symptoms produced by lesions of the transitional area
between the inferior parietal and middle occipital gyri. Reprinted. In:
Rottenberg, D.A., Hochberg, F.H. (Eds.), Neurological Classics in Modern
Translation. Hafner Press, New York, p. 1977. Gibbs, R.W., 2005.
Embodiment and Cognitive Science. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Gustavson, C.R., Gustavson, J.C., Pumariega, A.J., et al., 1990.
Body-­image distortion among male and female college and high school
students, and eating-­disordered patients. Percept. Mot. Skills 71 (Pt
1), 1003--1010.

14 Disorder of the Awareness of the Body Hamilton, K., Waller, G., 1993.
Media influences on body size estimation in anorexia and bulimia: an
experimental study. Br. J. Psychiatry 162, 837--840. Hay, G.G., 1970.
Dysmorphophobia. Br. J. Psychiatry 116, 399--406. Hay, G.G., Heather,
B.B., 1973. Changes in psychometric test results following cosmetic
nasal operations. Brit. J. Psychol. 122, 89--90. Hollyman, J.A., Lacey,
J.H., Whitfield, P.J., Wilson, J.S.P., 1986. Surgery for the psyche: a
longitudinal study of women undergoing reduction mammoplasty. Br. J.
Plast. Surg. 39, 222--224. Hopwood, P., Maguire, G.P., 1988. Body image
problems in cancer patients. Br. J. Psychiatry 153, 47--50. Howson, A.,
2013. The Body in Society -- an Introduction, second ed. Polity Press,
Cambridge. Huxley, A., 1952. The Devils of Loudon. Penguin,
Harmondsworth. Jones, T.F., 2000. Mass psychogenic illness: role of the
individual physician. Am. Fam. Physician 15, 2649--2653. Karseras, A.G.,
1976. Psychiatric aspects of ophthalmology. In: Howells, J.G. (Ed.),
Modern Perspectives in the Psychiatric Aspects of Surgery. Macmillan,
London. Kellner, R., 1985. Functional somatic symptoms and
hypochondriasis. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 42, 821--833. Kendell, R.E.,
2001. The distinction between mental and physical illness. Br. J.
Psychiatry 178, 490--493. Kendell, R.E., Hall, D.J., Hailey, A.,
Babigian, H.M., 1973. The epidemiology of anorexia nervosa. Psychol.
Med. 3, 200--203. Kenyon, F.E., 1964. Hypochondriasis: a clinical study.
Br. J. Psychiatry 110, 478--488. Kenyon, F.E., 1965. Hypochondriasis: a
survey of some historical, clinical and social aspects. Br. J. Med.
Psychol. 38, 117--133. Kenyon, F.E., 1976. Hypochondriacal states. Br.
J. Psychiatry 129, 1--14. Kharabsheh, S., Al-­Otoum, H., Clements, J., et
al., 2001. Mass psychogenic illness following tetanus-­diphtheria toxoid
vaccination in Jordan. Bull. World Health Organ. 79, 764--770. Kiev, A.,
1972. Transcultural Psychiatry. Penguin, Harmondsworth. Kirmayer, L.J.,
Looper, K.J., 2006. Abnormal illness behaviour: physiological,
psychological and social dimensions of coping with distress. Curr. Opin.
Psychiatry 19, 54--60. Kokota, D., 2011. View point: episodes of mass
hysteria in African schools -- study of literature. Malawi Med. J. 23,
74--77. Lacey, J.H., Coker, S., Birtchnell, S.A., 1986. Bulimia: factors
associated with its aetiology and maintenance. Int. J. Eat. Disord. 5,
475--487. Lader, M., Sartorius, N., 1968. Anxiety in patients with
hysterical conversion symptoms. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 13,
490--495. Langness, L.L., 1967. Hysterical psychosis: the cross-­cultural
evidence. Am. J. Psychiatry 124, 143--152. Leland, E.M., Xie, D.X.,
Kamath, V., Seal, S.M., Lin, S.Y., Rowan, N.R., 2022. Psychophysical
chemosensory dysfunction in eating disorders: a qualitative systematic
review. Eat. Weight Disord. 27 (2), 429--447.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40519-­021-­01189-­2. Lewis, A.J., 1975. The
survival of hysteria. Psychol. Med. 5, 9--12. L'Hermitte, J., 1939.
L'image de Notre Corps. Revue Nouvelle Critique, Paris. Luckianowicz,
A., 1967. Body Image" disturbances in psychiatric disorders. Brit. J.
Psychiat. 113, 31--47. Marcé, L.V., 1860. Note on a form of
hypochondriacal delusion consecutive to the dyspepsias and principally
characterized by refusal of food (A. Blewett, A. Bottéro, Trans, 1994).
Hist. Psychiat. 5, 273--283. Mechanic, D., 1962. Students under Stress:
A Study in the Social Psychology of Adaption. Free Press, New York.

229

Mechanic, D., 1986. The concept of illness behaviour: culture, situation
and personal predisposition. Psychol. Med. 16, 1--7. Merleau-­Ponty, M.,
1962. Phenomenology of Perception. Routledge, London. Merskey, H., 1979.
The Analysis of Hysteria. Baillière Tindall, London. Merskey, H.,
Buhrich, N.A., 1975. Hysteria and organic brain disease. Br. J. Med.
Psychol. 48, 359--366. Mitchison, D., Mond, J., Griffiths, S., Hay, P.,
Nagata, J.M., Bussey, K., 2021. Prevalence of muscle dysmorphia in
adolescents: findings from the EveryBODY study. Psychol. Med. 1--8.
Moore, D.C., 1988. Body image and eating behaviour in adolescent girls.
Am. J. Dis. Child. 142, 1114--1118. Morselli, E., 1886. Sulla
dismorfofobia e sulla tafefobia. Bolletino Accademia delle Scienze
Mediche di Genova VI, 100--119. Moss, P.D., McEvedy, C.P., 1966. An
epidemic of over-­breathing among schoolgirls. Br. Med. J. 2, 1295--1300.
Mumford, D.B., Davington, J.T., Bhatnagar, J.S., Hussain, Y., Mirza, S.,
Naraghi, M.M., 1991. The Bradford Somatic Inventory: a multi-­ethnic
inventory of somatic symptoms reported by the Indo-­Pakistan
Subcontinent. Br. J. Psychiatry 158, 379--386. Murray, S.B., Rieger, E.,
Touyz, S.W., De La Garza Garcia, Y., 2010. Muscle dysmorphia and the
DSM-­V Conundrum: where does it belong? A review paper. Int. J. Eat.
Disord. 43, 483--491. Murray, S.B., Rieger, E., Hildebrandt, T., et al.,
2012. A comparison of eating, exercise, shape, and weight related
symptomatology in males with muscle dysmorphia and anorexia nervosa.
Body Image 9, 193--200. Muse, K., McManus, F., Leung, C., Mehrebian, B.,
Williams, J.M., 2012. Cyberchondriasis: fact or fiction? A preliminary
examination of the relationship between health anxiety and searching for
health information on the Internet. J. Anxiety Disord. 26, 189--196.
Noyes Jr., R., Stuart, S., Longley, S.L., Langbehn, D.R., Happel, R.L.,
2002b. Hypochondriasis and fear of death. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 190,
503--509. Noyes Jr., R., Stuart, S., Langbehn, D.R., Happel, R.L.,
Longley, S.L., Yagla, S.J., 2002a. Childhood antecedents of
hypochondriasis. Psychosomatics 43, 282--289. Olatunji, B.O., Deacon,
B.J., Abramowitz, J.S., 2009. Is hypochondriasis an anxiety disorder?
Br. J. Psychiatry 194, 481--482. Olivardia, R., Pope Jr., H.G., Hudson,
J.L., 2000. Muscle dysmorphia in male weightlifters: a case control
study. Am. J. Psychiatry 157, 1291--1296. Orbach, C.E., Tallent, N.,
1965. Modification of perceived body and of body concept. Arch.
Gen. Psychiatry 12, 126--135. Parkes, C.M., 1976. The psychological
reaction to loss of a limb: the first year after amputation. In:
Howells, J.G. (Ed.), Modern Perspectives in the Psychiatric Aspects of
Surgery. Macmillan, London. Parsons, T., 1951. Illness and the role of
the physician: a sociological perspective. Am. J. Orthopsychiatry 21,
452--460. Phillips, K.A., Menard, W., Fav, C., Weisberd, R., 2005.
Demographic characteristics, phenomenology, comorbidity, and family
history in 200 individuals with body dysmorphic disorder. Psychosomatics
46, 317--325. Phillips, K.A., McElroy, S.L., Kerk, P.E., Pope, H.G.,
Hudson, J.I., 1993. Body dysmorphic disorder: 30 cases of imagined
ugliness. Am. J. Psychiatry 150, 302--308. Pollio, H., Henley, T.,
Thompson, C., 2008. The Phenomenology of Everyday Life: Empirical
Investigations of Human Experience. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge. Pope, C.G., Pope, H.G., Menard, W., Fay, C., Olivardia, R.,
Phillips, K.A., 2005. Clinical features of muscle dysmorphia among males
with body dysmorphic disorder. Body Image 2, 395--400.

230

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Pope Jr., H.G., Griber, A.J., Choi, P., Olivardia, R., Phillips, K.A.,
1997. Muscle dysmorphia: an under-­recognized form of body dysmorphic
disorder. Psychosomatics 38, 548--557. Rack, P., 1982. Race, Culture and
Mental Disorder. Tavistock, London. Ramachandran, V.S., Hirstein, W.,
1998. The perception of phantom limbs. The DO Hebb lecture. Brain 121,
1603--1630. Reed, J.L., 1975. The diagnosis of 'hysteria. Psychol. Med.
5, 13--17. Robin, A.A., Copas, J.B., Jack, A.B., Kaesar, A.C., Thomas,
P.J., 1988. Reshaping the psyche: the concurrent improvement in
appearance and mental state after rhinoplasty. Br. J. Psychiatry 152,
539--543. Russell, G.F.M., 1979. Bulimia nervosa: an ominous form of
anorexia nervosa. Psychol. Med. 9, 429--448. Santana, M.L., Silva Rde,
C., Assis, A.M., Raich, R.M., Machado, M.E., de Júnor Pinto, E., 2013.
Factors associated with body image dissatisfaction among adolescents in
public schools in Salvador, Brazil. Nutr. Hosp. 28, 747--755. Schreber,
D., 1955. Memoirs of My Nervous Illness. Dawson, London. Sims, A.C.P.,
1985. Head injury, neurosis and accident proneness. In: Trimble, M.R.
(Ed.), Advances in Psychosomatic Medicine: Neuropsychiatry. Karger,
Basel. Slade, P.D., 1988. Body image in anorexia nervosa. Br. J.
Psychiatry 153, 20--22. Slade, P.D., Russell, G.F.M., 1973. Awareness of
body dimension in anorexia nervosa: cross-­sectional and longitudinal
studies. Psychol. Med. 3, 188--199. Slater, E., 1965. Diagnosis of
hysteria. Br. Med. J. 1, 1395--1399. Slater, E., Glithero, E., 1965. A
follow-­up of patients diagnosed as suffering from hysteria. J.
Psychosom. Res. 9, 9--13. St Clare, W., 1787. Country News. The
Gentleman's Magazine 57, 1268. Cited by Hunter, R., Macalpine, I., 1963.
Three Hundred Years of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, London.

Starcevic, V., Berle, D., 2013. Cyberchondria: towards a better
understanding of excessive health-­related Internet use. Expert Rev.
Neurother. 13, 205--213. Steiger, H., Fraenkel, L., Leichner, P.P.,
1989. Relationship of body-­image distortion to sex-­role identifications,
irrational cognitions, and body weight in eating-­disordered females. J.
Clin. Psychol. 45, 61--65. Strauman, T.J., Vookles, J., Berenstein, V.,
Chaiken, S., Higgins, E.T., 1991. Self-­discrepancies and vulnerability
to body dissatisfaction and disordered eating. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol.
61, 946--956. Strober, M., Goldenberg, I., Green, J., Saxon, J., 1979.
Body image disturbance in anorexia nervosa during the acute and
recuperative phase. Psychol. Med. 9, 695--701. Taylor, B., 1856. The
hasheesh eater. Putnam's Monthly Magazine of American Literature.
Science and Art 8, 233--239. Veale, D., Boocock, A., Gournay, K., et
al., 1996. Body dysmorphic disorder: a survey of 50 cases. Br. J.
Psychiatry 169, 196--201. Veith, I., 1965. Hysteria: The History of a
Disease. University of Chicago Press, Chicago. Waldorf, M., Vocks, S.,
Düsing, R., Bauer, A., Cordes, M., 2019. Body-­oriented gaze behaviours
in men with muscle dysmorphia diagnoses. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 128 (2),
140--150. Walker, D.C., Anderson, D.A., Hildebrandt, T., 2009. Body
checking behaviours in men. Body Image 6, 164--170. Webb, J.B.,
Warren-­Findlow, J., Chou, Y., Adams, L., 2013. Do you see what I see?:
an exploration of inter-­ethnic ideal body size comparisons among college
women. Body Image 10, 369--379. World Health Organization, 1992. The
ICD-­10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Clinical
Description and Diagnostic Guidelines. World Health Organization,
Geneva. Zellner, D.A., Harner, D.E., Adler, R.L., 1989. Effects of
eating abnormalities and gender on perceptions of desirable body shape.
J. Abnorm. Psychol. 98, 93--96.

Chapter 15

The Psychopathology of Pain Chapter Outline Summary Organic or
Psychogenic Pain? Pain and Heightened Sensation Diminished Pain
Sensation and Pain Craving Pain Without Organic Cause Pain and Loss
Psychogenic Facial Pain Burning Mouth Syndrome Vulvodynia Psychogenic
Itch Pain and Suffering

KEYWORDS Pain asymbolia Phantom pain Burning mouth syndrome Vulvodynia

Summary Pain is an unpleasant experience that involves the conscious
awareness of noxious sensations, hurting and aversive feelings
associated with actual or potential tissue damage (International
Association for the Study of Pain, 1994). It is often conceptualized as
a mood state. In psychiatry, pain can present as being heightened,
markedly diminished or occurring in the absence of demonstrable cause.
The most problematic cases are those in which pain is the focus of
presentation but there is an absence of identifiable physical cause.
Facial pain, burning mouth syndrome, vulvodynia and psychogenic itch are
illustrative examples of this problem. 'You want to hear of me, my dear?
That's something new, I am sure, when anybody wants to hear of me. Not
at all well, Louisa. Very faint and giddy.' 'Are you in pain, dear
mother?' 'I think there's a pain somewhere in the room,' said Mrs
Gradgrind, 'but I couldn't positively say that I have got it.' Charles
Dickens (1854), Hard Times

Since Aristotle, pain has been classified not as a perception but as a
mood state, and so excluded from the five senses. It is conceptually a
most difficult topic, hard to describe and to categorize; the only
aspect that is clear is that it represents a state of subjective
suffering of the patient. But what does he mean by 'my pain'? Where is
it and what is it? Certainly, the meaning of the pain is more than the
pain itself, and often it is the reason for the sensation being
interpreted as suffering. A patient with soreness of the throat believed
themself 231

232

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

to have cancer of the throat; their mother had died of that condition.
The relation between symptoms and their meaning is not straightforward.
Another person believed themself to be suffering from venereal disease
without having been exposed to the risk. But they had previously been
successfully treated for Hodgkin's disease. They had no fears concerning
their factual and potentially lethal illness but only admitted
consciously to fearing the impossible. Phenomenological aspects of the
experience of pain are not well charted, although in general medicine
this is, above all others, the area in which phenomenology could be most
helpful: pain is a subjective experience that occurs only in
consciousness (Bond, 1976). The psychiatrist is often confronted with
the problem of whether the pain is physical or mental, organic or
functional, medical or psychiatric, and, of course, the answer for each
contrasted pair is often both. We may then be requested to assess how
much of the pain is psychogenic, although this is virtually impossible
because, following Aristotle, pain is a state of mind, even when there
is such an obvious cause as a haematoma under the fingernail.

Organic or Psychogenic Pain? The transmission of pain results in a
subjective, conscious experience. For an account of the anatomic basis
for pain and also the physiologic and biochemical mechanisms, the reader
is referred to Wall and Melzack (1999). There is a threshold for pain:
light pressure is perceived as touch, heavy pressure as pain. An
explanation for this has been suggested in the gate control theory of
Melzack and Wall (1965), who considered that painful stimulation through
the thin myelinated and unmyelinated fibres results in positive feedback
in the substantia gelatinosa; this is transmitted in the lateral
spinothalamic tract. However, this gate is under the influence of the
higher centres, which can override the local input, as demonstrated by
the effect of attention: sometimes pain is not felt when attention is
directed away from the affected site. Current biochemical theories are
also important in accounting for the mediation of pain. Other theories
involve the study of presynaptic and postsynaptic mechanisms in the
central nervous system (Nathan, 1980). Electrical stimulation in various

sites in the brainstem, including the medulla oblongata, the
periaqueductal grey matter and the hypothalamus around the third
ventricle, may produce analgesia. Endogenous opiate substances
(endorphins) have been discovered to inhibit nerve fibres reporting
noxious events. This was initially discovered after electrical
stimulation in the periaqueductal grey matter of the brainstem in rats
but has subsequently been demonstrated in humans (Bond, 1976). Central
nervous system mechanisms for the modulation of pain include descending
modulatory control and an increasing number of neurotransmitters,
especially serotonin and endogenous opioids; it is almost certainly the
interaction of these different systems that is effective in pain
modulation (Fields and Basbaum, 1994). There is also increasing
understanding of the molecular basis of pain. The role of sodium
channels after nerve injury and the genes encoding for the expression of
particular sodium channels in primary sensory neurons is gradually being
elucidated (Waxman, 1999; Waxman et al., 1999). The temptation to regard
pain simply as any other sensation creates certain dilemmas. For
example, what is the subjective experience of the person who complains
of severe pain with no organic pathology detectable or the person with
mild pathology who complains of excruciating pain? How does one assess
the person with an apparently painful injury who claims they did not
notice any pain at the time? Purely organic, physiologic terms, and also
psychological, emotional words have been used. Beecher (1959) believed
that pain could be defined and listed many distinguished physiologists
and psychiatrists to support his case. However, Merskey (1976) considers
that pain is a psychological experience, private to the individual but
tending to be described in terms of damage to the body, and so defined
pain as 'an unpleasant experience which we primarily associate with
tissue damage or describe in terms of such damage, or both'. Clearly,
irrespective of the physical stimulus, psychological factors are
enormously important in the appreciation of pain. For example,
psychological analgesia in obstetric care, using psychological
preparation, explanation and sometimes hypnosis, will result in 5% to
10% of subjects experiencing little or no pain, 15% to 20% experiencing
only moderate pain and in

15

the rest, pain is not modified, but fear and anxiety are diminished
(Bonica, 1994). Doctors have frequently, through neglecting subjective
evaluation, missed the important distinction between the experience of
pain and its physical causes (Noordenbos, 1959). The patient assumes
that their pain indicates the presence of physical illness, but pain of
various types is a common symptom in many psychiatric conditions without
there being physical pathology. The experience of psychogenic pain has
been associated with particular personality types (Engel, 1959). The
most important traits of personality associated with pain are those of
anxiousness, depressiveness and the cyclothymic personality at its
depressive pole---hysterical, hypochondriacal and obsessional traits
(Bond, 1976). Subjects with such personality traits developed to
abnormal extent are especially likely to respond to life stresses with
pain. Complaints of pain are common in neurotic disorder, especially
with chronic anxiety or hysterical traits (Merskey, 1965). It is
important to be careful in attempting to distinguish pain of physical
origin from that which is largely psychogenic: generalizations can be
dangerous. However, Trethowan (1988) considers that there are certain
important differences between pain of psychiatric and organic origin.
These are as follows: • Pain associated with psychiatric illness tends
to be more diffuse and less well localized than pain due to a physical
lesion. It spreads with a nonanatomic distribution. • Pain is complained
of as a constant feature. It may become more severe at times, but it
persists unremittingly. Physical pains usually have more definite
provocative agents and are relieved by specific measures. • Psychogenic
pain is clearly seen to be associated with an underlying disturbance of
mood that appears to be primary in both time and causation. • It seems
to be much more difficult to accurately describe the quality of
psychogenic pain. The patient is in no doubt that they are suffering,
that the pain is very unpleasant and that they feel they cannot bear it.
But in contrast to painful damage to a defined organ, when pain may be
described as burning (skin), shooting (nerve) or gripping (heart
muscle), the patient with nonorganic pain can find no adequate words for
description.

The Psychopathology of Pain

233

• A further addition to this list is the finding of progression of the
severity and extent of the pain over time---unusual for a purely
physically mediated pain without increased tissue damage (Tyrer, 1986).

Pain and Heightened Sensation Generalized increase in sensory input may
be experienced as pain. This is exemplified by hyperacousia: the patient
complains of noises being uncomfortably loud. There is no objective
improvement in their capacity to hear, but the threshold at which sound
is perceived as unpleasantly loud is lowered. Noises, even a normal
speaking voice, are described as painful to listen to. With lysergic
acid diethylamide, intense pain may be experienced in the limbs, which
seem to the sufferer to be twisted or contorted. Similarly, in the early
stages of thiamine deficiency, there may be increased sensitivity to
pain. In these situations, there is an alteration to perception of
sensations so that they are experienced as pain. During consciousness,
the person receives countless sensations from all over their body, such
as itching, distension, pressure, borborygmi, mild aching, thumping,
warmth and so on. These form the sensorium of the body image; they make
possible the location of self in space. Most of these sensations escape
attention for most of the time. However, occasionally the person
concentrates and may take action to eliminate the sensation---scratch
their ear or cross their legs. Attention to such sensations, especially
if linked to an unpleasant emotion, may occasion the experience of pain.
Noticing the sensation results in fear, and the distress of this emotion
is perceived as pain. This would appear to be the explanation for the
vital feelings of depression described in Chapter 16. Vital feelings are
the localization of depression in a bodily organ, complained of, perhaps
as pain, in the head or chest or elsewhere. On further questioning,
symptoms are described as being unpleasant, painful pressure or even a
feeling of misery and depression in that organ: morbid interpretations
of ordinary bodily sensations. The sensation is unpleasant but normal
and would be ignored in health. With disorder of affect, the sensation
may be morbidly interpreted as being due to cancer, tuberculosis or
venereal disease. There

234

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

are, of course, also actual physical changes in depression, for example,
slowing of peristalsis and decreased gastrointestinal secretions, and
these may also provoke unpleasant sensations such as spasm and
constipation. Central pain (thalamic syndrome) is experienced as a
spontaneous burning sensation that can be activated by cutaneous
stimulation or temperature changes. It can also present as tactile
allodynia, cold allodynia or ongoing pain (Greenspan et al., 2004). It
is usually intractable and occurs in the setting of cerebrovascular
accident, multiple sclerosis, syringomyelia and spinal cord injury. The
current hypothesis is that it arises as a result of disruption in the
spinothalamic pathways associated with ectopic neuronal discharges and
potentially involves adrenergic, GABAergic, glycine and other
neurotransmitters (Devulde et al., 2002).

Diminished Pain Sensation and Pain Craving In certain situations, there
is a decrease in the perception of pain. Pain asymbolia is a condition
in which situations that should give rise to pain do not (Schilder and
Stengel, 1931). This condition can occur as a congenital or an acquired
disorder. There are at present five recognized hereditary varieties,
usually associated with autonomic neuropathies including anhidrosis
(Butler et al., 2006). Several mutations of nerve growth factor have
been identified (Einarsdottir et al., 2004). Acquired pain asymbolia has
also been described in patients with vascular lesions, predominantly
left-­ sided and involving the insular (Berthier et al., 1988). Patients
with pain asymbolia show an absent or inadequate response to painful
stimuli over the entire body and an inability to learn appropriate
escape or protective responses. Other features include anhidrosis, lack
of thermal sensitivity, self-­mutilation, intellectual disability,
recurrent fever secondary to anhidrosis and failure to thrive (Dias and
Charki, 2012). In patients with schizophrenia and their relatives, there
is evidence of elevated pain thresholds and pain tolerance demonstrated
by relative insensitivity to finger pressure (Hooley and Delgado, 2001).
Self-­damage of a gross nature also occurs sometimes in schizophrenia,
for example, self-­castration. In other situations, such as acute
drunkenness, there is diminished appreciation due to the central
depressant action of alcohol,

and opiates similarly are analgesic through their action on the central
appreciation of pain. Attention is also an important factor in the
perception of pain. Excitement or aggression, as in footballers or
soldiers, may render the subject oblivious to serious injury. When a
wound has advantages to the patient---for example, enabling a soldier to
leave the battlefield---it causes less pain than when the injury is seen
as wholly disadvantageous. Various psychological techniques can reduce
the experience of pain, including hypnosis, various stratagems in
childbirth, placebo medication and, possibly, acupuncture. In
dissociation (conversion), there may be localized anaesthesia and
analgesia for the affected limb; for example, the patient may describe
no perception of pinprick sensation. A blunting and perverting of pain
perception is described in severe learning disability, resulting
occasionally in gross self-­damage. The patient may bang their head so
that there is chronic haematoma formation, bite themself or otherwise
harm themself repeatedly, causing permanent damage. Meanwhile, they
appear to experience no pain or even discomfort. Self-­ application of
constricting bands has been described in schizophrenia and organically
disordered patients (Dawson-­Butterworth et al., 1969). These are most
often applied to the left arm; despite extensive tissue damage, the
patient does not complain of pain. Self-­ inflicted harm occurs also in
those of disturbed personality without intellectual disability. Such
behaviour may include skin cutting, wrist slashing, skin burning,
self-­hitting, severe skin scratching and bone breaking (McElroy et al.,
2000). These patients are usually female (Graff and Mallin, 1967), and
the behaviour appears to be linked with the desire to relieve tension
and alleviate negative emotions. There is empirical evidence that it
does relieve negative emotions (Klonsky, 2007). There is also limited
evidence that the self-­injurious behaviour has several possible goals:
as self-­punishment, to influence personal relationships, to reduce
tendency to dissociation and also to induce intense sensory stimulation
(Box 15.1).

Pain Without Organic Cause Unfortunately, pain is an unpleasant feature
common to almost all medical settings; it is a frequent complaint in
medical, surgical, gynaecologic and psychiatric

15

BOX 15.1 EXAMPLES OF SELF-­INJURIOUS BEHAVIOUR When SHE's home alone, she
cuts herself, slicing off her nose to spite other people's faces. She
always waits and waits for the moment when she can cut herself
unobserved. No sooner does the sound of the closing door die down than
she takes out her little talisman, the paternal all-­purpose razor. SHE
peels the blade out of its Sunday coat of five layers of virginal
plastic. She is very skilled in the use of blades; after all, she has to
shave her father, shave that soft paternal cheek under the completely
empty paternal brow, which is now undimmed by any thought, unwrinkled by
any will. This blade is destined for HER flesh. This thin, elegant foil
of bluish steel, pliable, elastic. SHE sits down in front of the
magnifying side of the shaving mirror; spreading her legs, she makes a
cut, magnifying the aperture that is the doorway into her body. She
knows from experience that such a razor cut doesn't hurt, for her arms,
hands, and legs have often served as guinea pigs. Her hobby is cutting
her own body. (From Jelinek, E., 1988. The Piano Teacher (J.
Neugroschel, Trans). Weidenfeld and Nicholson, New York).

Late at night I went into the bathroom and took the broken pieces of a
razor blade which I had kept. I slashed my wrist again and again, as
deeply as I could. I knew perfectly well that it would not kill me, not
like the times before. They have been something quite different. As my
writing to you comes to a close, the pain is so unbearable inside me
that a force of such strength has driven me to inflict a physical pain
on myself in the hope of appeasing the other. (From Ferguson, S., 1973.
A Guard Within. Chatto and Windus, London).

practice. Recalcitrant cases may be referred to a pain clinic, and
prominent among such referrals are those in whom no organic basis can be
found to account for the complaint of pain (Tyrer, 1985). Pain in the
back and in the head and face, particularly, is often found not to be
associated with organic lesions. From 3% to 5% of patients, depending on
how referrals are made, have measurable psychiatric disturbance. There
are various possible mechanisms to explain the presence of pain without
physical disease: autonomic nervous activity may be interpreted and
elaborated through fear of possible consequences, normal sensations may
be experienced as painful in situations of stress or in fear, relatively
minor pain and discomfort of benign cause may be misinterpreted as being
more ominous than it really is. Classification of nonorganic pain is
complex. As well as occurring as a primary disturbance, pain also may be
conspicuous with hypochondriasis, with

The Psychopathology of Pain

235

somatization disorder and, especially, with depression in mood disorder.
In Tyrer's series, two-­thirds of those patients without organic cause
and with measurable psychiatric disturbance were diagnosed as suffering
from major depressive disorder. The remainder had personality disorders,
anxiety state, hysteria (dissociative disorder) and drug dependence;
paraphrenia and organic brain syndrome also occurred, but rarely (Tyrer,
1985). Pain without adequate organic explanation is one of the most
difficult problems psychiatrists are called on to treat. In a study of
patients with pain referred to psychiatrists in a general hospital, the
head and neck was the most common site, followed by the back, abdomen,
arm or leg, rectum or genitalia and chest (Pilling et al., 1967). In 32%
of these medical and surgical patients, pain was the presenting
complaint, and it was considered that these patients 'spoke to their
physicians in terms of pain or other organic symptoms rather than
anxiety, depression and the like'. In the evaluation of the significance
of emotional factors in chronic pain, adequate history and examination,
including the assessment of attribution and the relationship with mood
state, was found to be most helpful (Tyrer, 1992); the most useful
questionnaires were the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (Zigmond
and Snaith, 1983) and the West Haven-­Yale Multidimensional Pain
Inventory (Kerns et al., 1985). It is, of course, wholly understandable
that someone suffering pain should be miserable and that chronic pain or
the anticipation of recurrent pain should provoke depression of mood.
This is often so much taken for granted that no steps are taken to
alleviate the depressed mood if the cause of the pain is obvious.
However, if the perception of pain is considered to have two separate
contributions---the sensory perception and the investing
affect---efforts to relieve the latter, if successful, will produce a
global diminution of pain. Pain can be a cause of depression, and in
this situation treatment for the depression is appropriate. The role and
place of depression in chronic pain is exemplified in the report by
Roughan et al. (2021) which showed that chronic pain is associated with
an increased risk of depression, increased risk of recent suicide
attempt, higher use of tobacco and misuse of painkillers. Furthermore,
increased pain severity was associated with increased number of
depressive

236

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

episodes. Pain response to antidepressants in this sample of patients
with chronic pain was negligible. PAIN AND LOSS The best known model for
this topic is the phantom limb pain so often experienced in amputees
(see Chapter 14). Pain is experienced within a limb that is not there;
that is, spatially, pain is located outside the patient. However, this
is not a hallucination. The person knows full well that they have lost
their leg and that the feeling of pain is inside themself. The body
image takes a long time to adjust to a change such as an amputation, and
it may never do so fully. Ramachandran and Hirstein (1998) provide a
thorough review of the subject. The phantom limb experience occurs
almost immediately after the loss of a limb in the vast majority of
cases, and the incidence may be even higher after a traumatic loss. In
the case of surgical amputations, phantoms appear as soon as the
anaesthetic wears off. The phantom is present for a few days or weeks
and gradually fades but may persist for years or even decades in some
people. Indeed, some people are able to recall a phantom limb at will
after its disappearance. Phantoms are most common after amputation of an
arm or a leg but have been reported after mastectomies or removal of
parts of the face; even phantom internal viscera can produce sensations
of bowel movements and flatus. The posture of the limb can become
habitual, as with the arm, often partially flexed at the elbow with
forearm pronated, and when the phantom fades from consciousness,
especially with the forearm, it becomes progressively shorter until the
patient is left with just the phantom hand. Perhaps most surprisingly,
children with congenitally missing limbs can experience phantoms.
Originally, it was thought that phantom pain was due to stump neuromas
but given that people born without limbs (amelia) can have phantom pain,
neuromas do not seem necessary for phantom pain to occur. The
persistence of central representation of the amputated limb is largely
responsible for the phantom illusion and associated pain and provides
some understanding of the influence of the body schema on subjective
experience. In amputees, the body schema continues to exist irrespective
of the absence of sensory input from an actual limb and as for amelia,
the experience of phantom limbs, points to

existence of neural systems ready to respond to sensory inflows from
limbs. Phantom limbs in amelia and following amputation point to the
likely correctness of Melzack's notion of neuromatrix, a widespread
network of thalamocortical and limbic loops that is basically innate and
responds and adapts to sensory inputs and motor commands during a
person's life . PSYCHOGENIC FACIAL PAIN It has been known for a long
time that many patients with chronic pain at a variety of sites do not
have abnormal physical signs and do not manifest serious organic
illness. Atypical facial pain is an especially frequent and intractable
example, manifesting no organic signs but causing great suffering; the
patient is referred from surgeon to dentist to pain clinic physician to
psychiatrist, often without benefit. It tends to occur in the
nonmuscular areas of the face, either unilaterally or bilaterally. It is
poorly localized and does not tend to follow any definable nerve
distribution. It is described as a throbbing, deep, diffuse, boring or
nagging pain. It can last for years and can be continuous or episodic in
nature (Zakrzewska, 2002, 2013). Such pain has often been associated
with depression. Lascelles (1966) described a series of 93 patients
suffering from prolonged facial pain, of whom the majority suffered from
atypical depression with intense fatigue, tension and sleep disorder
superimposed on 'obsessive' personality; 53 of these patients responded
well to antidepressant therapy. Blumer and Heilbronn (1982) have seen
chronic, intractable pain without organic cause as being a variant of
depressive illness. Garvey et al. (1983) investigated the association
between headache and depression in 116 patients suffering from major
depressive disorder. During a nondepressed period, these patients
experienced a similar rate for headache to that of nondepressive control
subjects, but they had a markedly increased rate during depressive
episodes. Feinmann et al. (1984) investigated the efficacy of an
antidepressant, dosulepin (dothiepin), in the treatment of psychogenic
facial pain. Seventy-­one percent of patients were free of symptoms at 9
weeks, compared with 47% in a placebo group; at a 12-­month follow-­up,
81% of patients were pain-­free. Good prognostic indicators for
successful treatment included pain after an adverse life event, minimal
previous surgical intervention and freedom from pain after 9

15

weeks' treatment. Such studies would suggest an association between
facial pain without physical signs and depressive illness. BURNING MOUTH
SYNDROME A group of heterogeneous skin conditions that present with
unpleasant skin sensations including itching, burning, stinging or
numbness are well recognized as liable to affect face, scalp and
perineum. These conditions are poorly understood but demonstrate an
interplay among neuropathic pain, neuropathic itch, neurology and
psychiatric disorders (Gupta and Gupta, 2013). When these conditions
affect the oral cavity, it is referred to as burning mouth syndrome, a
condition characterized by intraoral burning for which no medical or
dental cause can be identified (Ducasse et al., 2013). The abnormal oral
sensations include burning, pricking (pins and needles), allodynia (pain
on brushing the teeth and gums), tingling, numbness, itching and
sensation of electrical discharges (Braud et al., 2013). These
sensations occur principally on the tip of the tongue, the lateral
aspects of the tongue, lips, hard and soft palate (Sun et al., 2013) and
may involve pain radiating to the lower and upper jaws, the inner
aspects of the cheeks and the gums. Despite normal salivation, patients
often complain of xerostomia and dysgeusia. Burning mouth syndrome seems
to occur most frequently in perimenopausal females (Dahiya et al.,
2013). There is evidence of elevated rates of depression and anxiety in
burning mouth syndrome compared to control groups. Moura et al., (2018)
report moderate or severe depression in 25% of their sample. It is still
too early to determine how far burning mouth syndrome is down to
neuralgic pain or nociceptive dysfunction. VULVODYNIA Vulvodynia can be
defined as persistent, spontaneous, unwelcomed, intrusive and
distressing vulval sensation (Markos and Dinsmore, 2013). It is a
little-­ understood condition. A frequent subtype is termed provoked
vestibulodynia in which the experienced pain or discomfort is provoked
by sexual intercourse rather than merely occurring spontaneously (Bois
et al., 2013). There is some evidence that vulvodynia is associated with
generalized hyperalgesia and that there are augmented brain responses to
thumb pressure,

The Psychopathology of Pain

237

that is, stimulation of an area remote from the vulva demonstrable
within the insula, dorsal midcingulate, posterior cingulate and thalamus
compared with normal control subjects. This is interpreted as showing
augmented central pain processing in vulvodynia (Hampson et al., 2013).
In focal as opposed to diffuse vulvodynia, when the pain is localized at
1 and 11 o'clock, it tends to be experienced as deep pain within the
vestibule, and the pain is provoked by sexual intercourse or the
insertion of a tampon. Pain at 5 and 7 o'clock is less severe (Donders
and Bellen, 2012). There are considerable associated adverse effects on
quality of life and on intimate relationships with sexual partners
(Ponte et al., 2009; Xie et al., 2012; Bois et al., 2013; Smith et al.,
2013). Male patients can also present with a condition similar to
vulvodynia. The patients present with burning sensation in the penis and
scrotum, and this condition is termed penoscrotodynia. The current
proposed classification is generalized, focal, provoked, unprovoked and
mixed types (Markos, 2011). PSYCHOGENIC ITCH Itch and the desire to
scratch is a normal response to skin sensations. Pruritogenic itch
(physiologic itch) is transmitted by dedicated afferent neurons much as
is pain. Mediators of itch include the 'cross-­talk' between dermal Mast
cells and adjacent cutaneous afferents. In addition, there are a number
of neuropeptides (neurotensin and substance P, for example) involved in
the process (Greaves, 2010). Some cases, which are considered to be
neuropathic in origin, are thought to be related to damage to the
peripheral nervous system, such as in postherpetic neuralgia,
brachioradial pruritus, notalgia paresthetica, central nervous damage to
the spinal cord by tumours and demyelinating disease such as multiple
sclerosis (Yosipovitch and Samuel, 2008). The itch sensation in these
conditions is analogous to neuropathic pain and overlaps with burning,
aching and stinging sensations. Psychogenic itch, on the other hand,
occurs in the absence of a physical cause and is unrelated to
demonstrable nerve damage. It can be associated with depression and
obsessive ­compulsive disorder (Calikuşu et al., 2003), anxiety and
delusions of parasitosis. The French psychodermatology group has
proposed diagnostic criteria to include the following three: localized
or generalized

238

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

pruritus sine materia, chronic pruritus lasting longer than 6 weeks and
the absence of a somatic cause. In addition, there should be three
additional criteria from the following seven: chronological relationship
of pruritus with one or several life events that could have
psychological repercussions, variations in intensity associated with
stress, nocturnal variations, predominance during rest or inaction,
associated psychiatric disorders, improvement in response to
psychotropic agents and improvement in response to psychotherapy (Misery
et al., 2007). There is continuing debate about how best to classify and
conceive of psychogenic itch. Misery (2021) further proposed three
distinct ways of thinking of an itch: pruriceptive that arises from
actual or threatened damage to non-neural tissue; neuropathic that is
analogous to neuropathic pain and arises from a lesion or disease of the
somatosensory nervous system; and a new category termed pruriplastic
itch that arises from altered pruriception and best construed as a
dysfunction of itch processing systems. In this schema, psychogenic itch
would be classified as pruriplastic itch.

Pain and Suffering Pain is an appropriate study for the phenomenologist,
in that the external signs may be irrelevant and the subjective
experience all-­important. The chief problem in assessing pain is the
extraordinary difficulty a patient has in describing the quality of
their pain: the greater the psychogenic component of the pain, the more
difficult it is to find the right words to describe it. Sometimes, it
seems that pain may be needed as a neurotic solution to a neurotic
conflict: for the equilibrium to remain, it is necessary for the pain to
be retained. It has been considered by Trethowan (1988) that such a
patient 'is not suffering from pain at all. What they are suffering from
is suffering'. There are differences between the person suffering from
organically determined pain and the chronic sufferer with multiple
symptoms whose pain is considered psychogenic. The latter truly suffers
but does not show the physical correlates of severe pain. It seems that
the state of suffering in which this person exists finds expression,
dons respectability and can only be communicated when it is transformed
peripherally into a specific pain. Pain may occur with little

suffering, as in the injection of local anaesthetic that, after the
small prick, brings relief from a worse pain. Suffering may also occur
without pain, but it may also be described as pain, and this may be the
nature of many neurotic complaints of pain. This transposition of affect
is wholly understandable when one considers the semantics of suffering.
Suffering of all nonphysical kinds---indignation, humiliation,
disappointment--- finds expression in pain terms: taking pains, feeling
crushed, bruised self-­esteem, rubbing salt in the wound, getting one's
fingers burnt, searing remarks. It is not just that pain is a metaphor
for suffering, but in many situations suffering can be experienced and
explained by the sufferer only in terms of pain. So the use of pain
words can be construed metaphorically, and the neurotic patient may
follow this to its logical conclusion and describe concretely the
unbearable and humiliating suffering of their daily existence as
complaints of localized physical pain. The experience of pain is a
physical sensation that takes on an affective component for its
expression and interpretation. This affective
component---suffering---may occur without physical perception and
sometimes still be experienced by the person themself as pain.
REFERENCES Beecher, H.K., 1959. Measurement of Subjective Responses,
Quantitative Effects of Drugs. Oxford University Press, New York.
Berthier, M., Starktein, S., Leiguarda, R., 1988. Asymbolia for pain: a
sensory--limbic disconnection syndrome. Ann. Neurol. 24, 41--49. Blumer,
D., Heilbronn, M., 1982. Chronic pain as a variant of depressive
disease: the pain-­prone disorder. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 70, 381--406.
Bois, K., Bergeron, S., Rosen, N.O., McDuff, P., Gregoire, C., 2013.
Sexual and relationship intimacy among women with provoked
vestibulodynia and their partners: associations with sexual
satisfaction, sexual function, and pain self-­efficacy. J. Sex. Med. 10,
2024--2035. Bond, M.R., 1976. Psychological and psychiatric aspects of
pain. In: Howells, J.G. (Ed.), Modern Perspectives in the Psychiatric
Aspects of Surgery. Macmillan, London, pp. 109--139. Bonica, J.J., 1994.
Labour pain. In: Wall, P.D., Melzack, R. (Eds.), Textbook of Pain, third
ed. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh. Braud, A., Touré, B., Agbo-­Godeau,
S., Descroix, V., Boucher, Y., 2013. Characteristics of pain assessed
with visual analogue scale and questionnaire in burning mouth syndrome:
a pilot study. J. Orofac. Pain 27, 235--242. Butler, J., Fleming, P.,
Webb, D., 2006. Congenital insensitivity to pain---review of a case with
dental implications. Oral Surg. Oral Med. Oral Pathol. Oral Radiol.
Endod. 101, 58--62. Calikuşu, C., Yücel, B., Polat, A., Baykal, C.,
2003. The relation of psychogenic excoriation with psychiatric
disorders: a comparative study. Compr. Psychiatry 44, 256--261.

15 Dahiya, P., Kamal, R., Kumar, M., Niti, M., Gupta, R., Chaudhary, K.,
2013. Burning mouth syndrome and menopause. Int. J. Prev. Med. 4,
15--20. Dawson-­Butterworth, K., Wallen, G.D.P., Gittleson, N.L., 1969.
Self-­ applied constricting bands. Br. J. Psychiatry 115, 1255--1259.
Devulde, R., Crombez, E., Mortier, E., 2002. Central pain: an overview.
Acta Neurol. Belg. 102, 97--103. Dias, E., Charki, S., 2012. Congenital
insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis. J. Pediatr. Neurosci. 7,
156--157. Dickens, C., 1854. Hard Times. Penguin, London. Donders, G.,
Bellen, G., 2012. Characteristics of the pain observed in the focal
vulvodynia syndrome. Med. Hypotheses 78, 11--14. Ducasse, D., Courtet,
P., Olie, E., 2013. Burning mouth syndrome: current clinical,
physiopathologic, and therapeutic data. Reg. Anesth. Pain Med. 38,
380--390. Einarsdottir, E., Carlsson, A., Minde, J., et al., 2004. A
mutation in the nerve growth factor beta gene (NGB) causes loss of pain
perception. Hum. Mol. Genet. 13, 799--805. Engel, G.L., 1959.
'Psychogenic' pain and the pain prone patient. Am. J. Med. 26, 899.
Feinmann, C., Harris, M., Cawley, R., 1984. Psychogenic facial pain:
presentation and treatment. Br. Med. J. 288, 436--438. Ferguson, S.,
1973. A Guard within. Chatto and Windus, London. Fields, H.L., Basbaum,
A.I., 1994. Central nervous system mechanisms of pain modulation. In:
Wall, P.D., Melzack, R. (Eds.), Textbook of Pain, third ed. Churchill
Livingstone, Edinburgh. Garvey, M.J., Schaffer, C.B., Tuason, V.B.,
1983. Relationship of headaches to depression. Br. J. Psychiatry 143,
544--547. Graff, H., Mallin, R., 1967. The syndrome of the wrist-­cutter.
Am. J. Psychiatry 124, 36--42. Greaves, M.W., 2010. Pathogenesis and
treatment of pruritus. Curr. Allergy Asthma Rep. 10, 236--242.
Greenspan, J.D., Ohara, J., Sarlani, E., Lenz, F.A., 2004. Allodynia in
patients with post-­stroke pain (CPSP) studied by statistical
quantitative sensory testing within individuals. Pain 109, 357--366.
Gupta, M.A., Gupta, A.K., 2013. Cutaneous sensory disorder. Semin.
Cutan. Med. Surg. 32, 110--118. Hampson, J.P., Reed, B.D., Clauw, D.J.,
et al., 2013. Augmented central pain processing in vulvodynia. J. Pain
14, 579--589. Hooley, J.M., Delgado, M.L., 2001. Pain insensitivity in
the relatives of schizophrenic patients. Schizophr. Res. 47, 265--273.
International Association for the Study of Pain, 1994. Classification of
chronic pain: descriptions of chronic pain syndromes and definitions of
pain terms. In: Task Force on Taxonomy (Suppl. 3). IASP Press, Seattle.
Jelinek, E., 1988. The Piano Teacher (J. Neugroschel, Trans). Weidenfeld
and Nicholson, New York. Kerns, R.D., Turk, D.C., Rudy, T.F., 1985. The
West Haven--Yale Multidimensional Pain Inventory (WHYMPI). Pain 23,
345--356. Klonsky, E.D., 2007. The functions of deliberate self-­injury:
a review of the evidence. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 27, 226--239. Lascelles,
R.G., 1966. Atypical facial pain and depression. Br. J. Psychiatry 112,
651--659. Markos, A.R., 2011. Dysaesthetic penoscrotodynia:
nomenclature, classification, diagnosis and treatment. Int. J. STD AIDS
22, 483--487. Markos, A.R., Dinsmore, W., 2013. Persistent genital
arousal and restless genitalia: sexual dysfunction or subtype of
vulvodynia? Int. J. STD AIDS 24, 852--858. McElroy, S.L., Arnold, L.M.,
Beckman, D.A., 2000. Habit and impulse control disorders. In: Gelder,
M.G., López-­Ibor, J.J., An-

The Psychopathology of Pain

239

dreasen, N.C. (Eds.), New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. Melzack, R., 1990. Phantom limbs and the
concept of a neuromatrix. Trends Neurosci. 13 (3), 88--92. Melzack, R.,
Wall, P.D., 1965. Pain mechanisms: a new theory. Science 150, 971.
Merskey, H., 1965. The characteristics of persistent pain in
psychological illness. J. Psychosom. Res. 9, 291. Merskey, H., 1976. The
status of pain. In: Hill, O. (Ed.), Modern Trends in Psychosomatic
Medicine 3. Butterworth, London, pp. 166--186. Misery, L., 2021.
Pruriplastic itch---a novel pathogenic concept in chronic pruritus.
Front. Med. 7, 615118. https://doi.org/10.3389/ fmed.2020.615118.
Misery, L., Alexandre, S., Dutray, S., et al., 2007. Functional itch
disorder or psychogenic pruritus: suggested diagnosis criteria from the
French psychodermatology group. Acta Derm. Venereol. 87, 341--344.
Moura, B.S., Ferreira, N., DosSantos, M.F., Janini, M., 2018. Changes in
the vibration sensitivity and pressure pain thresholds in patients with
burning mouth syndrome. PloS one, 13 (5), e0197834. Nathan, P., 1980.
Recent advances in understanding pain. Br. J. Psychiatry 136, 509--512.
Noordenbos, W., 1959. Pain: Problems Pertaining to the Transmission of
Nerve Impulses Which Give Rise to Pain. Elsevier, London. Pilling, L.F.,
Bannick, T.L., Swenson, W.M., 1967. Psychological characteristics of
patients having pain as a presenting symptom. Can. Med. Assoc. J. 97,
387. Ponte, M., Klemperer, E., Sahay, A., Chren, M.M., 2009. Effects of
vulvodynia on quality of life. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 60, 70--76.
Ramachandran, V.S., Hirstein, W., 1998. The perception of phantom limbs.
The DO Hebb lecture. Brain 121, 1603--1630. Roughan, W.H., Campos, A.I.,
García-­Marín, L.M., et al., 2021. Comorbid chronic pain and depression:
shared risk factors and differential antidepressant effectiveness.
Front. Psychiatry 12, 643609. Schilder, P., Stengel, E., 1931. Asymbolia
for pain. Arch. Neurol. Psychiatry 25, 598--600. Smith, K.B., Pukall,
C.F., Chamberlain, S.M., 2013. Sexual and relationship satisfaction and
vestibular pain sensitivity among women with provoked vestibulodynia. J.
Sex. Med. 10, 2009-- 2023. Sun, A., Wu, K.M., Wang, Y.P., Lin, H.P.,
Chen, H.M., Chiang, C.P., 2013. Burning mouth syndrome: a review and
update. J. Sex. Med. 42, 649--655. Trethowan, W.H., 1988. Pain as a
psychiatric symptom. In: Hall, P., Stonier, P.D. (Eds.), Perspectives in
Psychiatry. John Wiley, Chichester. Tyrer, S., 1985. The role of the
psychiatrist in the pain clinic. Psychiatr. Bull. 9, 135--136. Tyrer,
S., 1986. Learned pain behaviour. Br. Med. J. 292, 1--2. Tyrer, S.,
1992. Psychiatric assessment of chronic pain. Br. J. Psychiatry 160,
733--741. Wall, P.D., Melzack, R., 1999. Textbook of Pain, fourth
ed. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh. Waxman, S.G., 1999. The molecular
pathophysiology of pain: abnormal expression of sodium channel genes and
its contributions to hyperexcitability of primary sensory neurons. (Pain
Suppl.), 6 S133--S140.

240

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Waxman, S.G., Dib-­Hajj, S., Cummins, T.R., Black, J.A., 1999. Sodium
channels and pain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96, 7635--7639. Xie,
Y., Shi, L., Xiong, X., Wu, E., Veasley, C., Dade, C., 2012. Economic
burden and quality of life of vulvodynia in the United States. Curr.
Med. Res. Opin. 28, 601--608. Yosipovitch, G., Samuel, L.S., 2008.
Neuropathic and psychogenic itch. Dermatol. Ther. 1, 32--41.

Zakrzewska, J.M., 2002. Facial pain: neurological and non-­neurological.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 6; 72. Suppl 2(Suppl 2): ii27--ii32.
Zakrzewska, J.M., 2013. Differential diagnosis of facial pain and
guidelines for management. Br. J. Anaesth. 111, 95--104. Zigmond, A.S.,
Snaith, R.P., 1983. The hospital anxiety and depression scale. Acta
Psychiatr. Scand. 67, 361--370.

Section V

EMOTIONS AND ACTION

241

This page intentionally left blank

     

Chapter 16

Affect and Emotional Disorders Chapter Outline Summary Theories of
Emotion Basic Emotions Communication of Mood Classification of Pathology
of Emotions Pathologic Changes in Basic Emotions Changes in Intensity of
Emotions Changes in Timing, Duration and Appropriateness to Situation
Abnormalities of Expression and Appropriateness to Object Abnormality of
Experience and Physiologic Activity Abnormalities of Evaluation
Abnormality of Mood in Bipolar Disorder Depression of Mood Core
Experience: Psychological and Physical Shame and Guilt Suicidal Thoughts
Depression and Loss Mania

KEYWORDS Emotion Ecstasy Anhedonia Alexithymia Prosody

Summary Mood disturbance is not only a common abnormality presenting to
psychiatrists but is of considerable importance because of the severe
consequences that poor recognition or treatment may have in the lives of
patients. It is associated with suicide, homicide and reckless behaviour
and has potentially significant, undesirable impact on social
reputation. Affect is a broad term that is used to cover mood, feeling,
attitude, preferences and evaluations. In modern usage, it refers to the
expression of emotion as judged by the external manifestations that are
associated with specific feelings---for example, laughter, crying and
fearful appearance. Mood is a more prolonged, prevailing state or
disposition, whereas emotion is often used to refer to spontaneous and
transitory experience similar to but not identical to feeling because it
need not incorporate the physical accompaniments of the experience.
Abnormalities of mood can be classified as follows: (1) morbid states of
the basic emotions, including sadness, happiness, fear, anger, surprise
and disgust, that can be affected in the intensity, duration, timing,
quality of experience, expression and appropriateness to the object or
social setting; (2) abnormalities of the physiologic and arousal
mechanisms associated with emotions; and (3) abnormalities of the
cognitive evaluation of the social world and of the perception of the
emotions of others. I wish to inform you that I have received the cake.
Many thanks, but I am not worthy. You sent it on the anniversary of my
child's death, for I am not worthy of my birthday; I must weep myself to
death; I cannot live 243

244

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

and I cannot die, because I have failed so much, I shall bring my
husband and children to hell. We are all lost; we won't see each other
any more; I shall go to the convict prison and my two girls as well, if
they do not make away with themselves because they were born in my body.
A patient of Emil Kraepelin (1905)

Assessing and observing the state of, and changes in, mood are essential
in psychiatry but at the same time require skill. Part of the problem
has always been the conceptual confusion and lack of cohesive
psychopathologic theory that has traditionally been associated with
disturbance of affect (Berrios, 1985). In a study of patients with
unsolved diagnostic problems at the time of discharge from hospital,
atypical psychotic depression was found, at follow-­up, to be the
condition most frequently responsible for doubt (Anstee and Fleminger,
1977). In another study, depressed affect was a major cause of somatic
problems without physical pathology (Brenner, 1979). However, the terms
used are not standardized nor mutually exclusive. Different languages,
in contrast to the names given to physical objects, have an entirely
different range of descriptions of mood, so that one is left wondering
whether it is just the terms that differ in different cultures or
perhaps even the experience of emotion itself. So Angst cannot be
translated exactly into English with a single equivalent word; neither
can depression be precisely translated into German. The word feeling
describes an active experience of somatic sensation, touch, as well as
the passive subjective experience of emotion. Emotion, according to
Whybrow (1997), 'is actually memory and feeling intertwined'. Feelings
are also personal convictions, predictive forecasts and social
sensibilities. All these nuances of meaning are somewhat different from
the associations of the word mood. Traditionally, feeling has been used
to describe a positive or negative reaction to an experience; it is
marked but transitory. Affect is a broad term that is used to cover
mood, feeling, attitude, preferences and evaluations. In psychiatry, it
is customary to limit its use to the expression of emotion as judged by
the external manifestations that are associated with specific feelings,
for example, laughter, crying or fearful appearance. Mood is a more
prolonged prevailing state or disposition, whereas emotion is often used
to refer to spontaneous and transitory experience similar to but

not identical to feeling, as it need not incorporate the physical
accompaniments of the experience. In practice, these terms are used more
or less interchangeably, a fact that contributes to much confusion. Mood
describes the state of the self in relation to its environment. There is
an enormous range of variation of what could reasonably be called normal
mood. Pathologic mood, that is, mood from which the patient suffers or
mood that causes disturbance or suffering to others, also varies a great
deal, and the extent to which it is acceptable to others in its
expression is different in different social contexts. The clinician has
to ask two questions concerning the mood of his patient. First, is the
person suffering? Second, is the expression of mood inappropriate in
this social setting? Psychopathology of mood is confined to those
situations in which there is an affirmative answer to at least one of
these questions, and treatment is directed towards improving the mood.
Like other human characteristics, pathology of mood arises in the
context of a diathesis. It is the physical constitution that forms the
tendency for developing, for example, a prolapsed intervertebral disc;
in the mental realm, personality is closely associated with the type,
quality and direction of mood. So a person of cyclothymic personality is
more prone to morbid states of elation and excessive activity or
taciturn dejection and retardation.

Theories of Emotion The James--Lange theory of emotion was developed
independently by William James (1842--1910) and Carl Lange (1834--1900).
Simply, it posits that emotions are the result of self-­awareness of
physical and bodily changes in the presence of a stimulus. William James
(1884) wrote: My theory ... is that the bodily changes follow directly
the perception of the exciting fact, and that our feeling of the same
changes as they occur is the emotion. Common sense says, we lose our
fortune, are sorry and weep; we meet a bear, are frightened and run; we
are insulted by a rival, are angry and strike. The hypothesis here to be
defended says that this order of sequence is incorrect ... and that the
more rational statement is that we feel sorry because we cry, angry
because we strike, afraid because

16 Affect and Emotional Disorders

we tremble ... Without the bodily states following on the perception,
the latter would be purely cognitive in form, pale, colorless, destitute
of emotional warmth. We might then see the bear, and judge it best to
run, receive the insult and deem it right to strike, but we should not
actually feel afraid or angry. This theory was criticized by Walter
Cannon (1871--1945) and Philip Bard (1898--1977). Visceral (physiologic)
responses to stimuli are too slow to account for the rapidity of
emotions that arise in the presence of appropriate stimuli. In other
words, the timeliness of my awareness of the increased heart rate and
dry mouth that occur when I am in the presence of a hostile lion is
inadequate to explain my fear of the lion. Furthermore, the visceral
responses to varying stimuli are similar, yet the emotions may be as
disparate as fear, surprise, joy and so on. And injection of adrenaline
(epinephrine) is accompanied by visceral changes but not necessarily by
emotional change. In addition, animals that have spinal lesions continue
to experience emotions. Instead, the Cannon--Bard theory argued that
emotion has temporal primacy and that any visceral or behavioural change
follows the emotion. In this theory, I see a hostile lion and become
fearful. My fearfulness provokes the typical physiologic response of
increased heart rate, among others, and the resulting behaviour is that
I run off. This theory obviously leaves no room for any cognitive aspect
to the origin of emotions. The other influential theory is Schachter and
Singer's (1962) two-­factor theory of emotion. The two relevant factors
are physiologic arousal and cognition. In this theory, an individual is
in a given social context, and they respond to this situation with a
physiologic arousal. The meaning attributed to this arousal is
determined by their cognitions. If their appraisal is that the context
is threatening, then they will feel fear, but if the appraisal is that
the situation is funny, then the emotion will be a positive one. This
theory has obvious implications for the clinical evaluation of disorders
of mood. It specifies that the social context is important, that the
cognitions of the individual are relevant and, finally, that careful
consideration and description of the accompanying emotion is also
important.

245

Basic Emotions Ekman and Friesen (1971) have shown that there are six
basic emotions that are expressed in the face: anger, disgust, fear,
happiness, sadness and surprise. These basic expressions of emotion are
universal. Ekman's findings were anticipated by Charles Darwin (1872).
It is also the case that despite there being universals in facial
expressions of emotions, these expressions are not universal in every
regard. In Ekman's fieldwork in Papua New Guinea among the Fore people,
there was little distinction between surprise and fear. Furthermore, it
is also true that when people experience strong emotions there are
display rules that determine who can show which emotion to whom and
when. Cultures also differ on which events are likely to produce
particular emotions. This is well exemplified by what food one culture
regards as a delicacy and what another regards as revolting. The
important point is that the general theme is universal; ingesting
something repulsive is a cause for disgust (Ekman, 1998).

Communication of Mood 'No man is an Island, entire of itself' (John
Donne, 1571--1631), and in no area of life is this more true than that
of feelings. Our feelings are very much affected by those around us.
They are observable and understandable to other people, and this is not
accidental; they are actually signalled as a nonverbal message. The
affect itself is not directed towards another person, but the expression
of the affect is conveyed both deliberately and unintentionally to
others. One of the most important findings in the past decade has been
that of mirror neurons. These neurons have been found in primates and
birds, and their existence inferred in humans. Mirror neurons fire when
an animal performs an action and also when an animal observes the same
action performed by another animal. In other words, these neurons mirror
the behaviour of another animal. In humans, the relevant neurons are in
the premotor cortex and inferior parietal cortex. Rizzolatti and Fadiga
(1998) showed that in the macaque monkey there are two distinct groups
of neurons in the rostroventral premotor cortex that respond to the
observation of grasping objects and grasping actions. The canonical
neurons respond specifically

246

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

to the three-­dimensional objects, whereas the mirror neurons respond to
the direct observation of the hand actions performed by another animal.
Rizzolatti and Craighero (2004) argue that this mirror neuron system
underlies imitative learning and is therefore important for the
development of human culture and the acquisition of language. More
recently, Gallese (2007) proposed that the mirror neuron system is an
embodied simulation system wherein we not only see an action, emotion or
sensation but form internal representations of these actions, emotions
or sensations based on evocations of the same neural systems as when we
perform the same actions or experience the same emotions or sensations.
Thus by means of this system, the objectified other becomes for us
another experiencing self. In other words, empathy and the capacity to
understand another person's emotional state have an already identified
basis. Emotions are communicated nonverbally by different parts of the
body, for example, by the face (especially the eyes), gesture, posture,
tone of voice and general appearance, especially the choice of clothes.
While assessing another's affective response, the assessor in part
influences it by their own behaviour and disposition. A person who is
cheerful on meeting someone else will greet them cheerfully and induce a
feeling of cheerfulness, even if transitory, which they then read as the
other person being cheerful also. This has important implications in the
way that mood is assessed. It would seem that emotion is evaluated
empathically. Without having to go through this elaborate argument in
words, the observer says to themself, 'If I felt how I estimate the
feelings of that person from their appearance, I would feel very
unhappy; they are unhappy'. This is, of course, the empathic method as
described earlier, and it takes place spontaneously and without
deliberate training. Assessment of others' mood does not need to become
verbal to be acted upon. It takes place rapidly and is followed by the
appropriate behavioural response from the observer.

Classification of Pathology of Emotions There is no consensus on how to
classify abnormalities of the experience and display of emotions.
Cutting (1997) provides a viable framework, which has been adapted for
use in this chapter. There are morbid states

BOX 16.1 CLASSIFICATION OF DISORDERS OF EMOTION Abnormalities of Basic
Emotions • Intensity of emotions, including diminution and exacerbation
• Duration, time and quality of experience, including lability of mood,
pathologic crying and laughing, parathymia and paramimia • Expression of
emotion, including blunting and flattening of affect • Appropriateness
to object, including phobia Abnormality of Physiologic Arousal •
Alexithymia Abnormalities of Evaluation of Social Context • Negative
cognitive schemas • Prosopoaffective agnosia • Receptive vocal
dysprosody

of the basic emotions, including sadness, happiness, fear, anger,
surprise and disgust. These basic emotions can be affected in their
intensity, duration, timing, quality of experience, expression and
appropriateness to the object or social setting. There are abnormalities
of the physiologic and arousal mechanisms associated with emotions.
Finally, there are abnormalities of the cognitive evaluation of the
social world and of the perception of the emotions of others (Box 16.1).

Pathologic Changes in Basic Emotions CHANGES IN INTENSITY OF EMOTIONS
Most often in psychiatric practice, subjective description of change in
the experience of emotion is for the worse---a state of dysphoria,
meaning the condition of 'being ill at ease'; more rarely, the patient
may describe the onset of ecstasy or euphoria. The subjective experience
of change of mood can be quantified approximately and represented
graphically as in Fig. 16.1, which shows part of a mood chart a
previously depressed patient had recorded; he had noticed an association
between an acute attack of bronchitis and exacerbation of depressive
symptoms. Diminution of Intensity: Feeling of a Loss of Feeling

This is experienced as a loss of feeling, a deficiency that is all-­
pervasive, affecting all emotions including sadness, joy, anger, fear
and so on. The patient

16 Affect and Emotional Disorders

247

High 10 8 6 4 Mood

2 Normal 0

Mild Moderate

2 4

Severe

6

Most severe in previous episodes

8 Low 10

1

5

10

15

Start date: 1 Dec 1985

20

25

Days

30 1

5

10

15

Jan 1986

Fig. 16.1 Mood chart kept by a depressed patient who had had acute
bronchitis.

resents or does not understand it, suffers very greatly and often feels
guilty about the feeling. It is a subjective experience of loss of
feelings that were formerly present rather than an objectively observed
absence. A depressed young woman said, 'I have no feelings for my
children. That is wicked. They are beautiful children'. A person with
religious belief may experience this loss of feeling with a religious
content: they no longer believe in God. On more detailed eliciting of
their subjective experience, they are likely to describe a loss of the
feeling of assurance associated with their faith rather than any actual
change in the content of their beliefs. This affect occurs particularly
in depressive psychosis but also occasionally with personality disorders
and schizophrenia. Milder forms are experienced as depersonalization or
deaffectualization (see Chapter 13): the patient complains that their
feelings are numbed, diminished, made remote from themself, to which is
ascribed the unmelodious word deaffectualization.

best clinical marker predicting response to treatment. This would seem
to be a fundamental symptom of depressive illness. A highly intelligent
and perceptive man suffering from psychotic depression said, 'I have a
sort of uncanny feeling. I know what I am reading is amusing but I am
not at all amused by it'. The experience was very well described by J.S.
Mill (1806--73): It was the autumn of 1826. I was in a dull state of
nerves, such as everybody is occasionally liable to; unsusceptible to
enjoyment or pleasurable excitement; one of these moods when what is
pleasure at other times, becomes insipid or indifferent ... In this
frame of mind it occurred to me to put the question directly to myself,
'suppose that all your objects in life were realized; that all the
changes in institutions and opinions which you are looking forward to,
could be completely effected at this very instant: would this be a great
joy and happiness to you?' And an irrepressible self-­consciousness
distinctly answered, 'No!' At this my heart sank within me. Mill (1873)

Anhedonia

Anhedonia specifically refers to a loss of the capacity to experience
joy and pleasure. It is a subset of the diminution of the intensity of
emotions. In anhedonia there is a total inability to enjoy anything in
life or even get the accustomed satisfaction from everyday events or
objects; a 'loss of ability to experience pleasure' (Snaith, 1993). The
term was originally introduced by Ribot (1896) and considered to be a
prominent symptom of depressive illness by Klein (1974), probably the

In Shakespeare's Hamlet Hamlet says: I have of late -- but wherefore I
know not -- lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercise; and
indeed it goes so heavily with my disposition that this godly frame, the
earth seems to me a sterile promontory. This most excellent canopy, the
air, look you, this brave o'erhanging firmament, this majestical roof
fretted with golden fire -- why, it appears no other thing to me than a
foul and

248

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

pestilent congregation of vapours. What piece of work is a man, how
noble in reason, how infinite in faculty, in form and moving how express
and admirable, in action how like an angel, in apprehension how like a
god -- the beauty of the world, the paragon of animals! And yet, to me,
what is this quintessence of dust? Man delights not me -- no, nor woman
neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so. Shakespeare (∼1600)

Both extracts indicate the disparity between the absence of the feeling
of natural joy that would normally accompany how the world is
experienced alongside the preservation of the cognitive appreciation of
this lack of emotional response. Anhedonia as an experience is starting
to be deconstructed into its component parts. This deficit in the
capacity to experience pleasure is now thought to include impairments in
the processes of reward valuation, decision-­making, anticipation and
motivation. The neural circuits underlying these reward-­related
mechanisms include the ventral striatum and prefrontal cortical regions
(Der-­Avakian and Markou, 2012; Gaillard et al., 2013). Anhedonia is also
described as a symptom in schizophrenia, in which it is especially
likely to be social---an absence of the ability to feel pleasure in
relationships (Cutting, 1985). There is evidence that the hedonic
aspects of olfactory experience may be disturbed in schizophrenia. Male
patients with schizophrenia failed to attach the appropriate hedonic
valence to a pleasant odour, despite correctly perceiving changes in
odour intensity in a study where the odour was presented birhinally. In
a study in which amyl acetate was presented unirhinally, both males and
females with schizophrenia underevaluated the hedonic characteristics at
low concentrations and overestimated its hedonic characteristics at
concentrations judged to be unpleasant by controls and relatives. These
patient-­specific findings were not explicable by medication, smoking
habit or subjective ratings of odour intensity but rather were
associated with increased levels of anhedonia/asociality (Kamath et al.,
2013). One of the paradoxes of anhedonia in schizophrenia is that when
assessed by 'trait' measures of affect, there are robust and marked
deficits in the reported experience of pleasure.

However, when affect is assessed in 'the moment' by laboratory
mood-­induction procedures, there is no evidence of anhedonia (Cohen et
al., 2011; Strauss and Gold, 2012). The reasons for this disjunction are
unclear but may include (1) anticipatory hedonic experience deficit, (2)
impairment of affective regulation control, (3) encoding-­retrieval
deficit, (4) representational deficit and (5) social-­specific deficits.
It is therefore likely that anhedonia is not a singular, homogenous
abnormality in which the inability to experience pleasure equally
affects all modalities of experience, but an experience that is composed
of different component parts. This conceptualization of anhedonia is
given further amplification by a single case report of selective loss of
emotional experience in listening to music (Satoh et al., 2011).
Pleasure in different kinds of sensory experience may be discrete and
open to selective disruption. Exacerbation of Emotions: Melancholia,
Mania and Ecstasy

In affective disorders, the mood is usually the primary focus of the
abnormality. The pathology of mood can be manifested as intensification
of sadness or joy. In sadness, this may present as feelings of sadness
and gloom, despondency, despair or hopelessness. Often, the actual
experience is indescribable but recognized as different in character
from normal sadness. In other words, the character is qualitatively
different from sadness and akin to physical pain: I was feeling in my
mind a sensation close to, but indescribably different from actual pain.
William Styron (1990)

It is a positive and active anguish, a sort of psychical neuralgia
wholly unknown to normal life. William James (1902)

William Styron (1990), in his book about his personal experience of
depression, argued that the term depression was a weak word for the
experience. 'Melancholia' would appear to be a far more apt and
evocative word for the blacker forms of the disorder, but it was usurped
by a noun with a bland tonality and lacking

16 Affect and Emotional Disorders

any magisterial presence, used indifferently to describe an economic
decline or a rut in the ground, a true wimp of a word for such a major
illness ... Nevertheless, for 75 years the word has slithered
innocuously through the language like a slug, leaving little trace of
its intrinsic malevolence and preventing, by its insipidity, a general
awareness of the horrible intensity of the disease when out of control.
The positive feeling of joy and pleasure can also be intensified.
Jamison (1995) described her personal experience of mania: When you're
high it's tremendous. The ideas and feelings are fast and frequent like
shooting stars and you follow them until you find better and brighter
ones. Shyness goes; the right words and gestures are suddenly there, the
power to captivate others a felt certainty. There are interests found in
uninteresting people. Sensuality is pervasive and the desire to seduce
and be seduced is irresistible ... But somewhere this changes ...
Everything previously moving with the grain is now against -- you are
irritable, angry, frightened, uncontrollable, and enmeshed in the
blackest caves of the mind. It is clear that the positive, joyful aspect
of the elevation of mood can quickly turn into a dysphoric sensation
that is uncomfortable and unwelcome, yet that is not a variant of
depression. Euphoria is a state of excessive unreasonable cheerfulness;
it may be manifested as extreme cheerfulness, as described by Jamison in
mania, or it may seem inappropriate and bizarre. It is commonly seen in
organic states, especially associated with frontal lobe impairment.
Heightened states of happiness such as ecstasy sometimes occur in people
with mental illness or abnormality of personality but also occur outside
of psychiatry in normal contexts. Ecstatic states can be conceptualized
as an altered state of consciousness and can be self-­induced in
meditation adepts. Jhanas are an example of such a self-­induced
meditative state characterized by dimming of the awareness of external
experience, fading of internal verbalizations, alteration in the sense
of personal boundary, intense focus on the object of meditation and
increase in joy. This state has been shown to be associated with the
activation of cortical processes and of the nucleus accumbens in

249

the dopamine/opioid reward system (Hagerty et al., 2013). In neurology,
ecstatic states are associated with epilepsy. Fyodor Dostoevsky
(1821--81) in his novels, The Idiot and Demons described ecstatic states
based on his own experiences. Gschwind and Picard (2016) define ecstatic
seizures as fulfilling the following criteria: (1) the feeling of
intense positive emotion termed bliss, (2) enhanced physical well-­being
and (3) heightened self-­ awareness or heightened perception of the
external world termed clarity. They reported on 52 patients and
exemplify these characteristic features drawing from the accounts of
these patients. For example, intense serenity and bliss is described as
'the immense joy that fills me is above physical sensations'. 'it is a
feeling of total presence, an absolute integration of myself, of
unbelievable harmony of my whole body and myself with life, with the
world, and with the "All"'; enhanced physical well-­being is described as
'something pleasant which fills my inner body, wrapping me, with a rapid
crescendo. It is a well-­being inside, a sensation of velvet, as I were
sheltered from anything negative. I feel light inside, but far from
being empty, I feel really present. Something has taken possession of my
body, to feel really good'; and heightened self-­awareness is described
as 'I feel very, very, very present at that time, the consciousness of
myself is very increased, rather on a psychic point of view, I am one
hundred percent concentrated on myself'. Investigation of these patients
suggests that ecstatic experiences arise from a functional network
centred on the anterior insular cortex. Understandably, most
psychiatrists writing about the mood state of ecstasy have described its
occurrence in patients with psychosis. But ecstatic experience may also
be reported in association with minor psychiatric symptoms. The patient
may describe a calm, exalted state of happiness amounting to ecstasy,
although this tranquil mood state is relatively uncommon and usually
short-­lived. In schizophrenia, ecstatic mood may be associated with
delusions of exaltation, for example, the chronic patient who sat
placidly enraptured on a long-­stay ward, knowing herself to be the Queen
of Heaven and waiting for a messenger to inform her that she was to take
over the rule of the world. Ecstatic states, usually with a histrionic
flavour, may occur in dissociative disorder and may be associated with
religious stigmata (Simpson, 1984). Bizarre, mass

250

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

hysterical phenomena, often with religious associations, are usually of
this type, for example, in the devils of Loudun as described by Aldous
Huxley (1952). The social, institutional and group psychological
prerequisites for the development of epidemic or mass hysteria (Sirois,
1982) are usually present in these situations, and mismanagement is
usually responsible for the development from isolated hysteria in one
individual to an epidemic. Ecstasy, solemn elation or excessive
exuberant expansiveness may also be seen in epilepsy, as described
above, and in other organic states, for example, in general paresis.
Characteristic of ecstasy in psychiatry is that it is self-­referent; for
example, the flowers of spring 'open for me'. There is an alteration of
the boundaries of self so that the person may feel 'at one with the
universe', or may 'empty myself of all will' so that 'I am nothing but
feelings'. The change in ego boundaries does not usually have the aspect
of interference with self that accompanies passivity experiences. In
ecstasy, the abrogation of self is experienced as being voluntary.
Expert knowledge of the abnormal does not preclude ignorance of the
normal, and the psychiatrist can never generalize from the sample of
people selectively referred to them to the whole of mankind. This
discrepancy can become very obvious in the area of ecstatic and
religious experience. There is a need to acknowledge, take into account,
have respect for and use in treatment the patient's own subjective
experience in this area (Sims, 1994). The psychiatrist sees a most
unrepresentative group of those having some form of religious
experience, which has been considered to amount to more than 40% of the
adult population of the United States, more of whom are males than
females, more are stable than unstable and more happy than unhappy. The
anthropology of ecstasy (Lewis, 1971) can be traced through Christian
and other cultures and makes contact with recognizable mental illness
only at a few points. William James (1902), in The Variety of Religious
Experience, demonstrated the vast extent of the phenomenology of
religion and showed how unwise it would be to equate the surprising with
the pathologic. Rodney Stark (1965) in his A Taxonomy of Religious
Experience included the ecstatic experience as one of the general type
of religious experience incorporating awareness of the divine, a sense
that the awareness is returned and a

deepening of the aforementioned awareness is a sense of personal
affective relationship. Stark describes this as 'comparable to the
intimacy of friendship, or, perhaps, even courtship. Indeed, a heavily
sexual motif runs through the ecstatic writings of Catholic monastics'.
For example, '\[...\] I felt as a wave started at my crown and continued
down through my body, out through my feet. I truly felt as if God had
passed his hand over me. I felt as if I had been reborn. It was a
miracle! I went back to sleep without a care or concern in the World'.
Accounts vary as to the extent of psychopathology among converts to
religious groups and sects; it is probably associated with the nature of
the group. Thus Ungerleider and Wellisch (1979) found no evidence of
severe mental illness in one study, whereas Galanter (1982) described
evidence of emotional problems among adherents to Divine Light, the
Unification Church, Baba and Subud. Suggestive indicators for
establishing a religious experience as probably associated with
psychiatric morbidity are as follows: • the phenomenology of the
experience conforms with psychiatric illness; • there are other
recognizable symptoms of mental disturbance; • the lifestyle, behaviour
and direction of personal goals of the person subsequent to the event
are consistent with the natural history of mental disorder rather than
with an enriching life experience; and • such behaviour is consistent
with disorders in the person's personality. With the following signs,
the experience is more likely to be intrinsic to the person's belief and
less likely to denote psychiatric illness: • the person shows some
degree of reticence to discuss the experience, especially with those
they anticipate will be unsympathetic; • it is described unemotionally
with matter-­of-­fact conviction and appears 'authentic'; •  the person
understands, allows for and even sympathizes with the incredulity of
others; • the person usually considers that the experience implies some
demands on themself; and • the religious experience conforms with the
subject's recognizable religious traditions and peer group.

16 Affect and Emotional Disorders

Finally, for completion, it is worth noting that there is a literature
on transcendental sexual experience (Wade, 2001) which includes sex as a
route to ecstatic experience. In this study of 86 participants, it was
reported that the altered state was independent of orgasm and was
considered as a discrete state in its own right and the ecstatic state
was experienced as a cosmic force. The experience included transcendence
of spatial boundaries, identification with objects and other subjects,
among other things. Intensification of Fear, Anger and Surprise

The intensification of fear and anger is described in Chapter 17. These
two basic emotions can occur in pure form but can also complicate the
intensification of sadness or joy, so that it is not uncommon for
depressed or elated mood to be associated with anxiety or irritability.
Morbid surprise is seen in latah, a culture-­bound disorder described in
Malaysia in which there appears to be an exaggerated startle response
characterized by a myriad of echo phenomena including echolalia,
echopraxia and echomimia. There is also coprolalia, automatic obedience
and hypersuggestibility (Bartholomew, 1994). Hyperekplexia is a
heightened startle reflex that occurs either as a hereditary neurologic
condition involving the inhibitory glycine receptor, or as a symptomatic
disorder predominantly of epilepsy in which a surprise stimulus provokes
a normal startle response that then triggers a focal, usually frontal
lobe, seizure (Meinck, 2006). Late-­onset cases, without demonstrable
pathology, have been reported in which audiogenic, visual or tactile
stimuli trigger myoclonic jerks characterized by eye blinking, head
flexion, abduction of the upper arms, movement of the trunk and bending
of the knees (Hamelin et al., 2004). In addition, the startle reflex can
be exaggerated in post-­traumatic stress disorder and alcohol withdrawal
states (Howard and Ford, 1992). CHANGES IN TIMING, DURATION AND
APPROPRIATENESS TO SITUATION Timing, Duration and Appropriateness to
Situation

The timing and duration of emotions are aspects of the emotional
expression that determine whether the emotion is appropriate to its
context. In pathologic grief, the timing and duration may be altered
such that the grief is delayed or prolonged. Delayed grief is in essence
prolongation of the initial numb phase (see discussion later in the
chapter). Lability of mood involves both a

251

heightening or an intensification of emotions accompanied by an
instability in the persistence of emotions that communicates itself to
the observer as an inappropriateness to the social context. It can also
appear as a shallowness of emotional expression despite being intense,
because it is transitory and can seem not to be deeply felt. It is often
a sign of brain damage and is seen after frontal lobe injury or
cerebrovascular accident. Pathologic laughter or crying is usually an
unprovoked emotion that does not have an apparent object. In other
words, the emotion is not related to any identifiable social situation.
Pathologic laughter occurs in epilepsy, in which it is known as gelastic
epilepsy, but it may also be associated with acquired brain injury. It
is commonly associated with pathologic crying, which is also associated
with focal brain injury and when it occurs in epilepsy is termed
dacrystic epilepsy. It is noteworthy that pathologic crying occurs as a
discrete condition without pathologic laughter (Poeck and Pilleri, 1963,
quoted in Cutting, 1997). In schizophrenia, Bleuler (1911) described
parathymia and paramimia. In parathymia, patients react to sad news with
cheerfulness or even laughter. These patients may become sad or
irritated by events to which others will react with indifference or
pleasure. Furthermore, the term parathymia is also used for unprovoked
or inappropriate bursts of laughter. This particular aspect of
parathymia is similar if not identical to pathologic laughter. Paramimia
refers to the lack of unity between the various modes of expression of
emotions: A female catatonic patient approached one of the female
attendants whom she liked and told her in the friendliest manner and in
her sweetest tone of voice: 'I really would like to slap your face,
people like you are usually called s.o.b.s.' A woman patient complained
bitterly about her 'voices' and body hallucinations; her mouth and her
forehead manifested disgust, but her eyes expressed happy eroticism.
After a few minutes the mouth also assumed the expression of happiness,
while her forehead continued to appear gloomy and wrinkled.
ABNORMALITIES OF EXPRESSION AND APPROPRIATENESS TO OBJECT Blunting and
Flattening of Feeling

The terms blunting and flattening are used interchangeably to refer to
unchanging facial expression, decreased

252

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

spontaneous movements, poverty of expressive gesture, poor eye contact,
affective unresponsivity and lack of vocal inflection (Andreasen, 1979).
Thus the terms refer to a composite of features that are related but are
not necessarily part of a unified abnormality. Blunting implies a lack
of emotional sensitivity, such as that displayed by the girl with
schizophrenia who, with obvious relish for the sensational effect, took
her visitors up to the bedroom to show them her mother who had been dead
for 48 hours. Flattening is a limitation of the usual range of emotion
expressed usually by facial but also bodily gestures. The individual
does not express much affect in any direction, although that which is
expressed is appropriate in direction. Both blunting and flattening
occur in schizophrenia. Bodily Feelings Associated with Emotion

In the theories of emotion, physiologic changes such as palpitations,
dry mouth, sweatiness, and the like have a key determining part in the
labelling of emotion. These and other changes can be the sole features
of emotional disorder in some individuals. The relationships between
mood and somatic symptoms have been discussed in Chapter 14. In a number
of cultures and languages, depression is considered to have an anatomic
location to such an extent that the mood state and the part of the body
become synonymous. Melancholia literally means 'black bile'; similarly,
in Urdu the word jee, meaning self, describes the hypochondrium
anatomically and comes to mean depression, that is, depression is a
central assault on the well-­being of the self. Changes in bodily feeling
are important in a number of conditions. Physical illness frequently
precipitates a loss of the accustomed sense of well-­being. This is
subjectively experienced as a generalized lowering of vitality and may
be associated with other psychological abnormalities, for instance
hypochondriasis or dissociation. In these settings, the expression of
emotional disturbance is likely to emphasize the physical rather than
the emotional: And thence proceeds wind, palpitation of the heart, short
breath, plenty of humidity in the stomach, heaviness of heart and
heartache, and intolerable stupidity and dullness of spirits. Their
excrements or stool hard, black to some, and little. If the heart,
brain, liver, spleen, be misaffected, as they usually are, many
inconveniences

proceed from them, many diseases accompany ... those frequent wakings
and terrible dreams, intempestive laughing, weeping, sighing, sobbing,
bashfulness, blushing, trembling, sweating, swooning, etc. Burton
(1577--1650), The Anatomy of Melancholia (1628)

Vital feelings was a term used by Wernicke (1906) to describe certain
somatic symptoms occurring in the affective psychoses. The word vital
comes from the concept of the vital self, which describes the close
relationship of the body to awareness of self, the way we experience our
bodies and the impression we consider our physical presence makes on
others. So, vital feelings are those that make us aware of our vital
self. These are the feelings of mood that appear to emanate from the
body itself: localized and somatized affect. For example, depressed
patients commonly complain of headache. On more informed enquiry, the
patient may say, 'it's not exactly a pain, but more an unbearable
feeling of pressure like a tight band around the head', 'a feeling of
misery, like a black cloud pressing on my head'. The head is the
commonest site for vital feelings, but they may also occur in the
abdomen--- 'I have a dull feeling in my bowels, they are slowing down
and blocking', in the chest---'it feels like a weight bearing down on my
chest, stopping me breathing', in the eyes---'everything looks black,
dark and drab; my eyes are heavy, I cannot see properly' or in the
legs---'my legs are terribly heavy; I cannot walk I feel so exhausted'.
They may occur in other regions of the body, for instance the bladder,
the feet, the hair and so on. The features that appear to be constant
are the association of the localized body sensation with the prevailing
depressed mood; the sensation of weight, tension, heaviness, even
depression in the particular organ; and a consequent loss of
function---'I cannot think properly ... my bowels are blocked'.
Schneider (1920) considered vital feelings to be of paramount diagnostic
significance in depressive illness, equivalent to the first-­rank
symptoms in schizophrenia, the core of cyclothymic depression and
autonomic in origin. He considered these feelings to be common in
depression. It would seem that Dupré (1913), writing about what he
called coenestopathic states, was describing the same symptom:
'Coenestopathic states are, indeed, so common as to

16 Affect and Emotional Disorders

figure among the most frequent features of the psychoses'. He described
coenaesthesia as the 'deep but more or less indefinite awareness that we
have of our own bodies and the general tone of functional activity'.
Coenestopathic states are 'the distressing feelings which emanate from
one or other of the coenesthesic areas ... a change in the normal
quality of physical feeling in certain parts of the body'. They are
localized, but there is no local pathogenic lesion. Dupré claimed that
coenestopathic states were autonomous and not associated with other
psychiatric disorders; but, in describing the affects with which they
are associated, he appears to describe affective disorders. The mood of
depression may be described as a global loss of vitality in which all
functions are affected and all performances depressed. A change in vital
feelings does not occur only in depression. The bizarre feelings that a
patient with schizophrenia has about their body is a change in the way
they express themself, often further elaborated by delusions. It should
be noted that the term vital is used rather differently in vital anxiety
states. These states have been described (López Ibor, 1966) in which the
anxiety is thought to be endogenous, developing relatively acutely in
people of stable personality. The depressive content of what
phenomenologists would consider to be vital feelings varies very
greatly, for example, 'I have turned to stone ... I have a feeling of
depression in my chest ... it is a pain, a knot, a weight ... I have a
cloud on my head, a feeling of nothingness'. Burns (1971) commented with
regard to respiratory vital feelings, 'A striking feature of the
breathlessness described by the patients with depression was its fairly
sudden onset and cessation, corresponding exactly with the onset and
resolution of the depressive illness'. Trethowan (1979) considered that
lowering of vitality is fundamental to the experience of depressive
illness. He described this as 'a lowering of vitality which is
all-­pervasive and leads to a marked loss of ability of the subject to
function as he did before he became ill in terms of both mind and body'.
Feelings Attached to the Perception of Objects

Objects may evoke an emotional response in a normal person, for
instance, a comfortable feeling of familiarity towards an armchair in
which one rests after

253

an energetic walk or apprehensive dislike towards a dentist's chair.
This normal affective response may be exaggerated pathologically.
Excessive feelings of fear amounting to terror may remain associated
with objects. The objects to which affect is attached may not only be
physical, inanimate objects but also thoughts, and patterns of thoughts,
and people. The occurrence of certain ideas may regularly be associated
with specific pathologic emotion, perhaps resulting in phobia (see
Chapter 17). Any object of perception may be invested with idiosyncratic
affect. Feelings Directed Towards People

These may be disturbed in a number of ways. Affect may be absent or
deadened, increased and excessive or distorted. It may also be
ambivalent---both loving and hating, rejecting and overprotecting
synchronously. A girl, described in Chapter 14 who was suffering from
anorexia nervosa, would take great care to cook enormous meals for her
twin sister, to whom she was very close; the sister became grossly obese
while the patient vanished almost to a skeleton. In answer to
remonstrations about feeding her sister, she said, 'I look horrible, so
she should look horrible as well'. Free-­Floating Emotion

This is commonly described in psychiatric disturbance, and in his
original description of anxiety neurosis, Freud (1895) considered that
the condition was characterized by free-­floating anxiety. A powerful
affect seems to have no goal and is associated with no object. The
patient describes themself as feeling generally anxious, not anxious
about anything in particular but just anxious. This free-­floating
anxiety has somatic and psychological concomitants. It may seem to be
localized physically in certain areas of the body. Other free-­floating
affects occur, such as dread, restlessness, tension, gloom, despondency,
euphoria, irritability and so on.

Abnormality of Experience and Physiologic Activity A speculative
hypothesis that clinicians have found helpful is the term alexithymia,
which was coined by Sifneos (1972) to describe a specific disturbance in
psychic functioning characterized by difficulties in

254

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

the capacity to verbalize affect and elaborate fantasies. This was
originally introduced to describe psychosomatic disorders occurring in
individuals with difficulty expressing their emotions. The link with
absence or diminution of fantasy is a consistent finding (Nemiah and
Sifneos, 1970). The communicative style shows markedly reduced or absent
symbolic thinking so that inner attitudes, feelings, wishes and drives
are not revealed; few dreams and a paucity of fantasies are reported
(Taylor, 1984). Thinking is literal, utilitarian and concerned with the
minutiae of external events. These individuals have great difficulty in
recognizing and describing their own feelings and in discriminating
between emotional states and bodily sensations. They show a stiff,
robot-­like existence, 'almost as if they are following an instruction
book'; there may be stiffness of posture and lack of facial expression.
They show an impaired capacity for empathy in their interpersonal
relationships. Alexithymic characteristics have been found especially
among patients with psychosomatic disorders, somatoform disorders,
psychogenic pain disorders, substance abuse disorders, post-­traumatic
stress disorder, masked depression, character neuroses and sexual
perversions, but these findings have not been consistently replicated.
The Toronto Alexithymia Scale, which is the most widely used measure of
alexithymia, has four factors: difficulty in identifying feelings,
externally oriented thinking, difficulty expressing feelings and reduced
daydreaming (Kirmayer and Robbins, 1993). The difficulty in identifying
feelings and the difficulty in expressing them both appear to be
correlated with somatosensory amplification (Nakao et al., 2002). This
provides some validation of the idea that alexithymia is the basis for
excessive somatization and that this may be caused by undue awareness of
discrepant sensations that are then misconstrued as evidence of physical
illness. Somatization in patients with mental disorder can be defined as
the selective perception and focus on the somatic manifestations of the
disorder with denial or minimization of the affective and cognitive
changes (Katon et al., 1982). As a method of expression of emotion, it
is frequently reported in transcultural studies, especially in the
Indian subcontinent, according to Rack (1982). Murphy and co-­workers
(1967) studied basic depressive symptomatology in

30 countries and showed how culture changes illness and the way
dysphoria is expressed. Bavington (1981), studying depression in a
predominantly Pathan culture in Pakistan, found somatization to be
expressed in 45% of cases; hypochondriasis was present in 55%,
hysterical (dissociative) features in 60%, feelings of guilt in 50%,
paranoid ideas in 38%, suicidal thoughts in 75%, diurnal variation in
18%, retardation in 50% and irritability in 80% of depressed patients.
Bavington explains these somatic ideas by the presence of vital feelings
rather than poverty of language. Mumford (1992) found that patients with
psychiatric disorders originating from India and Pakistan typically
communicate their distress as somatic symptoms; somatic presentation was
common in general hospital settings where psychiatric disorders were
often unrecognized and untreated. The use of somatic symptoms and
somatic metaphor to communicate emotional distress is found in all
languages and cultures. Complaining of emotional dysphoria in terms of
somatic symptoms may reflect the limitation of the medical profession in
listening to complaints rather than a poverty of language or paucity of
verbal expression in the patient.

Abnormalities of Evaluation The relationship between cognitions and
emotions is difficult to disentangle. Initially, it was thought that the
emotional state determined the associated cognitions. Thus low mood
provoked negative thoughts about the self and the world. However, Beck
(Beck 1967; Beck et al., 1979) proposed that a constellation of
cognitive errors initiated or maintained depression. These included
arbitrary inferences, selective abstractions, overgeneralizations,
magnification and minimization. Furthermore, there were cognitive
schemas, that is, underlying assumptions about the self, the world and
the future, that developed from previous experiences and that habitually
influenced how events in the world were appraised and these could induce
mood change, either directly or via disruption in self-­esteem. This
proposal is in line with Schachter and Singer's two-­ factor theory of
emotion, in which cognitions play a central role. There are also
abnormalities of appraisal of the facial or vocal expression of emotions
in others.

16 Affect and Emotional Disorders

Prosopoaffective agnosia refers to the selective deficiency in
appreciating the emotional expression displayed in the face of others.
This abnormality is distinct from prosopagnosia in which only
recognition of familiar faces is impaired. It is usually associated with
acquired brain disease and has been reported in frontotemporal dementia
when it is also associated with impairment of recognition of vocal
expression of emotion (Keane et al., 2002); after right thalamic infarct
(Vuillemier et al., 1998); and in subjects with right-­sided limbic and
heteromodal cortical lesions (Weniger and Irle, 2002). It has been
reported in autism and Asperger's syndrome, but it is not part of a
pervasive impairment of face-­processing skills (Hofter et al., 2005). In
other words, it occurs in some patients but not in others and
dissociates from impairment of face recognition per se. Prosodic aspects
of speech such as pitch, duration and amplitude are part of the
nonverbal cues that modify the meaning of the spoken word and indicate
the emotional value of an utterance and the intention of the speaker
(Mitchell and Ross, 2013). Expressive emotional prosody refers to the
generation of affect in speech. The mechanisms are unclear but are
thought to include bilateral basal ganglia involvement in motor
production of speech as a function of affective state and right
lateralization of cortical processes in the monitoring and production of
acoustic speech parameters (Pichon and Kell, 2013), and the degree to
which there is unilateral right-­sided or bilateral frontotemporal
involvement in receptive emotional prosody is uncertain (Witteman et
al., 2012). Receptive emotional dysprosody refers to the selective
deficit in recognizing the emotional tone in speech. This is often
associated with expressive emotional dysprosody, the impairment of the
production of emotional tone in speech. Both abnormalities are found in
Parkinson's disease (Caekebeke et al., 1991; Pell, 1996). The
evolutionary relationship between music and language is uncertain, but
it is thought that music and language may have a common origin as an
emotional protolanguage that remains evident in overlapping functions
and shared neural circuitry. In a study of 12 individuals with
congenital amusia, a disorder characterized by deficits in acoustic and
structural attributes of music, a marked impairment in receptive
emotional prosody was demonstrated, suggesting that music and

255

language share mechanisms that trigger emotional responses to acoustic
attributes (Thompson et al., 2012).

Abnormality of Mood in Bipolar Disorder Certainly since the writings of
Kraepelin, the apparently opposite mood states of mania and depression
have been recognized as occurring in the same illness---frequently at
different times and stages of the illness in the same patient, more
rarely at the same time in the same patient. Although they are described
separately, it is important to realize that these mood states may occur
together. Mania and depression are not opposite mood states; they are
both pathologic, and the opposite of either would be freedom from morbid
emotion. Agitation and overactivity may occur with depression,
irritability and a feeling of frustration with mania. A patient, now
depressed, having previously been manic, described this: 'The first fine
careless rapture has disappeared. I feel more tired and moody'.

Depression of Mood An additional video for this topic is available
online. CORE EXPERIENCE: PSYCHOLOGICAL AND PHYSICAL Depression of mood
is common, and depression of such persistence and intensity has to be
regarded as illness frequently occurs. There is considerable discussion
as to what is the central core of depression. Of course, arguments
advocating biochemical, psychodynamic or conditioning factors as
initiating causes are not mutually exclusive. Depression affects
virtually all physical and psychological functions; for example, using a
tachistoscopic method, Powell and Hemsley (1984) were able to show that
depression influenced perception. The word depression is a misnomer, as
depressive illness may occur without the patient making a complaint of
depression as a symptom (depressio sine depressione). For this reason,
the term melancholia may be preferred; although this literally means
'black bile', it has come to be accepted as a medical illness. It was
the term used by Lewis (1934) in his classic

256

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

description of depressive states in a detailed study of 61 cases; this
has influenced all subsequent investigation of the condition.
Melancholia is the preferred term for Whybrow (1997), who considers that
it 'better captures the "veritable tempest in the brain" that marks the
experience of inner turmoil and confused thinking as harmony and emotion
drain away, often to be replaced by a withered imitation of life'. The
subjective symptoms of depression are very variable. The mood varies
from indifference and apathy to profound dejection, despondency and
despair. Anhedonia, the complete inability to experience pleasure, is a
constant feature; it is experienced as joylessness and revealed in
facial expression, speech, behaviour, lifestyle and the patient's
account of personal experience. A slowing down of the ability to
initiate thought or action is noted by the observer as retardation. A
patient, describing this after recovery, said, 'it feels as if treacle
has been poured into my head through my ears'. Psychic retardation is
experienced subjectively as an inability to fulfil normal obligations,
as loss of coping. The proneness to self-­blame often results in the
patient describing themself as lazy and good for nothing. There is a
catastrophic lowering of self-­esteem as a prominent cognitive component.
Agitation and purposeless restlessness add to the discomfort and to the
inability of the depressed person to achieve anything. This anxiety and
preoccupation with gloomy thoughts impairs concentration. Diurnal
variation of mood is often prominent, with the patient feeling at their
worst, and perhaps most suicidal, when they wake early in the morning
or, alternatively, somewhat later in the morning. The degree of
depression and misery may sometimes successfully be concealed; this is
the presentation of depressio sine depressione (smiling depression) in a
patient who appears not to be depressed in the consulting room but may,
much to their doctor's dismay, kill themself. The concealment is
probably conscious and may be associated with habitual masking of the
expression of emotion or alternatively aimed at avoiding treatment.
Concentration, application and decision-­ making become difficult,
painful and sometimes impossible. The person describes difficulty or
impossibility in fantasy and recollection of emotion. This is described
as loss of memory and loss of feeling. Often, this loss of mental
function makes the patient believe they are 'going mad' or 'losing

their mind', a sort of mental hypochondriasis. Physical retardation may
become the focus for hypochondriacal beliefs about the body: 'I am
constipated ... my bowels are totally blocked'. A very depressed
middle-­aged woman described her bodily feelings thus: 'I have a feeling
like having an injection at the dentist's. My face feels numb, but at
the same time painful all over'. Anxiety is a common concomitant with
depression and may completely obscure the latter. In agitated
depression, agitation and restlessness are extreme and the patient
carries a serious risk of suicide. Histrionic behaviour may also obscure
the underlying depressive illness. A patient who was actually profoundly
depressed kept picking her skin and pulling her hair, saying, 'Look, I
can't feel anything when I do this to myself'. The affect of depression
may be localized somatically in vital feelings (described earlier). It
may take the form of profound misery or dejection. There is usually a
feeling of loss of capacity, helplessness and a feeling that the patient
cannot cope. Absence of feelings is often described or it may be
described as an inexplicable loss of feelings 'that ought to be there'.
Feelings of guilt and unworthiness are prominent in depressive illness
of the endogenous type. This has long been known; for example Plutarch,
in the CE 1st century, described a person: 'He looks on himself as a man
whom the gods hate and pursue with their anger ... "Leave me", says the
wretched man, "me the impious, the accursed, hated of the gods, to
suffer my punishment".' (Zilboorg and Henry, 1941). On the other hand,
Shepherd (1993) considers that guilt feelings did not feature
predominantly in depressive states described in pre-­Puritan England. The
patient may blame themself for having allowed themself to get into this
state of mind. They are full of self-­reproach and recrimination for all
sorts of peccadilloes from the distant past. For all that goes wrong
around them they take personal blame; this may be of delusional
intensity. Using a scale for the evaluation of feelings of guilt, it was
possible to identify two separate components: 'delusional' guilt or
shame (experienced in relation to one's actions) and 'affective' guilt
(a more general feeling of unworthiness) (Berrios et al., 1992). As well
as delusions of guilt and unworthiness, hypochondriacal and nihilistic
delusions are relatively common in depression, especially when it occurs
in the elderly.

16 Affect and Emotional Disorders

Delusions occur in psychotic depression. It is important to make the
distinction between a belief about the state of the world coloured by
current mood---'I feel that I must have done something to my brain as I
can't think properly', from an actual delusional belief---'I can't think
at all, it is impossible, my brain is dead'. The former is a
metaphorical statement, the latter a belief held with conviction. In
practice, there is often a grey area between frank depressive delusions
and emotionally laden views of the world. Table 16.1 shows the frequency
of symptoms, however slight, in depressive illness that were recorded
quantitatively using a rating scale in 239 men and 260 women (Hamilton,
1989). It is seen that anxiety is a frequent symptom in depressive
illness. SHAME AND GUILT Shame and guilt are regarded as self-­ conscious
and moral emotions in that they both involve self-­ evaluation and play a
role in facilitating moral conduct.

257

They are also emotions that flow from human action, human conduct
wherein human beings cause things to happen and whatever results from
this conduct can sometimes be regretted or deplored. In essence, these
emotions derive from the notion of responsibility, of being an agent who
is responsible for the consequences of action and hence can be blamed
and/or be disapproved of as an individual. Williams (1993) wrote: 'The
basic experience connected with shame is that of being seen,
inappropriately by the wrong people, in the wrong condition. It is
straightforwardly connected with nakedness, particularly in sexual
connections ... The reaction is to cover oneself or to hide, and people
naturally take steps to avoid the situations that call for it'.
According to Tangney and Dearing (2002), 'Shame is an extremely painful
and ugly feeling that has a negative impact on interpersonal behaviour'.
They make the point that shame is associated with the tendency to blame
others for negative outcomes and that individuals who are

TABLE 16.1 Frequency of Symptoms in Depressive Illness Symptoms

Subjects (%)

Symptoms

Subjects (%)

Depressed mood Loss of interest Anxiety, psychic Anxiety, somatic
Insomnia, initial Suicide Somatic, general Somatic, gastrointestinal
Insomnia, delayed Guilt Insomnia, middle Weight loss Agitation Libido
Retardation Hypochondriasis Loss of insight Paranoid symptoms
Obsessional symptoms Depersonalization Diurnal variation: Worse in
morning Worse in evening Worse in afternoon

100.0 99.6 97.1 87.4 83.7 82.0 82.0 80.3 74.1 71.5 71.5 69.0 68.1 59.8
52.3 33.1 28.0 25.1 13.3 10.9 59.4 61.4 30.7 7.9

Depressed mood Loss of interest Anxiety, psychic Somatic, general
Anxiety, somatic Somatic, gastrointestinal Suicide Insomnia, initial
Guilt Insomnia, delayed Weight loss Agitation Insomnia, middle Libido
Retardation Hypochondriasis Loss of insight Depersonalization
Obsessional symptoms Paranoid symptoms Diurnal variation: Worse in
morning Worse in evening Worse in afternoon

100.0 98.8 97.8 94.2 87.3 83.5 80.4 77.7 72.7 71.9 68.8 68.1 66.5 49.5
43.5 25.8 21.9 21.1 20.7 13.8 60.1 65.5 25.0 9.5

After Hamilton, M., 1989. Frequency of symptoms in melancholia
(depressive illness). Br. J. Psychiatry 154, 201--206, with permission.
  

258

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

shame-­prone are also more prone to anger and hostility. Furthermore
shame focuses on the self and this is distinct from guilt where the
focus is on specific behaviours (Lewis, 1971). Lewis (1971) makes the
point that 'the experience of shame is directly about the self, which is
the focus of evaluation'. In guilt, the self is not the central object
of negative evaluation, but rather the thing done or undone is the
focus. In guilt, the self is negatively evaluated in connection with
something but is not itself the focus of the experience. From an
anthropologic point of view shame is thought of as arising from public
exposure and disapproval of shortcomings or transgression whereas guilt
is seen as a private experience deriving from self-­generated
determination of wrongdoing with the consequent guilt feelings.
Nonetheless there is empirical evidence to the contrary---shame can also
be experienced in private (Tangney and Dearing, 2002). This is not
surprising given the capacity to imagine the absent other in our
deliberations. In other words, it cannot be the case that shame can only
be experienced when others are physically present because we can imagine
the other as present even in their absence. Williams (1993) emphasizes
this point 'If everything depended on the fear of discovery, the
motivations of shame would not be internalized at all. No one would have
a character, in effect, and, moreover, the very idea of there being a
shame culture \[italics in original\], a coherent system for the
regulation of conduct, would be unintelligible'. Williams goes on to
say, 'Even if shame and its motivations always involve in some way or
other an idea of the gaze of another, it is important that for many of
its operations the imagined gaze of an imagine other will do'. In Lewis'
(1971) account, shame is experienced as a sense of powerlessness and
worthlessness in the context of exposure to critical scrutiny, whereas
guilt is less painful and less likely to affect self-­identity and this
is confirmed by Tangney and Dearing's (2002) empirical studies thus
making clear that the actual emotional experiences of shame and guilt
are distinct. Williams (1993) suggests that the distinction between
shame and guilt runs even deeper. He argues that the experience of shame
is connected with sight and being seen, whereas 'guilt is rooted in
hearing, the sound in oneself of the voice of judgement'. Williams
describes the experience of shame as follows:

In my experience of shame, the other sees all of me and all through me,
even if the occasion of the shame is on my surface -- for instance, in
my appearance; and the expression of shame, in general as well as in the
particular form of it that is embarrassment, is not just the desire to
hide, or to hide my face, but the desire to disappear, not to be there.
It is not even the wish as people say, to sink through the floor, but
rather the wish that the space occupied by me should be instantaneously
empty. With guilt, it is not like this; I am more dominated by the
thought that even if I disappeared, it would come with me. These
conceptualizations of shame and guilt are important because they lay the
groundwork for furthering our understanding of these emotions in
pathologic states. In social anxiety disorder, for example, measures of
shame have been shown to be elevated in people with social anxiety
whereas guilt was found to be unrelated to social anxiety (Hedman et
al., 2013). In a meta-­analytic review study, Kim et al. (2011) showed
that shame and guilt were equally associated with depression but only
when specific types of guilt were considered separately: contextual-­
maladaptive guilt that involves exaggeration of responsibility for
uncontrollable events and generalized guilt involving free-­floating
guilt divorced from specific contexts were both as likely as shame to be
associated depression. From a clinical point of view delusional guilt is
often present in severe depression and exaggerated guilt in the context
of bereavement. Shame, on the other hand, is prominent in social
anxiety. SUICIDAL THOUGHTS 'I feel as though I want to destroy myself.
There is no point in going on.' Suicidal ideas, ruminations and impulses
are common. Alvarez (1971) has written a detailed study of suicide from
a literary point of view. He is concerned with the background and the
reasons for suicide and attempted suicide in many well-­known writers,
especially poets. He writes about suicide as 'letting go': I have to
admit that I am a failed suicide ... Seneca, the final authority on the
subject, pointed out disdainfully that the exits are everywhere: each
precipice and river, each branch of each tree, every vein in your body
will set you free ... Yet despite all that, I never quite made it.

16 Affect and Emotional Disorders

The intertwined threads of artistic creativity, manic-­ depressive
illness and suicide have been explored by Goodwin and Jamison (1990).
Both the muse and madness as gifts of the gods have been a recurring
theme from earliest times through such 19th-­century poets as Browning,
Shelley, Coleridge and Byron to the modern American poets such as Sylvia
Plath and Anne Sexton, among whom there was found to be a high
prevalence of manic-­depressive illness and many suicides. In her
enlightening study of manic-­ depressive illness and the artistic
temperament, Touched With Fire, Jamison (1993) demonstrates differential
rates for depressive illness and suicide in poets, artists and other
writers and comments on this. It is no longer satisfactory to simply
think of suicidal thoughts or ideas as a unitary phenomenon. Obegi
(2019) makes the point that suicidal ideation is itself a composite of
thoughts of killing oneself, wishing to be dead, and internal debates
about living and dying. Alongside these aspects of suicidal ideation is
the degree to which there is suicidal intent, a complex construct that
attempts to capture the extent of a person's motivation to die. Next to
these issues are ancillary but important features such as psychological
pain, feelings of hopelessness, overarousal, readiness and preparedness
for suicide, and cognitive rigidity. House et al. (2020) make the
additional point that the term 'ideation' encompasses far more than mere
thinking and includes imagining and imagination, a mental state that
incorporates images of real or imagined events with a strong visual
component. In addition, ideation includes constructing an idea, which
involves deliberation, extensive inner dialogue, encompassing the
specific details of the potential act and its imagined consequences.
Furthermore, they argue that suicidal ideation may be initiated or
enhanced by imagining the self-­harm or suicide of a third party or
suicidal ideation may be reversed or inhibited, for example, by
imagining how an attempt may affect the train driver in someone
contemplating railway suicide. The place of psychological pain
(psychache/psychalgia) in suicidal ideation and behaviour is starting to
be elucidated. A three-­dimensional model of psychological pain in
suicide describes three components including (1) pain arousal, which is
the cognitions

259

about past traumatic experience; (2) painful feelings involving the
subjective experience and physiological symptoms and (3) pain avoidance,
which is the strong motivation escape from unbearable psychological
pain. The suggestion is that suicide results when an individual can no
longer endure psychological pain and chooses suicide as the only means
of relieving pain. There is some empirical evidence suggesting that
individuals who attempt suicide compared with those who have suicidal
ideation are more likely to demonstrate a significantly larger cued-­P3
amplitude in the punitive condition compared to the reward condition
(Song et al., 2020). There is a role, too, for the degree to which an
individual believes that they have or do not have control over their
thoughts and in this rumination, the tendency to repetitive and passive
fixation on negative emotion and on the potential causes, meaning and
consequences of one's distress are linked to suicidal thoughts and
behaviours (Rogers et al., 2021). Rumination reflects an impaired
ability to disengage from negative emotional and cognitive content
rather than merely a tendency to more easily engage with such content
and may signal a degree of cognitive rigidity. Nocturnal cognitive
hyperarousal manifest as insomnia has been shown to be associated with
suicidal ideation (Kalmbach et al., 2021). This is in line with findings
that short sleep duration in farmers is associated with higher suicidal
ideation (Oh et al., 2021), that insomnia is associated with suicidal
ideation, lifetime suicide attempt in patients with chronic
schizophrenia (Miller et al., 2020) and sleep distress, onset insomnia
and insufficient sleep is strongly associated with suicidal ideation in
university students (Khader et al., 2020). It is noteworthy that gender
seems to mediate the narratives of suicidal thoughts and attempts in
military veterans. Females discussed negative self-­ evaluative processes
whereas males discussed a feeling of being overwhelmed by their
situation. A female, for example, reported 'I felt like such a failure
... No relationship worked. I wasn't productive. I wasn't doing anything
that was good. I was just non-­existent in an existing world. My
self-­esteem was so low.' A man reported 'I got to a point, a breaking
point. I mean the mind can hold so much and when you deprive your mind
of resting, your body of resting and it's always

260

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

go, go, go then on top of that you experiences in your head recently and
emotionally and psychologically ... something has to break, there is
always a weak link. I feel like at that point I was like "screw this."'
The suggestion here is that the content and structure of the inner
monologue is determined by gender Denneson et al., 2020). There are
different explanatory hypotheses, such as the integrated
motivational-­volitional model and the network perspective, aimed at
integrating the disparate factors underpinning suicidal ideation and
behaviours. These models have in common a recognition that suicidal
ideation and behaviours are the end points of complex interactions
between different factors (de Beurs et al., 2021). The unanswered
questions include how suicidal ideation moves from ideas to action, that
is from desire to intent and finally to behaviour. At a simple level,
psychological pain and fearlessness about death are associated with
desires, plans and preparations for suicide. Specifically, psychological
pain and hopelessness are positively associated with the desire to die,
but desire is independently associated with fearlessness about death
(Marie et al., 2020). DEPRESSION AND LOSS Any social situation of
transition is associated with some disturbance of emotion (Parkes,
1971). Depression is the affect associated with experience of loss. It
is not the intention here to enter into theoretical aspects but to
discuss the subjective experience. Parkes (1976) has demonstrated how
loss of a person, loss of a limb and even loss of a home are stressful
in similar ways, and that there is a mental process going on in which
the person is 'making real inside the self events which have already
occurred in reality outside'. This process is associated with marked
psychic pain and unhappiness. An example of depression associated with
the threat of loss of a loved object was a taxi driver who owned his own
car, which was the only thing he valued in life. During an episode of
profound depression, he polished the taxi to perfection, took it into
the garage, connected a pipe to the exhaust of the car, started the
engine and killed himself. The dysphoric mood associated with the
experience of loss is always exacerbated if there is any sense of guilt
or self-­blame attached to the circumstances of the loss: 'If

only I had called the doctor in to see Mother earlier; I shall never
forgive myself'. Grief

The immediate experience of loss is shock and numbness. The suddenly
bereaved person may say that they cannot believe that it has happened to
them. They just feel numb and empty. They may describe depersonalization
feelings. There is a tendency to deny that the loss has happened. A
woman was referred to a surgeon for a lump in the breast. At operation,
the mass was found to be malignant and mastectomy was performed. For
several days after the operation, she was unable to accept that the
painful area under the dressing signified the loss of her breast rather
than a minor excision. After the initial shock and denial come the pangs
of grief. This is an acute feeling of loss, with anxiety prominent, as
well as grieving---anxious searching. The implications of the experience
of loss begin to be realized, and this may cause the person's feelings
of anxiety amounting to panic: 'However am I going to cope without him?'
The somatic symptoms of anxiety may be present as well as the
psychological. Three distinct patterns of morbid grief have been
observed (Lieberman, 1978): 1. phobic avoidance of persons, places or
things related to the deceased, combined with extreme guilt and anger
about the deceased and their death; 2.  a total lack of grieving, with
anger directed towards others and overidealization of the deceased; and
3. physical illness and recurrent nightmares involving the deceased.
These patterns have relevance for treatment using the behavioural method
of forced or guided mourning. When the experience of loss has been
accepted as a reality, depression, the affect appertaining to loss,
occurs. The person feels very low and hopeless, perhaps with the
lowering of vitality and apathy of depression. They become resigned to
their situation but see no way out: 'there is simply no future for me
now'. Not surprisingly, this state is often associated with suicidal
ideas and impulses, and there is an increased mortality from suicide and
other causes in the 6 months subsequent to bereavement (Parkes et al.,
1969).

16 Affect and Emotional Disorders

As the state of grieving is resolved, the person gradually overcomes
this despairing hopelessness. There is an attitude of mind that results
in reorganization and redirection. They gradually make decisions and
carry out activities that demonstrate their emotional and intellectual
acceptance of the loss and intention to continue their life as
congenially as possible, although still remembering the loss. This stage
of resolution may be postponed for many years, as with Queen Victoria's
grieving for Prince Albert. Parkes (1976) discriminates between the
subjective experience of external loss and internal change. The external
loss is shown by pining for the lost object. Anxiety after loss occurs
both in bereaved people and in amputees and is associated with anxious
searching: a bereaved person used to walk up and down the street
wondering if she would see her husband, whom she knew to be dead. In
these circumstances, misperception of strangers as being the lost
relative may happen. A man whose father had died a long time before
thought he heard his father's voice in another room and then realized it
was his son. People return to places associated with the lost person or
keep articles that belonged to them sacrosanct. Internal change, with a
sense of mutilation, is common to people with different types of loss.
Amputees feel themselves to be badly damaged both in their function and
in their self-­image. Because a man has lost his leg, he will be unable
to carry out his previous activities as before and may feel himself to
be less of a man. Similarly, the woman with an amputated arm may prefer
a cosmetic but useless prosthesis rather than a more functional hook.
She may feel the affront to her self-­image of a mutilated arm more than
the loss of function. Parkes and Napier (1975) stress the social
associations of loss in their discussion of prevention and alleviation
of the problems resulting from amputation. Widows also describe a
feeling of loss within themselves due to their bereavement; there is, of
course, often a real loss of status. Those rehoused often described an
internal change on moving: 'something of me went when I left the old
home'.

Mania Mania is a word with a long history. Hare (1981) considers that
the early descriptions of intellectual

261

deterioration with excitement were made because of the association with
organic deterioration from poor general health during the 19th century.
As the physical health of the population improved, it was possible to
describe separate conditions with different natural histories. However,
mania still forms a much higher proportion of affective psychoses
occurring puerperally than of affective disorders occurring at other
stages of life (Dean and Kendell, 1981). Mania refers to elation of
mood, acceleration of thinking and overactivity. Subjectively, although
it may be described as a different state from normal, it is rarely
complained of by the patient as a symptom. A young, manic inpatient
described his internal state thus: 'I feel hypersuffused with experience
... I am developing a close secretarial relationship with Camilla Brown
(another young patient) ... I feel like a rocket with the blue paper
lit, standing in a bottle and just ready to take off'. It has become
conventional to refer to all but the most severe cases as suffering from
hypomania. This is unfortunate because one does not refer to
'hypodepression' and the person using the term hypomania often gives the
impression that wrong diagnosis is permissible to a greater extent than
if the term mania had been used. The early stages of mania may be
experienced as enjoyable, even 'wonderful', and an enormous relief from
the depression that preceded it. A patient quoted by Whybrow (1997) put
it this way: 'In the early stages of mania I feel good -- about the
world and everybody in it. There's a faster beat; a sense of expectation
that my life will be full and exciting'. For this reason, the patient
may be reluctant to take medication or to report his condition to his
doctor. Later on in manic illness, the patient's experience is usually
described as unpleasant and even frightening. In pure form, it is
characterized by excessive cheerfulness, rapid train and association of
thought and overactivity. The speed of thinking and the ready ability to
form associations results in rapid and apparently sparkling conversation
(see Chapter 9). Puns and clang associations abound, for example, in a
case quoted by Bingham (1841): A fine bold lady, well dressed and well
known to the officers of a certain house, 'a regular madwoman', as they
called her, was brought thither by her friends. She was no

262

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

sooner announced than every missile and instrument of attack was
carefully removed out of her way. She opened the conference by a
familiar address to the physician under whose care she had been before
and was going to remain, by saying to him, 'Well, Doctor M(orrison), but
I beg pardon, I forgot whom I was speaking to -- it is Sir A(lexander).
Well, Sir A---, since I had the pleasure of seeing you last, I have been
benighted, and you have been knighted'. Kay Redfield Jamison (1995)
describes her own experience of mania as follows (previously quoted
above but quoted in full here): When you're high its tremendous. The
ideas and feelings are fast and frequent like shooting stars, and you
follow them until you find better and brighter ones. Shyness goes, the
right words and gestures are suddenly there, the power to captivate
others a felt certainty. There are interests found in uninteresting
people. Sensuality is pervasive and the desire to seduce and be seduced
irresistible. Feelings of ease, intensity, power, well-­ being, financial
omnipotence, and euphoria pervade one's marrow. But, somewhere, this
changes. The fast ideas are far too fast, and there are far too many;
overwhelming confusion replaces clarity. Memory goes. Humour and
absorption on friends' faces are replaced by fear and concern.
Everything previously moving with the grain is now against -- you are
irritable, angry frightened, uncontrollable, and enmeshed totally in the
blackest caves of the mind. You never knew these caves were there. It
will never end, for madness carves its own reality. REFERENCES Alvarez,
A., 1971. The Savage God: A Study of Suicide. Weidenfeld & Nicolson,
London. Andreasen, N., 1979. Affective flattening and the criteria for
schizophrenia. Am. J. Psychiatry 136, 944--947. Anstee, B.H., Fleminger,
J.J., 1977. Diagnosis 'uncertain': a follow-­ up study. Br. J. Psychiatry
131, 592--598. Bartholomew, R.E., 1994. Disease, disorder or deception?
Latah as habit in a Malay extended family. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 182,
331--338. Bavington, J., 1981. Depression in Pakistan. Transcultural
Psychiatry Society (UK) Workshop, Leeds. Beck, A.T., 1967. Depression:
Clinical, Experimental and Theoretical Aspects. Hoeber, New York. Beck,
A.T., Rush, A.J., Shaw, B.F., Emery, G., 1979. Cognitive Therapy of
Depression. Guilford Press, New York.

Berrios, G.E., 1985. The psychopathology of affectivity: conceptual and
historical aspects. Psychol. Med. 15, 745--758. Berrios, G.E., Bulbena,
A., Bakshi, N., et al., 1992. Feelings of guilt in major depression:
conceptual and psychosomatic aspects. Br. J. Psychiatry 160, 781--787.
Bingham, N., 1841. Religious Delusions. Hatchard, London. Bleuler, E.,
1911. Dementia Praecox: Or the Group of Schizophrenias. International
University Press, New York. Brenner, B., 1979. Depressed affect as a
cause of associated somatic problems. Psychol. Med. 9, 737--746. Burns,
B.H., 1971. Breathlessness in depression. Br. J. Psychiatry 119, 39--45.
Burton, R., 1628. The Anatomy of Melancholia. Henry Cripps, Oxford.
Caekebeke, J.F., Jennekens-­Schinkel, A., van der Linden, M.E., Buruma,
O.J., Roos, R.A., 1991. The interpretation of dysprosody in patients
with Parkinson's disease. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 54, 145--148.
Cohen, A.S., Najolia, G.M., Brown, L.A., Minor, K.S., 2011. The
state-­trait disjunction of anhedonia in schizophrenia: potential
affective, cognitive and social-­based mechanisms. Clin. Psychol.
Rev. 31, 440--448. Cutting, J., 1985. The Psychology of Schizophrenia.
Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh. Cutting, J., 1997. Principles of
Psychopathology. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Darwin, C., 1872. The
Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. John Murray, London. de
Beurs, D., Bockting, C., Kerkhof, A., Scheepers, F., O'Connor, R.,
Penninx, B., van de Leemput, I., 2021. A network perspective on suicidal
behavior: understanding suicidality as a complex system. Suicide Life
Threat Behav. 51 (1), 115--126. Dean, C., Kendell, R.E., 1981. The
symptomatology of puerperal illness. Br. J. Psychiatry 139, 128--133.
Denneson, L.M., Tompkins, K.J., McDonald, K.L., et al., 2020. Gender
differences in the development of suicidal behavior among United States
military veterans: a national qualitative study. Soc. Sci. Med. 260,
113178. Der-­Avakian, A., Markou, A., 2012. The neurobiology of anhedonia
and other reward-­related deficits. Trends Neurosci. 35, 68--77. Dupré,
E., 1913. Les cénestopathies, mouvement médical 3--22 (M. Rohde, Trans,
1974). In: Hirsch, S.R., Shepherd, M. (Eds.), Themes and Variations in
European Psychiatry. John Wright, Bristol. Ekman, P., 1998. Afterword.
In: Darwin, C. (Ed.), The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals.
HarperCollins, London. Ekman, P., Friesen, W., 1971. Constants across
cultures in the face and emotion. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 17, 124--129.
Freud, S., 1895. On the grounds for detaching a particular syndrome from
neurasthenia under the description 'anxiety neurosis. In: Standard
Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. III.
Translated from the German and under the general editorship of J.
Strachey. Hogarth Press, London, pp. 90--115. Gaillard, R., Gourion, D.,
Llorca, P.M., 2013. Anhedonia in depression. Encephale 39, 296--305.
Galanter, M., 1982. Charismatic religious sects and psychiatry: an
overview. Am. J. Psychiatry 139, 1539--1548. Gallese, V., 2007. Embodied
simulation: from mirror neuron systems to interpersonal relations.
Novartis Found. Symp. 278, 3--12. Goodwin, F.K., Jamison, K.R., 1990.
Manic-­Depressive Illness. Oxford University Press, New York.

16 Affect and Emotional Disorders Gschwind, M., Picard, F., 2016.
Ecstatic epileptic seizures: a glimpse into the multiple roles of the
insula. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 10, 21. Hagerty, M.R., Isaacs, J.,
Brasington, L., Shupe, L., Fetz, E.E., Cramer, S.C., 2013. Case study of
ecstatic meditation: fMRI and EEG evidence of self-­stimulating a reward
system. Neural Plast. 2013, 653572. Hamelin, S., Rohr, P., Kahane, P.,
Minotti, L., Vercueil, L., 2004. Late onset hyperekplexia. Epileptic
Disord. 6, 169--172. Hamilton, M., 1989. Frequency of symptoms in
melancholia (depressive illness). Br. J. Psychiatry 154, 201--206. Hare,
E., 1981. The two manias: a study of the evolution of the modern concept
of mania. Br. J. Psychiatry 138, 89--99. Hedman, E., Ström, P., Stünkel,
A., Mörlberg, E., 2013. Shame and guilt in social anxiety disorder:
effects of cognitive behaviour therapy and association with social
anxiety and depressive symptoms. PLoS One 8, e61713. Hofter, R.L.,
Manoach, D.S., Barton, J.J., 2005. Perception of facial expression and
facial identity in subjects with social developmental disorders.
Neurology 65, 1620--1625. House, A., Kapur, N., Knipe, D., 2020.
Thinking about suicidal thinking. Lancet Psychiatr. 7 (11), 997--1000.
Howard, R., Ford, R., 1992. From the jumping Frenchmen of Maine to
posttraumatic stress disorder: the startle response in neuropsychiatry.
Psychol. Med. 22, 695--707. Huxley, A., 1952. The Devils of Loudun.
Chatto & Windus, London. James, W., 1884. What is an emotion? Mind 9,
188--205. James, W., 1902. The Varieties of Religious Experience: A
Study in Human Nature. Longmans, Green, New York. Jamison, K.R., 1993.
Touched with Fire: Manic-­Depressive Illness and the Artistic
Temperament. Free Press, New York. Jamison, K.R., 1995. An Unquiet Mind.
A Memoir of Moods and Madness. Knopf, New York. Kalmbach, D.A.,
Ahmedani, B.B., Gelaye, B., Cheng, P., Drake, C.L., 2021. Nocturnal
cognitive hyperaousal, perinatal-focused rumination, and insomnia are
associated with suicidal ideation in perinatal women with mild to
moderate depression. Sleep Medicine, 81, 439--442. Kamath, V., Moberg,
P.J., Kohler, C.G., Gur, R.E., Turetsky, B.I., 2013. Odor hedonic
capacity and anhedonia in schizophrenia and unaffected first-­degree
relatives of schizophrenia patients. Schizophr. Bull. 39, 59--67. Katon,
W., Kleinman, A., Rosen, G., 1982. Depression and somatization: a
review. Part 1. Am. J. Med. 72, 127--135. Keane, J., Calder, A.J.,
Hodges, J.R., Young, A.W., 2002. Face and emotion processing in frontal
variant frontotemporal dementia. Neuropsychologia 40, 655--665. Khader,
W.S., Tubbs, A.S., Haghighi, A., et al., 2020. Onset insomnia and
insufficient sleep duration are associated with suicide ideation in
university students and athletes. J. Affect. Disord. 274, 1161--1164.
Kim, S., Thibodeau, R., Jorgensen, R.S., 2011. Shame, guilt, and
depressive symptoms: a meta-­analytic review. Psychol. Bull. 137, 66--96.
Kirmayer, L.J., Robbins, J.M., 1993. Cognitive and social correlates of
Toronto alexithymia scale. Psychosomatics 34, 41--52. Klein, D.F., 1974.
Endogenomorphic depression. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 31, 447--454.
Kraepelin, E., 1905. Lectures on Clinical Psychiatry, third ed. (T.
Johnson, Trans, 1917). W. Wood, New York. Lewis, A., 1934. Melancholia:
a clinical survey of depressive states. J. Ment. Sci. 80, 277--378.

263

Lewis, H.B., 1971. Shame and Guilt in Neurosis. International University
Press, New York. Lewis, I.M., 1971. Ecstatic Religion: An
Anthropological Study of Spirit Possession and Shamanism. Penguin,
Harmondsworth. Lieberman, S., 1978. Nineteen cases of morbid grief. Br.
J. Psychiatry 132, 159--163. López Ibor, J.J., 1966. Neuroses as Mood
Disorders. Editorial Gredos, Madrid. Marie, L., Poindexter, E.K.,
Fadoir, N.A., Smith, P.N., 2020. Understanding the transition from
suicidal desire to planning and preparation: correlates of suicide risk
within a psychiatric inpatient sample of ideators and attempters. J.
Affect. Disord. 274, 159--166. Meinck, H.M., 2006. Startle and its
disorders. Neurophysiol. Clin. 36, 357--364. Mill, J.S., 1873. In:
Robson, J.M., (Ed.) 1989, Autobiography. Penguin, London. Miller, B.J.,
McCall, W.V., Xia, L., et al., 2020. Insomnia, suicidal ideation, and
psychopathology in Chinese patients with chronic schizophrenia. Prog.
Neuro-­Psychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 111, 110202. Mitchell, R.L.,
Ross, E.D., 2013. Attitudinal prosody: what we know and the directions
for future study. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 37, 471--479. Mumford, D.B.,
1992. Detection of psychiatric disorders among Asian patients presenting
with somatic symptoms. Br. J. Hosp. Med. 47, 202--204. Murphy, H.B.M.,
Wittkower, E.D., Chance, N.A., 1967. Cross-­ cultural inquiry into the
symptomatology of depression: preliminary report. Int. J. Soc.
Psychiatry 13, 6--15. Nakao, M., Barsky, A.J., Kumano, H., Kuboki, J.,
2002. Relationship between somatosensory amplification and alexithymia
in a Japanese psychosomatic clinic. Psychosomatics 43, 55--60. Nemiah,
J.C., Sifneos, P.E., 1970. Affect and fantasy in patients with
psychosomatic disorders. In: Hill, O.W. (Ed.), Modern Trends in
Psychosomatic Medicine, vol. 2. Butterworth, London. Obegi, J.H., 2019.
Rethinking suicidal behaviour disorder. Crisis 40 (3), 209--219. Oh,
J.H., Yoo, J.R., Ko, S.Y., et al., 2021. Relationship between sleep
duration and suicidal ideation among farmers: safety for agricultural
injuries of farmers cohort study of Jeju, Korea. Saf Health Work 12 (1),
102--107. Parkes, C.M., 1971. Psycho-­social transitions: a field for
study. Soc. Sci. Med. 5, 101--115. Parkes, C.M., 1976. The psychological
reaction to loss of a limb: the first year after amputation. In:
Howells, J.G. (Ed.), Modern Perception in the Psychiatric Aspects of
Surgery. Macmillan, London, pp. 515--533. Parkes, C.M., Benjamin, B.,
Fitzgerald, R.G., 1969. Broken heart: a statistical study of increased
mortality among widows. Br. Med. J. 1, 740--743. Parkes, C.M., Napier,
M.M., 1975. Psychiatric sequelae of amputation. In: Silverstone, T.,
Barraclough, B. (Eds.), Contemporary Psychiatry. Headley Brothers,
Ashford, pp. 440--446. Pell, M.D., 1996. On the receptive prosodic loss
in Parkinson's disease. Cortex 32, 693--704. Pichon, S., Kell, C.A.,
2013. Affective and sensorimotor components of emotional prosody
generation. J. Neurosci. 33, 1640--1650. Poeck, K., Pilleria, G., 1963.
Pathologisches Lachen und Weinen. Art Institut, Orell Füssli. Powell,
M., Hemsley, D.R., 1984. Depression: a breakdown of perceptual defence?
Br. J. Psychiatry 145, 358--362.

264

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Rack, P., 1982. Race, Culture and Mental Disorder. Tavistock, London.
Ribot, T., 1896. La Psychologie des Sentiments. Félix Alcan, Paris.
Rizzolatti, G., Craighero, L., 2004. The mirror-­ neuron system. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 27, 169--192. Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., 1998. Grasping
objects and grasping action meanings: the dual role of monkey
rostroventral premotor cortex (area 5). Novartis Found. Symp. 218,
81--95. Rogers, M.L., Gorday, J.Y., Joiner, T.E., 2021. Examination of
characteristics of ruminative thinking as unique predictors of suicide-­
related outcomes. J. Psychiatr. Res. 139, 1--7. Satoh, M., Nakase, T.,
Nagata, K., Tomimoto, H., 2011. Musical anhedonia: selective loss of
emotional experience in listening to music. Neurocase 17, 410--417.
Schachter, S., Singer, J., 1962. Cognitive, social and physiological
determinants of emotional state. Psychol. Rev. 69, 379--399. Schneider,
K., 1920. The stratification of emotional life and the structure of the
depressive states. Zeitschrift fuer Gesundheitswesen Neurologie und
Psychiatrie 59, 281. Shakespeare, W., 1600. The Oxford Shakespeare
Hamlet. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Shepherd, M., 1993. Historical
epidemiology and the functional psychoses. Psychol. Med. 23, 301--304.
Sifneos, P.E., 1972. Short-­Term Psychotherapy and Emotional Crisis.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. Simpson, C.J., 1984. The
stigmata: pathology or miracle? Br. Med. J. 289, 1746--1748. Sims, A.,
1994. Psyche' -- spirit as well as mind? Br. J. Psychiatry 165,
441--446. Sirois, F., 1982. Epidemic hysteria. In: Roy, A. (Ed.),
Hysteria. John Wiley, Chichester, pp. 101--116. Snaith, R.P., 1993.
Anhedonia: a neglected symptom of psychopathology. Psychol. Med. 23,
957--966. Song, W., Li, H., Sun, F., Guo, T., Jiang, S., Wang, X., 2020.
Pain avoidance and its relation to neural response to punishment
characterizes suicide attempters with major depression disorder.
Psychiatry Res 294, 113507. Stark, R., 1965. A taxonomy of religious
experience. J. Sci. Stud. Relig. 5 (1), 97--116.

Strauss, G.P., Gold, J.M., 2012. A new perspective on anhedonia in
schizophrenia. Am. J. Psychiatry 169, 364--373. Styron, W., 1990.
Darkness Visible. A Memoir of Madness, Cape, London. Tangney, J.P.,
Dearing, R.L., 2002. Shame and Guilt. The Guildford Press, New York.
Taylor, G., 1984. Alexithymia: concept, measurement and implications for
treatment. Am. J. Psychiatry 141, 725--732. Thompson, W.F., Marin, M.M.,
Stewart, L., 2012. Reduced sensitivity to emotional prosody in
congenital amusia rekindles the musical protolanguage hypothesis. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 19027--19032. Trethowan, W.H., 1979.
Affective disorders. In: Trethowan, W.H. (Ed.), Psychiatry, fourth
ed. Baillière Tindall, London. Ungerleider, J.T., Wellisch, D.K., 1979.
Coercive persuasion (brainwashing), religious cults, and deprogramming.
Am. J. Psychiatry 136, 279--282. Vuillemier, P., Ghika-­Schmid, F.,
Bogousslavsky, J., Assal, G., Regli, F., 1998. Persistent recurrence of
hypomania and prosoaffective agnosia in a patient with right thalamic
infarct. Neuropsychiatry Neuropsychol. Behav. Neurol. 11, 40--44. Wade,
J., 2001. Mapping of the courses of heavenly bodies: the varieties of
transcendental sexual experience. J. Transpers. Psychol. 32 (2),
103--122. Weniger, G., Irle, E., 2002. Impaired facial affect
recognition and emotional change in subjects with transmodal cortical
lesions. Cerebr. Cortex 12, 258--268. Wernicke, C., 1906. Fundamentals
of Psychiatry. Thieme, Leipzig. Whybrow, P.C., 1997. A Mood Apart:
Depression, Mania and Other Afflictions of the Self. Basic Books, New
York. Williams, B., 1993. Shame and Necessity. University of California
Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles. Witteman, J., Van Heuven, V.J.,
Schiller, N.O., 2012. Hearing feelings: a quantitative meta-­analysis on
the neuroimaging literature of emotional prosody perception.
Neuropsychologia 50, 2752-- 2763. Zilboorg, G., Henry, G.W., 1941. A
History of Medical Psychology. Norton, New York.

Chapter 17

Anxiety, Panic, Irritability, Phobia and Obsession Chapter Outline
Summary Anxiety Panic Attacks and Disorder Phobic States Anxiety in
Other Disorders Irritability Obsessions and Compulsions

KEYWORDS Anxiety Panic Phobia Obsession Compulsion Irritability

Summary Response to stress is an integral aspect of human existence, and
the alarm reaction sets the context for an understanding of anxiety and
anxiety-­related disorders. Hence, free-­floating anxiety includes
experiential features of the alarm reaction but marked out as abnormal
by the intensity, the prolonged duration, the trivial nature of the
triggering events and finally by the socially disruptive and disabling
nature of the experience. Anxiety can be focused on a specified object
or situation and this is termed phobia; it can occur as paroxysmal and
episodic attacks as in panic, or it can be discomforting if unregulated
as in obsessive compulsive phenomena: Montanus speaks of one that durst
not walk alone from home for fear that he should swoon or die. A second
fears every man he meets will rob him, quarrel with him or kill him. A
third dares not venture to walk alone, for fear he should meet the
devil, a thief, be sick; fears all old women as witches; and every black
dog or cat he sees he suspecteth to be a devil; every person comes near
him is malificiated; every creature, all intend to hurt him, seek his
ruine; another dares not go over a bridge, come near a pool, rock, steep
hill, lye in a chamber where cross beams are for fear he be tempted to
hang, drown or precipitate himself. If he be in a silent auditory, as at
a sermon, he is afraid he shall speak aloud, at unawares, something
undecent, unfit to be said. If he be locked in a close room, he is
afraid of being stifled for want of air, and still carries 265

266

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

bisket, aquavitae, or some strong waters about him for fear of
deliquiums, or being sick; or if he be in a throng, middle of a church,
multitude, where he may not well get out, though he sit at ease he is
certase affected. He will freely promise, undertake any business
beforehand; but when it comes to be performed he dares not adventure,
but fears an infinite number of dangers, disasters, etc. ... They are
afraid of some loss, danger, that they shall surely lose their lives,
goods, and all they have; but why they know not. Robert Burton (1621)

Response to stress is an integral aspect of human existence. But what is
stress? There are at least three conceptualizations of stress: stress as
a stimulus; stress as a response; and stress as an interaction. The
notion of stress as a stimulus is modelled on the assumption that it is
an external factor that affects an individual, whereas stress as a
response locates the stress within the individual. This latter notion
was developed by Selye (1907--82), who defined stress as a 'non-­specific
response of the body to any demand made upon it' (Selye, 1956). The
notion of stress as an interaction built on Selye's work and was
developed by Lazarus (1922--2002): A particular relationship between the
person and the environment that is appraised by the person as taxing or
exceeding his or her resources and endangers his or her well being.
Lazarus and Folkman (1984)

Selye's general adaptation syndrome describes the stress response as
comprising three stages: alarm reaction, resistance and exhaustion. The
alarm reaction, typically termed the flight-­or-­fight response, involves
autonomic arousal mediated by release of catecholamines and is
experienced as fear, palpitations or readiness for action, among other
things. In the event that the stressor persists, there is decreased
release of catecholamines and a switch to release glucocorticoid
hormones during the resistance phase. Finally, in contexts of chronic
stress, exhaustion is the result with the potential for hypoglycaemia
and death. An understanding of Selye's general adaptation syndrome,
particularly the physiologic and experiential aspects of the alarm
reaction (flight-­or-­fight response),

sets anxiety and anxiety-­related emotional disturbance in context. The
five abnormal phenomena of this chapter are relatively common human
experiences and can be construed as emanating from disturbances of the
regulation of anxiety. Abnormality in this context is marked out by the
severity and intensity of the experience, prolonged duration, occurrence
in reaction to what could be considered an inadequate situational stress
and the deleterious and disabling effect on social functioning. Each of
these phenomena has a normal, even necessary, aspect: it is appropriate
to be anxious at the beginning of a speech in public; it is normal for a
parent to express irritability when an 8-­year-­old son breaks a
window---it is a necessary learning experience for him; fear is
necessary for coping when an individual suddenly discovers oneself to be
surrounded by poisonous snakes; meticulous checking and checking again
is an important part of learning to be a competent airline pilot; even
panic is normal, in a statistical sense, in some situations of extreme
mass disaster. In any modern consideration of anxiety disorders,
anxiety, panic and phobia would be included both as states of emotion
and as distinct syndromes (Noyes and Hoehn-­Saric, 1998). Irritability is
a distinct and important mood state that occurs in several conditions,
and obsession is both an individual symptom and an essential feature of
obsessive compulsive disorder. Superficially, obsession and compulsion
can seem unrelated to anxiety, but both can be construed as means of
regulating anxiety. Patients may have insight and present themselves as
suffering from 'phobia', 'obsession' or 'anxiety state'. However, the
lay meaning of each of these terms is significantly different from their
psychiatric use, and it will be more usual for the clinician to diagnose
the state from a description of the mood or thought process.

Anxiety Anxiety is a universal and normal emotion. It is a necessary and
adaptive response of the organism to stress. It is clear that levels of
arousal relate to the efficiency of an organism's ability to respond
appropriately to a task: too little arousal and excessive arousal are
both associated with poor performance (this is the Yerkes-- Dodson Law)
(Yerkes and Dodson, 1908). Lader and

17 Anxiety, Panic, Irritability, Phobia and Obsession

Marks (1971) have discussed the features of anxiety in terms of the
emotion being normal or pathologic. In rather concrete terms, a person
who discovers that they are sharing a field with a bull feels acutely
anxious and runs at top speed for the gate; if, 6 weeks later, when back
in the city, they have a panic attack and have to lie down because
someone mentions a part of the city called the Bullring, their response
is clearly maladaptive and their anxiety pathologic. More recently, Pine
et al. (2021) have described the potential role for two uniquely human
cognitive capacities, namely (1) a subjective sense of participating in
and re-­experiencing remembered events and (2) a limitless capacity to
imagine details of future events. It is proposed that the capacity for
re-­experiencing events allows for lasting memories of an individual's
attributes, capacities, past experiences and social relationships. And
what the authors term constructive episodic simulation allows for the
ability to imagine future events, without temporal limitations and
facilitating goal-­ related behaviour, and promoting goal achievement.
The hypothesis is that the evolutionary innovations that made these
capacities possible also laid the groundwork for vulnerabilities such as
anxiety. Anxiety results from rumination about future harms and failures
and a preoccupation with imagined harmful events in the presence of
concurrent safety signals. This novel thesis allows for a better
understanding of anxiety over and above merely examining the role of
cognitive appraisals in the generation of anxiety. Anxiety may also,
arbitrarily, be polarized between state and trait (Sims and Snaith,
1988). Anxiety state is the quality of being anxious now, at this
particular time, probably as a reaction to provoking circumstances.
Anxiety trait is the tendency over a long time, perhaps throughout life,
to meet all the vicissitudes of life with a habitually excessive degree
of anxiety. Anxiety as a description of the experience of normal emotion
is not different in quality, only quantitatively, from anxiety state
(Hamilton, 1959). Characteristic of the mood of anxiety are feelings of
constriction. The word angst is etymologically associated with the idea
of narrowness, stricture, 'straits' and in early usage was located in
the praecordium and prominently associated with angina (Sims, 1985). The
patient with anxiety state may feel restless, uncertain, vulnerable,
trapped, breathless and choked. As well as feeling

267

frightened and worried, hypochondriacal ideas and even feelings of guilt
are often prominent. Symptoms of anxiety occur pathologically in anxiety
states without obvious external cause. The anxiety is not attached to
any specific provoking object, and so it is termed free-­floating
anxiety. There is also a contrast between the experience of anxiety as a
subjective emotion and the objective occurrence of physiologic somatic
changes normally associated with that affect; some of the commoner
symptoms are shown in Box 17.1 (Tyrer, 1982). Tyrer considers
irritability to be a symptom of anxiety state, but Snaith and Taylor
(1985) made the case for irritability being an independent mood state
that may be associated with anxiety---or any other mood disorder.
Although it is usual to find the psychological and physical aspects of
anxiety associated and related in intensity, this may not necessarily be
so. The patient may complain of feeling extremely anxious but show
minimal somatic expression; in dissociation, marked physical changes
have been described when the patient does not complain at all of feeling
anxious. BOX 17.1 SYMPTOMS OF ANXIETY Somatic and Autonomic •
Palpitations • Difficulty in breathing • Dry mouth • Nausea • Frequency
of micturition • Dizziness • Muscular tension • Sweating • Abdominal
churning • Tremor • Cold skin Psychic (Psychological) • Feelings of
dread and threat • Irritability • Panic • Anxious anticipation • Inner
(psychic) terror • Worrying over trivia • Difficulty in concentrating •
Initial insomnia • Inability to relax From Tyrer, P., 1982. Anxiety. Br.
J. Hosp. Med. 27, 109--116, with permission.

268

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

State 'I feel anxious right now'

Somatic 'My hands shake ... I have palpitations' etc. Normal 'I am
anxious with good cause'

Psychological 'I feel anxious inside'

Pathological 'I feel anxious without cause'

Trait 'I feel anxious most of the time'

Fig. 17.1 Three-­dimensional model of anxiety symptoms.

These three dichotomous aspects of anxiety are represented in Fig. 17.1.
Psychiatric nosology makes a distinction between three principal anxiety
syndromes: generalized anxiety disorder, social and specific phobias and
panic disorder. Those who suffer from generalized anxiety disorder
experience persistent anxiety and worry that is out of proportion to
actual events or circumstances (Spiegel and Barlow, 2000). The worry is
typically focused on everyday matters, and over time it shifts from item
to item; the subject is almost never free from anxiety. Patients with
anxiety disorder describe characteristic ideational components,
concentrating on themes of personal danger and especially physical harm
(Hibbert, 1984). The 'most important' thought of patients included the
following: 'I may panic in front of others', 'I may die of a heart
attack while asleep' and 'I am going to have a heart attack'. Fear of
physical, psychological or social disaster also occurred during panic
attacks. Stressful life experiences in the preceding 12 months, and some
physiologic disturbance other than anxiety immediately before the
symptoms, were commonly described. These ideas can be construed as
worry. Worry is now recognized as a cognitive process common during the
experience of anxiety. It has been defined as follows:

A chain of thoughts and images, negatively affect-­ laden and relatively
uncontrollable. The worry process represents an attempt to engage in
mental problem-­ solving on an issue whose outcome is uncertain but
contains the possibility of one or more negative outcomes. Consequently,
worry relates closely to fear process. Borkovec et al. (1983)

Other psychological functions are affected by acute anxiety. The
capacity for reflection is decreased and the field of conscious
awareness narrowed; this obviously has survival value for instant
physical action but is a disadvantage when planning, reviewing and
taking a variety of different factors into consideration are important.
The variations of activity with anxiety are seen, for instance, after
the experience of disaster: some victims will be numb and inert; others
tense, restless and constructively overactive; and others still
terrified, almost literally 'petrified', and incapable of sustained
activity. General anxiety is often contrasted with situational anxiety,
that is, the tendency to become anxious in certain defined situations.
This latter is discussed later with phobic states. Under general anxiety
are included free-­ floating autonomic anxiety; panic attacks; and the
observation during interview that the patient

Anxiety

18 14 10 6 2

Depression

17 Anxiety, Panic, Irritability, Phobia and Obsession

18 14 10 6 2

269

Fig. 17.2 Serial recordings of anxiety and depression in one patient on
the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale. (From Sims, A.C.P., Snaith,
P., 1988. Anxiety in Clinical Practice. John Wiley, Chichester., with
permission of John Wiley.)

appears to be anxious, tense, worried or apprehensive. Free-­floating
anxiety comprises such autonomic components as blushing, 'butterflies in
the stomach', choking, difficulty in getting the breath, dizziness, dry
mouth, giddiness, palpitations, sweating and trembling, dilated pupils
and raised blood pressure; parasympathetic aspects include nausea,
vomiting, frequency of micturition and diarrhoea. The psychological
quality of feeling anxious or tense is more difficult to quantify than
its physiologic correlates. Words are idiosyncratic in their meaning,
and so there is a tendency to judge the veracity of the patient's
statement that they are 'terribly anxious' according to the severity of
the autonomic symptoms occurring concurrently. However, it is possible
by using serial rating scales to compare the patient's subjective
experience at different times; one much-­used example of this is the
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (Zigmond and Snaith, 1983). Serial
recordings of a patient who showed both anxiety and depressive symptoms
that responded to treatment at different times are shown in Fig. 17.2.
Self-­description of anxiety includes worry, brooding, sleeplessness
through preoccupation with contents of the thoughts and so on. PANIC
ATTACKS AND DISORDER Panic attacks occur as discrete episodes of somatic
or autonomic anxiety associated with marked psychic anxiety as an
extreme sense of fear. The attack ends either with a complete
interruption to the patient's current stream of behaviour so that they
lie on the floor, rush into the open air, run back into the house or
'collapse' or they terminate their current behaviour voluntarily so that
the attack remits more gradually.

In either case, there is something about their mode of activities before
the attack that was precipitating panic. The patient makes this
association for themself, and they go to elaborate lengths to avoid
provoking a panic attack. This may be the antecedent condition for
development of a phobic state. The duration of the attack varies from
less than a minute to several hours but is normally about 10 to 20
minutes. These attacks may occur many times per day, although usually
less frequently. Onset is sudden, with many anxiety symptoms such as
palpitations, chest pain or discomfort, choking or smothering feelings,
dizziness, feelings of unreality, dyspnoea, paraesthesiae, hot flushes,
sweating, faintness, trembling or fear of dying or going mad. There are
distinctions and similarities between panic disorder and generalized
anxiety disorder. Forty-­one generalized anxiety disorder subjects who
had never had panic attacks were compared with 71 subjects with panic
disorder (Noyes et al., 1992). The generalized anxiety disorder subjects
had an earlier, more gradual onset of symptoms and more often suffered
from simple phobias, while the panic disorder subjects tended to report
depersonalization and agoraphobia. In general, those with panic disorder
had a more severe degree of illness and were more likely to give a
history of major depression. There is growing recognition that there are
at least two discrete and distinct experiential subtypes of panic
disorder: a respiratory type that is characterized by fear of dying,
chest pain and discomfort, shortness of breath, paraesthesias and the
sensation of choking and a nonrespiratory type. The respiratory subtype
is associated with spontaneous panic experience rather than
situationally induced panic. Furthermore, it is

270

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

BOX 17.2 SPECIES OF PHOBIA ACCORDING TO RUSH (1798) • The cat phobia •
The rat phobia • The insect phobia • The odour phobia • The dirt phobia
• The rum phobia • The water phobia • The solo phobia • The power phobia
• The faction phobia • The want phobia • The doctor phobia • The blood
phobia • The thunder phobia • The home phobia • The church phobia • The
ghost phobia • The death phobia

more likely to be provoked in challenge tests by inhalation of 35%
carbon dioxide or hyperventilation producing hypocapnic alkalosis
(Freire and Nardi, 2012). PHOBIC STATES Phobias, or unreasonable fears,
have been described for many centuries. For example, Benjamin Rush
(1798) defines phobia as 'a fear of an imaginary evil, or an undue fear
of a real one' and then produces a list of 18 phobias, partly humorously
intended; this is reproduced in Box 17.2. Agoraphobia was originally
described by Westphal (1871); this condition, literally 'fear of the
marketplace', causes very severe disability. Animal phobias have been
contrasted by Marks (1970): If ever we are tempted to think that all
phobic states are a unity which reflects the same disorder and
aetiology, we can quickly dispel this illusion simply by looking at the
startling contrast between animal phobias and agoraphobias. These two
conditions differ radically in onset, course, symptomatology, response
to treatment and psychological measures. Solyom et al. (1986) divided
the symptomatology of 199 patients into three categories: agoraphobia
(80 patients), social phobia (47 patients) and simple

BOX 17.3 SUBDIVISIONS OF PHOBIC NEUROSIS Phobias of External Stimuli •
Agoraphobia • Social phobias • Animal phobias Phobias of Internal
Stimuli • Illness phobias • Obsessive phobias • Miscellaneous specific
phobias After Marks, I.M., 1969. Fears and Phobias. Heinemann, London,
with permission.

phobia (72 patients). Agoraphobia included 'fear of leaving home, of
being alone at home or on the street, in crowds, of travelling by car,
bus or train'. Social phobia involved anxiety in social situations.
Simple phobia described a single but life-­disrupting fear, such as of
animals, heights, disease, aeroplanes, insects and so on. What is common
to all these phobic experiences is that the fear is intense and
persistent and that, furthermore, it is provoked by exposure or, the
anticipation of exposure, to cues that are clearly discernible and
circumscribed objects or situations. A more comprehensive subdivision of
phobic states is contained in Box 17.3 from Marks (1969). Because
agoraphobia literally means 'fear of the marketplace', this is
frequently appropriate nowadays, as often the most phobic situation for
such people is in the supermarket. Agoraphobia is, in fact, a
heterogeneous collection of disorders and not an entity; the patient
does not only fear a throng of people but has multiple avoidance
responses to many stimuli (Snaith, 1991). It includes both those who
have a fear of being under public scrutiny, and therefore who avoid
public places, and those with illness fears in either a public place
where they become noticeable or an exposed place where they will not be
able to receive help. Social phobias are common conditions that have
been relatively neglected over recent years (Swinson, 1992). They are
particularly likely to occur in association with other disorders of mood
or other types of anxiety. There are a variety of different
manifestations, but social phobia can be considered to be an extreme
variant of shyness. However, avoidance is more typical of the
established disorder. It is characterized by excessive fear,
self-­consciousness and avoidance of social situations due

17 Anxiety, Panic, Irritability, Phobia and Obsession

to the possibility of embarrassment or humiliation. Typically the fear
focuses on situations where there is the possibility of public
performance such as public speaking, eating in public, signing a
document under scrutiny or, for men, urinating in a public toilet.
Illness phobia is different from hypochondriacal preoccupation in that,
with the former, avoidance occurs. Thus the criteria for phobia,
according to Marks (1969), are as follows: • fear is out of proportion
to the demands of the situation, • it cannot be explained or reasoned
away, • it is not under voluntary control, and •  the fear leads to an
avoidance of the feared situation. A 28-­year-­old married woman said, My
fear problems are worst ... I am afraid of catching cancer. I am afraid
of catching it from the hospital \[radiotherapy hospital\] 1 mile away
... I bought a scarf from a shop and the assistant frightened me ... the
look of her, she hardly had any hair and looked very old... I thought I
had caught it from her and so I had to wash the house. I cleaned the
whole house and it made me poorly. I had to move house because of the
hospital and I cannot go back to that shop ever again. There is also
some relationship between phobias, especially agoraphobia, and
depression (Schapira et al., 1970). Persistent fear and foreboding,
often of a situational nature, may occur with other depressive symptoms.
Phobic states, as well as panic disorder, may respond to antidepressant
therapy. Phobias are overpowering and compelling in their nature,
dominating the whole of life. Like obsessions, they are repetitive,
resisted unsuccessfully, regarded by the subject as senseless and
irrational but at the same time as coming from inside of themself. Some
authors therefore describe them as obsessional fears. Often compulsive
behaviour, such as handwashing, arises out of a phobia, for instance,
fear of dirt and contamination. Prominent in the subject's description
of their phobia is that they are controlled by it, that the fear is
something from inside themself (in no way controlled from outside).
ANXIETY IN OTHER DISORDERS Obviously, most consideration of anxiety and
its different forms and manifestations has been given in the

271

context of the anxiety disorders. However, anxiety is a common symptom
and is frequently a part of other illnesses, both psychiatric and
physical. Among psychiatric conditions, the most frequent comorbidity is
with depressive illness; most patients with depression have some anxiety
symptoms, most of those with more severe anxiety disorders also have
some feelings of depression. Anxiety is a frequent symptom in the
prodromal stages of schizophrenia and is also associated with relapse
(Tarrier and Turpin, 1992). Anxiety often occurs with organic
psychosyndromes, both exacerbating the restlessness of acute organic
psychosyndromes or delirium and manifesting as an additional cause of
subjective distress in chronic organic states or dementia. Anxiety is an
understandable reaction to physical illness and its consequent distress,
pain, physical and social disability and threat to life (Sims and
Snaith, 1988). In the following conditions, it may also be a direct
expression of the morbid process: hypoglycaemia, hyperthyroidism,
phaeochromocytoma, carcinoid syndrome, some cardiac and ictal disorders
and states of withdrawal from psychoactive substances. These conditions
therefore need to be considered in the differential diagnosis of
anxiety, and the component of anxiety in their symptomatology must be
dealt with in their treatment.

Irritability Irritability is defined as a subjective experience that can
occur in a variety of physiologic settings, that is, in association with
sleep deprivation, hunger or pain and is often conflated with aggression
and anger, even though it is conceptually distinct from these constructs
(Bell et al., 2021). It is also a feature of disease being found in, for
example, mood disorders. Irritability in a patient may be observed by
others or experienced subjectively directed towards others (outward) or
towards the self (inward). Irritability, outwardly expressed, is
considered to be a disorder of mood in its own right and independent of
anxiety, depression or other mood state (Snaith and Taylor, 1985):
'Outwardly expressed irritability is an independent mood disorder and
not merely one which is symptomatic of states of depression or anxiety'.
Outwardly expressed irritability is particularly commonly associated
with

272

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

puerperal mood disorder, whereas inwardly directed irritability was
described in those with obsessive compulsive disorder. In the
Irritability, Depression and Anxiety Scale, two subscales were developed
for irritability (Snaith et al., 1978): outwardly directed irritability
and inwardly directed irritability. Snaith and Taylor (1985) have
defined irritability for use in the context of psychopathology as:
Irritability is a feeling state characterized by reduced control over
temper, which usually results in irascible verbal or behavioural
outbursts, although the mood may be present without observed
manifestation. It may be experienced as brief episodes, in particular
circumstances, or it may be prolonged and generalized. The experience of
irritability is always unpleasant for the individual, and overt
manifestation lacks the cathartic effect of justified outbursts of
anger. It is a prominent symptom in post-­traumatic stress disorder in
which it is listed as one of the symptoms of increased arousal.
Relatives described an individual survivor of disaster: 'He has
completely changed his character. He has become nasty tempered and
swears at us all the time.' The severity of irritability probably has an
inverse correlation with age; it occurs in both men and women. It is
useful to make a distinction between the subjective mood of irritability
and the observation of violent behaviour, although these may overlap.
Severe irritability may cause considerable distress to patients,
relatives and healthcare professionals; there may be no other
psychiatric symptomatology present. The factors that predispose to
irritability are not clearly known. 'The state of irritability is
primarily a mood which may be translated into behaviour' (Snaith, 1991).
It is thought to be related to deficits in reward and threat processing
in children and adolescents involving brain regions such as the amygdala
and frontal cortices. In adults, it is invariably associated with mood
disorders and the amygdala, orbitofrontal cortices and hypothalamus are
implicated (Bell et al., 2021).

Obsessions and Compulsions A  n additional video for this topic is
available online.

There is no necessary association between obsessions or obsessive
compulsive disorder and anxiety

or any type of anxiety disorder. Isolated obsessions or obsessive
compulsive disorder may occur with or without anxiety, with or without
depression and with or without personality disorder, anankastic or
otherwise. It is a distinct and separate phenomenon. The patient may be
troubled by thoughts that they know to be their own but that they find
repetitive and strange; they find they are unable to prevent their
repetition. These obsessional thoughts have, according to Lewis (1936),
three essential features: a feeling of subjective compulsion, a
resistance to it and the preservation of insight. These features
distinguish obsession from voluntary repetitive acts and social
ceremonies. The word obsession is usually reserved for the thought and
compulsion for the act. The sufferer knows that it is their own thought
(or act), that it arises from within themself and that it is subject to
their own will whether they continue to think (or perform) it; they can
decide not to think it on this particular occasion (but it does and will
recur). They are tormented by the fear of what may happen if they
disturb the routine. There is no disturbance of consciousness or of the
awareness of the possession of their own thought. The person usually
functions satisfactorily in other areas of their life uncontaminated by
the obsessional thought, but as the obsessions become more severe there
is increasing social incapacity and misery that can grossly disrupt
their whole lifestyle. John Bunyan, in his poignant autobiography Grace
Abounding to the Chief of Sinners (1666), describes gross, obsessional
thoughts and ruminations that are connected with, but can be clearly
separated from, his underlying religious beliefs. For example: 33. Now
you must know, that before this I had taken much delight in ringing, but
my Conscience beginning to be tender, I thought that such a practice was
but vain, and therefore forced myself to leave it, yet my mind hankered,
wherefore I should go to the Steeple house, and look on: though I durst
not ring. But I thought this did not become Religion neither, yet I
forced my self and would look on still; but quickly after, I began to
think, How, if one of the bells should fall: then I chose to stand under
a main Beam that lay over thwart the Steeple from side to side thinking
there I might stand sure; But then I should think again, Should the Bell
fall with a swing, it might first hit the Wall, and then rebounding upon
me, might kill me for

17 Anxiety, Panic, Irritability, Phobia and Obsession

all this Beam; this made me stand in the Steeple door, and now thought
I, I am safe enough for if a Bell should fall, I can slip out behind
these thick walls, and so be preserved not with-­standing. 34. So after
this, I would yet go to see them ring, but would not go further than the
Steeple door; but then it came into my head, how if the Steeple it self
should fall, and this thought, (it may fall for ought I know) would when
I stood and looked on, continually so shake my mind, that I durst not
stand at the Steeple door any longer, but was forced to fly, for fear it
should fall upon my head. The obsessional symptom and the religious
belief expressed in this passage are not the same phenomenologically,
although they are interconnected. The nature of the obsessional thought
is demonstrated in the way that Bunyan felt compelled to think through
this elaborate chain of arguments; he resisted his ideas but
unsuccessfully. There is no lack of insight into its being his own
behaviour. The behaviour was compulsive in that it was the acting out of
ambivalent, obsessional notions. There is more than a hint of underlying
obsessional personality, for instance, in the numbering of the
paragraphs. A midwife, aged 32, kept thinking after she had finished her
spell of duty at hospital that she might have pushed an airway down the
throat of a baby that she had delivered. She would telephone the ward
repeatedly to check that the infant was well. She frequently made sure
that her dog's collar was secure when she was out walking in case he
escaped and was killed by traffic. When a little boy and his mother
visited her home, she gave him a glass of soda pop. However, she had to
drink what she had just poured out for him herself, although she
disliked it, to make sure it really was soda pop and not something
harmful. The accumulation of more and more symptoms eventually prevented
her from working or carrying out any reasonable social life. She knew
that these were her own notions, that they were stupid, but she could
not stop herself from thinking and performing them. The compulsive
behaviour often provokes further anxiety in the patient, the need both
to perform the action and to preserve social acceptability. Although

273

wide areas of life are often implicated in compulsive rituals, it is
often striking how the obsessional person omits other areas from their
obsessionality. The patient who excoriates their hands by excessive
washing and devotes a substantial portion of each day to the pursuit of
cleanliness may drive to work in a dirty and ill-­serviced car and work
in an untidy office! The dilemma of obsessional symptoms remains that
they are both reckoned as part of the patient's own behaviour and
resisted unsuccessfully, that is, they are under voluntary control but
not altogether experienced as voluntary. The patient has an awareness
that this particular act or thought is voluntary and can be resisted,
with difficulty, but the overall pattern of thinking or behaving is
experienced subjectively as inevitable---it is ultimately futile to
struggle. The action sometimes 'appears to be against the will of the
patient, and often seems to have the quality of disgust or repulsion;
this urge to do something yet to be repelled by it, is said to be a
singular characteristic of the obsessional state' (Beech, 1974).
Obsession may occur as thoughts, images, impulses, ruminations or fears;
compulsions as acts, rituals, behaviours. Schneider's definition (1959)
emphasizes that there is no loss of contact with reality: 'An obsession
occurs when someone cannot get rid of a content of consciousness,
although when it occurs he realizes that it is senseless or at least
that it is dominating and persisting without cause'. Thus
hallucinations, delusions and mood disturbances cannot be obsessional in
form; they are not experienced as senseless, nor is there an attempt to
get rid of them. The craving of an alcoholic for their beverage or the
abnormal drive of sexual deviation is not compulsive in a strict sense.
It is not just that they do not contravene the person's will, although
they may dislike themself intensely for having such wishes, in the
philias, in particular, the thoughts or urges are welcome and often
pleasurable. Obsessional ideas may be simple or complicated. A tune or a
few musical notes may become repetitive and be resisted, or a sequence
of words, for example, 'the British Socialist Party', may be reiterated
irritatingly inside the person's head. The obsessions or compulsions may
be more complex and ritualistic. For example, a patient who tried to
shut the car door after getting out found this very difficult because
they were afraid that the act of shutting would produce

274

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

unpleasant, obscene, repetitive thoughts. For this reason, they had to
go to elaborate lengths to put the car in a certain place, check all the
doors before getting out, check them all again after getting out and
turn the key while looking in a particular direction. The images of
obsessional thinking may be vivid but are always known by the patient to
be products of their own mind. These images have been considered by de
Silva (1986) to be one of four types. 1. The obsessional image depicts
repetitively the unwanted intrusive cognition---images of blood flowing,
injuries and so on. 2. The compulsive image depicts compulsive behaviour
by rectifying either an obsessional image---the woman who saw corpses in
coffins and had to imagine the same people standing--- or an independent
compulsive image. 3. The disaster image affects compulsive checkers who
may not only fear that disaster will occur unless they check but also
'see' the disaster happening in fantasy---the house burning down if the
gas taps are not turned off. 4. The disruptive image may intrude while
compulsive rituals are being carried out and necessitate the ritual
being recommenced. Ruminations are often pseudophilosophical,
irritatingly unnecessary, repetitive and achieve no conclusion. A priest
has an inner impulse to utter swear words in church, or a mother an
impulse to harm her child---both quite frequent complaints of
obsessional patients. Reassurance that they will not harm themself or
others or act on the impulses can be given to the obsessional, provided
it is truly obsessional in form, that they are not concurrently
depressed and that there is no coexisting dissocial personality
disorder. The constituent elements of obsessive c­ ompulsive experience
are said to include the following: 1. a trigger, which is an event or
cue that sets off an obsession, a feeling of discomfort or a compulsive
urge; 2. an obsession itself; 3. a discomfort that is experienced as a
general unease, tension or a sense of guilt; 4. a compulsive urge or
drive to carry out a particular behaviour; 5. discomfort reduction; 6.
fears of disaster that the patient believes will to

come pass but that can be avoided by engaging in compulsive behaviour;
7. inflated sense of responsibility even for events over which the
patient has no control; 8. reassurance-­seeking behaviour; 9. avoidance
of stimuli or situations that may trigger obsessions or compulsions; 10.
disruption of social functioning because of the long and complicated
compulsions, which are often time consuming and exhausting; and 11.
resistance, which was discussed earlier (de Silva, 2003). Obsessions
occur in the context of obsessive compulsive disorder as the major
symptom of the condition and are the sole features in about 20% of
cases; they also occasionally occur in other circumstances. The
depressed patient with obsessional (anankastic) personality may show
obsessions and compulsions that clear when their illness is treated.
Obsessional states are more common when obsessional personality is
present, but this personality type is not a prerequisite. Obsessional
symptoms may occur in schizophrenia, when they usually have a bizarre
character. Apparent obsessional symptoms may arise de novo in an older
person, associated with an organic psychosyndrome. However, the element
of resistance characteristic of obsessionality is usually not present.
It seems that the person carries out repetitive behaviour to cope with
the uncertainties of their life caused by their failing memory and
performance. Repetition and stereotyped behaviour in those with learning
disability has sometimes been labelled compulsive; however, this is
psychopathologically incorrect, as there is no resistance or conflict of
urge and repulsion. Similarly, repetitiveness and stickiness of thinking
occur with epilepsy, after head injury and with other organic states,
but again, this is not truly obsessional in nature. There is a striking
similarity between the clinical presentation of obsessive compulsive
disorder in children and adolescents and in adults (Swedo et al., 1989).
In 70 consecutive juvenile patients, washing and grooming, repeating,
checking and touching rituals were the most frequent compulsions, and
obsessions were contamination fears, concerns about disasters happening
to the patient or those close to them, symmetry and scrupulousness.
Although the

17 Anxiety, Panic, Irritability, Phobia and Obsession

condition was frequently familial, the actual presenting symptoms were
not shared by relatives, even by monozygotic twins. There is some
evidence that there are categories of obsessive compulsive fears and
behaviours that are associated with particular types of threat, or
threat domains. These include the aggressive threat domain that concerns
fears about one's well-­being and that of loved ones; the physical
security threat domain that relates to the immediate home environment
and includes checking, symmetry and 'just right' symptoms; the
environmental cleanliness threat domain that relates to personal hygiene
and cleanliness and includes contamination fears and washing and
cleaning rituals; and the privation threat domain that relates to
essential resources and includes hoarding behaviours (Mathews, 2009).
However, this is not the only conceptualization of obsessions. Lee and
Kwon (2003) showed autogenous obsessions can be distinguished from
reactive obsessions. They describe autogenous obsessions as erupting
abruptly into consciousness without identifiable evoking stimuli. This
type of obsession is said to be seen as ego-­dystonic and aversive and
include sexual, aggressive and immoral thoughts or impulses. On the
other hand, reactive obsessions are evoked by identifiable stimuli and
these stimuli are regarded as realistic and relatively plausible, hence
the patient assumes that it makes sense to do something about the
thought. These reactive obsessions include thoughts about contamination,
possible mistakes or accidents, asymmetry and so on. Lee and Kwon (2003)
propose that this conceptualization of obsessions has implications for
the subjective experience and for the appraisal and control strategies.
Using a novel semantic linkages approach, Feusner et al. (2021) showed
that there are three clusters of themes relating to (1) doubt/checking,
(2) contamination/somatic harm/sexual harm and (3) relationship/ just
right. This study used free-­entry data of obsessions from a mobile
health treatment platform. Seven thousand unique words representing
obsessions from 25,369 individuals from across 108 countries were
analysed. The themes partially overlap, as described above, with the
previously described themes determined from checklists. The most
frequent words were the contamination/somatic/harm words. Obsessions
relating to relationships is only starting to be

275

recognized and include obsessions about partner's flaws, for example,
partner's intelligence, social aptitude or morality. Sometimes, it is
centred on doubt about whether the relationship is good enough or ideal.
Sexual-­ oriented obsessions are characterized by unwanted intrusive
thoughts, images of ego-­dystonic sexual content that may include
concerns about child abuse, intimate sexual activity with family, fears
related to sexual orientation, inappropriate sexual activity with
children or animals and aggressive sexual behaviours (Kuty-­Pachecka,
2021). These sexual-­oriented obsessions occur in approximately 15% of
patients with obsessive compulsive disorder. Often obsessions of this
kind are associated with checking or neutralizing behaviours such as
contracting specified muscles to check the level of sexual excitement,
maintaining sufficient physical distance to ensure that inappropriate
physical contact does not take place and undertaking mental actions such
as praying. Finally, there is a tendency in sexual-­oriented obsessions
for there to be hidden methods to neutralize or suppress the obsessions.
Excessive checking is a feature of obsessive compulsive disorder. This
usually takes the form of uncertainty about whether a door has been
locked, whether a stove has been turned off, even whether, while out
driving, an accident resulting in death may have occurred. It is
apparent from this account that it is possible to reframe these features
of obsessional doubt as problems of recognition memory, thus suggesting
that impairment of recognition memory may underlie some of the problems
that are present in obsessive compulsive disorder, but the empirical
data are not conclusive (Solway et al., 2021). The role of disgust in
the psychopathology of anxiety disorders and principally in obsessions
and compulsions is gradually being examined and understood. Disgust can
be considered an adaptive system that evolved to motivate disease-­
avoidant behaviours. It is argued that it arose to facilitate the
recognition of objects and situations associated with risk of disease
and to drive hygienic behaviour. Furthermore, disgust assumed a role in
regulating social behaviour by acting to mark prohibited and disapproved
behaviours as unacceptable. In this regard, disgust can be
conceptualized as a strong and visceral

276

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

emotion that can arouse powerful affective and behavioural responses.
Obsessions and compulsions can be understood in this schema as disorders
of disgust systems: patients present with contamination fears, suffer
from intrusive thoughts of contamination, engage in excessive sanitation
and disinfection of self and the environment (for a fuller exploration
and discussion of the place of disgust in psychopathology, see Curtis,
2011). To elaborate, patients with contamination-­based obsessive
compulsive disorder may perceive themselves as being at greater risk
from the effects of contagion, which then promotes harm-­ reduction
behaviours such as cleaning and washing. The absence of illness confirms
the rightness of the cleaning and washing behaviours and reinforces the
compulsive behaviours. Disgust alongside fear plays an important role in
generating and sustaining contamination-­based obsessive compulsive
disorder. Brady et al. (2021) demonstrated that disgust propensity,
disgust sensitivity, perceived infectability and germ aversion are all
significantly correlated with contamination-­based obsessive compulsive
disorder. REFERENCES Beech, H.R., 1974. Obsessional States. Methuen,
London. Bell, E., Boyce, P., Porter, R.J., Bryant, R.A., Malhi, G.S.,
2021. Irritability in mood disorders: neurobiological underpinnings and
implications for pharmacological intervention. CNS Drugs 35, 619--641.
Borkovec, T.D., Robinson, E., Pruzinsky, T., DePree, J.A., 1983.
Preliminary exploration of worry: some characteristics and processes.
Behav. Res. Ther. 21, 9--16. Brady, R.E., Badour, C.L., Arega, E.A.,
Levy, J.J., Adams, T.G., 2021. Evaluating the mediating effects of
perceived vulnerability to disease in the relation between disgust and
contamination-­based OCD. J. Anxiety Disord. 79, 102384. Bunyan, J.,
1666. Grace abounding to the chief of sinners: or, a brief and faithful
relation of the exceeding mercy of god. In: Sharrock, R. (Ed.), 1962.
Christ, to His Poor Servant John Bunyan. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, p. 13. Burton, R., 1621. The Anatomy of Melancholy, what it Is.
With All the Kinds, Causes, Symptomes, Prognostickes, and Several Cures
of it by Democritus Junior. Cripps, Oxford. Curtis, V., 2011. Why
disgust matters. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 366,
3478--3490. De Silva, P., 1986. Obsessional-­compulsive imagery. Behav.
Res. Ther. 24, 333--350. De Silva, P., 2003. The phenomenology of
obsessive-­compulsive disorder. In: Menzies, R.G., de Silva, P. (Eds.),
Obsessive-­ Compulsive Disorder: Theory, Research and Treatment. John
Wiley, Chichester, pp. 20--36. Feusner, J.D., Mohideen, R., Smith, S.,
et al., 2021. Semantic linkages of obsessions: clustering and
frequencies of obsessional symptoms from a large international
obsessive-­compulsive disorder mobile application dataset. J. Med.
Internet Res. 23 (6):e25482.

Freire, R.C., Nardi, A.E., 2012. Panic disorder and the respiratory
system: clinical subtype and challenge tests. Rev. Bras. Psiquiatr. 34,
32--41. Hamilton, M., 1959. The assessment of anxiety states by rating.
Br. J. Med. Psychol. 32, 50--55. Hibbert, G.A., 1984. Ideational
components of anxiety: their origin and content. Br. J. Psychiatry 144,
613--624. Kuty-­Pachecka, M., 2021. Sexual obsessions in
obsessive-­compulsive disorder. Definitions, models and
cognitive-­behavioural therapy. Psychiatr. Pol. 51 (1), 39--52. Lader,
M.H., Marks, I.M., 1971. Clinical Anxiety. Heinemann, London. Lazarus,
R.S., Folkman, S., 1984. Stress, Appraisal, and Coping. Springer, New
York. Lee, H.J., Kwon, S.M., 2003. Two different types of obsessions:
autogenous obsessions and reactive obsessions. Behav. Res. Ther. 41,
11--29. Lewis, A.J., 1936. Problems of obsessional illness. Proc. R.
Soc. Med. 29, 325--336. Marks, I.M., 1969. Fears and Phobias. Heinemann,
London. Marks, I.M., 1970. The classification of phobic disorders. Br.
J. Psychiatry 116, 377--386. Mathews, C.A., 2009. Phenomenology of
obsessive-­compulsive disorder. In: Antony, M.A., Stein, M.B. (Eds.),
Oxford Handbook of Anxiety and Related Disorders. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, pp. 56--64. Noyes, R., Hoehn-­Saric, R., 1998. The Anxiety
Disorders. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Noyes, R., Woodman,
C., Garvey, M.J., et al., 1992. Generalized anxiety disorder versus
panic disorder. Distinguishing characteristics and patterns of
comorbidity. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 180, 369--379. Pine, D.S., Wise, S.P.,
Murray, E.A., 2021. Evolution, emotion, and episodic engagement. Am. J.
Psychiatry 178 (8), 701--714. Rush, B., 1798. On the different species
of phobia. The weekly Magazine of original Essays, Fugitive Pieces, and
Interesting intelligence, Philadelphia. In: Hunter, R., McAlpine, I.,
1963. Three Hundred Years of Psychiatry 1535--1860. Oxford University
Press, London, pp. 669--670. Schapira, K., Kerr, T.A., Roth, M., 1970.
Phobias and affective illness. Br. J. Psychiatry 117, 25--32. Schneider,
K., 1959. Clinical Psychopathology, fifth ed. Grune and Stratton, New
York. Selye, H., 1956. The Stress of Life. McGraw-­Hill, New York. Sims,
A.C.P., 1985. Anxiety in historical perspective. Br. J. Clin. Pract.
Suppl. 38, 4--9. Sims, A.C.P., Snaith, P., 1988. Anxiety in Clinical
Practice. John Wiley, Chichester. Snaith, P., 1991. Clinical Neurosis,
second ed. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Snaith, R.P., Taylor, C.M.,
1985. Irritability: definition, assessment and associated factors. Br.
J. Psychiatry 147, 127--136. Snaith, R.P., Constantopoulos, A.A.,
Jardine, M.Y., McGuffin, P., 1978. A clinical scale for the self
assessment of irritability, anxiety and depression. Br. J. Psychiatry
132, 164--171. Solway, A., Lin, Z., Kaplan, C.M., 2021. Revisiting
verbal recognition memory in obsessive-­compulsive disorder: a
computational approach. J. Psychiatr. Res. 138, 428--435. Solyom, L.,
Ledwige, B., Solyom, C., 1986. Delineating social phobia. Br. J.
Psychiatry 149, 464--470. Spiegel, D.A., Barlow, D.H., 2000. Anxiety
disorders. In: Gelder, M., Lépez-­Ibor, J.J., Andreasen, N.C. (Eds.), New
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

17 Anxiety, Panic, Irritability, Phobia and Obsession Swedo, S.E.,
Rapoport, J.L., Leonard, H., Lenane, M., Cheslow, D., 1989. Obsessive-­
compulsive disorder in children and adolescents. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry.
46, 335--341. Swinson, R.P., 1992. Phobic disorders. Curr. Opin.
Psychiatry. 5, 238--244. Tarrier, N., Turpin, G., 1992. Psychosocial
factors, arousal and schizophrenic relapse. The psychophysiological
data. Br. J. Psychiatry 161, 3--11.

277

Tyrer, P., 1982. Anxiety. Br. J. Hosp. Med. 27, 109--116. Westphal, C.,
1871. Die Agoraphobie: eine neuropathische Erscheinung. Arch. Psychiatr.
Nervenkr. 1871 (3), 138--161. Yerkes, R.M., Dodson, J.D., 1908. The
relation of strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit-­formation. J.
Comp. Neurol. Psychol. 18, 459--482. Zigmond, A.S., Snaith, R.P., 1983.
The hospital anxiety and depression scale. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 67,
361--370.

This page intentionally left blank

     

Chapter 18

Disorders of Volition and Execution Chapter Outline Summary Urge, Drive
and Will and Their Disturbance Abnormalities of Need, Instinct,
Motivation and Will Organic Causes Disturbance of Volition in
Schizophrenia Disturbance of Volition in Mood Disorders Impulsive and
Aggressive Acts Psychopathology of Impulsive and Aggressive Behaviour
Diminished Aggression Disturbance of Movement and Behaviour Disturbance
of Movement and Gesture Disturbance of Behaviour

KEYWORDS Urge Will Drive Movement Behaviour

Summary In this chapter, the experience of contentless nondirectional
urge; natural instinctual drive directed towards some target and the
volitional act with a consciously conceived goal and an awareness of how
to achieve it and its consequences are discussed. Abnormalities of urge,
instinct, drive and will are some of the most complex in
psychopathology. Need is a striving towards a particular object, state
or action that is experienced as a desire. Drive is an inclination to
satisfy certain primary, that is, innate, needs and as activity, the
individual's basic mode of expression. Instinct is an innate pattern of
behaviour that leads to drive satisfaction. Will is a goal-­directed
striving or intention based on cognitively planned motivation.
Disturbances of these basic aspects of behaviour occur in both organic
and 'functional' psychiatric disorders and are manifest in a variety of
ways, including impairments of appetites, impulsivity, aggression, motor
disorders and gross behavioural abnormalities. For I know that in me
(that is, in my flesh,) dwelleth no good thing; for to will is present
with me; but how to perform that which is good I find not. For the good
that I would I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do. Now if
I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth
in me. I find then a law, that, when I would do good, evil is present
with me ... But I see another law in my members, warring against the law
of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in
my members. The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Romans (1662)

279

280

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Urge and drive Instinct

Behaviour

Need satisfaction

Motivation and cognition Fig. 18.1 Relationship between instinct, need
and behaviour.

This is the most unsatisfactory subject area in clinical
psychopathology. The dissatisfaction derives partly from the loss of
interest in the subject since the end of the 19th century and the lack
of conceptual clarity that has resulted from the impoverished literature
but also because of the inherent complexity of the subject. As Berrios
(1996) put it, 'The "will" no longer plays a role in psychiatry and
psychology. A hundred years ago, however, it was an important
descriptive and explanatory concept, naming the human "power, potency or
faculty" to initiate action'. Henderson (2005) concurs with this view
when he discusses the neglect of volition in the psychiatric literature
despite its importance as a concept underlying our understanding of the
sense of agency, responsibility and regret. The distinctions between
related but distinct concepts such as instinct, urge, impetus, impulse,
drive, motivation, will, involuntary and voluntary movements and
responsibility have until very recently ceased to be regarded as proper
subjects of inquiry. A distinction can correctly but theoretically be
drawn between the instinct and thus the desire to carry out an action to
satisfy a particular need, the drive and motivation to effect the action
and the will to execute the action. All of these are different from the
end product, the observable action or behaviour itself (Fig. 18.1).

Urge, Drive and Will and Their Disturbance Jaspers (1997) distinguishes
between the different experiences of primary, contentless nondirectional
urge; natural instinctual drive directed towards some target; and the
volitional act with a consciously conceived goal and an awareness of how
to achieve it and its consequences. Thus for Jaspers, there is a
distinction, subjectively, between impulsive acts, awareness of
inhibition of will and awareness of loss of will or availability of
willpower.

Definitions proposed by Scharfetter (1980) are as follows: • Need (a
phenomenological concept): a striving towards a particular object, state
or action that is experienced as a desire. • Drive: a. as a construct,
an inclination to satisfy certain primary, that is, innate, needs; b. as
activity, the individual's basic mode of expression. • Instinct (a
construct): an innate pattern of behaviour that leads to drive
satisfaction. • Motivation: a. as a phenomenological concept, a more or
less clearly experienced mood or affect that is governed by needs and
that moves us to actions that satisfy these needs; b. as a construct, a
hypothetical activating factor. • Will (a phenomenological concept): a
goal-­ directed striving or intention based on cognitively planned
motivation. Scharfetter then describes those primary needs that are
innate and not learned as hunger, thirst, breathing, urination and
defecation, sleep and self-­preservation. Other needs are not essential
for survival; their demands can be postponed, and they are more affected
by acquired patterns of behaviour, such as sexual need and prosocial
need. Secondary needs are acquired and vary with the individual, for
example, smoking. Human beings are so complex that although primary
needs require rapid satisfaction, they account for only a small
proportion of the individual's subjective experience and psychological
activity. While I write this, I allow myself to become aware of the
primary need for breathing, but I shall not be giving it a thought 10
minutes from now. The acquired primary needs and secondary needs have a
greater influence on the individual mental state than innate primary
needs. Drive can be conceived as a state of tension that initiates
directed behaviour. In this view, it can either activate or determine
selectivity or strength of actions. Hull (1943) introduced the concept
of need as a preliminary to introducing the more mechanical concept of
drive. For Hull, 'When a condition arises for which action on the part
of the organism is a prerequisite to optimum probability of survival of
either the individual or the species, a state of need is said to exist'

18 Disorders of Volition and Execution

and 'Animals may almost be regarded as aggregations of need. The
function of the effector apparatus is to mediate the satiation of these
needs. The drive apparatus is synonymous with effector apparatus'. In
this scheme, drive has the role of initiating behaviour that satisfies
needs. Instinct may be defined as 'an inherited or innate psychophysical
disposition which determines its possessor to perceive and to pay
attention to objects of a certain class, to experience an emotional
excitement of a particular quality and to act in regard to it in a
particular manner or at least to experience an impulse to act'
(McDougall, 1908). For Freud, instinct 'appears as a borderline concept,
being both the mental representative of the stimuli emanating from
within and penetrating to the mind, and at the same time a measure of
the demand made upon the energy of the latter in consequence of its
connection with the body' (Freud, 1915). Motivation, as a
phenomenological concept, is readily understood by the layman but is
ultimately tautologous: 'I do it because I am motivated', 'I am
motivated to do it'. However, it is a concept that in psychiatry and
psychology we cannot do without. It has both an emotional as well as a
cognitive aspect. In other words, it includes the pleasurable rewards
that govern and regulate behaviour as well as the reasons proffered for
behaviour. There are intrinsic as well as extrinsic motivating factors.
Intrinsic factors are those that are internal to the person, and
extrinsic factors are those, such as supermarket reward cards, that are
external incentives to behave in particular ways. Thus the term
motivation refers not only to the goal towards which behaviour is
directed but also to emotional states that set it off as well as those
that act to reward the behaviour. It also refers to the reasons,
justifications or explanations of an action. Similarly, will is a
necessary concept but we have great difficulty in comprehending it.
Thomas Reid (1710--96), founder of the Scottish School of Common Sense,
regarded the will as the power to put into effect our voluntary actions.
For Reid (1863), 'all our power is directed by our will, we can form no
conception of power, properly so called, that is not under the direction
of will. And therefore our exertions, our deliberations, our purposes,
our promises, are only in things that depend upon our will. Our advice,

281

exhortations, and commands, are only in things that depend upon the will
of those to whom they are addressed. We impute no guilt to ourselves,
nor to others, in things where the will is not concerned'. Other
authorities make similar points but emphasize different aspects of will:
'Will has a consciously conceived goal and is accompanied with an
awareness of the necessary means and consequences. It implies decision
making ability, intention and responsibility' (Jaspers, 1997). Hence,
theories of will have implications for notions of moral responsibility,
for what being an agent entails and for any description of guilt, shame
and punishment. Frith (2013) in his account of volition distinguishes
between a first-­person and third-­person perspective. In the first-­person
perspective, the experience of volition includes a vivid sense of agency
that relies on prior expectations and sensations associated with
movement and that is imbued with feelings of responsibility and the
possibility of alternative courses of action with the potential for
regret given the nature of outcomes. The third-­ person perspective
regards volitional behaviour as internally generated and ultimately
unpredictable because it is not determined by immediate environmental
contexts. There are more modern attempts to clarify and delineate the
phenomenology of will. Metzinger (2006) makes the point that the
experiential content of will is fundamentally difficult to pin down,
what he terms thin and evasive characteristics of the phenomenal content
of will. By this, he means the fact that 'will' lacks sensory
concreteness unlike, say, vision or taste; that the awareness of the
process of 'willing' something is intermittent and not functionally
stable; that episodes of 'will' are not temporally segmented and are
inherently fuzzy; and finally that the intended goal of 'will' is often
less than clear. To amplify these points, Bayne and Levy (2006) wrote:
We typically experience our actions as purposive. We do not simply find
ourselves walking towards a door and, on the basis of this, form the
belief that we must be intending to open it; instead, we experience
ourselves as walking towards the door in order to open it. The sense of
goal-­directedness can operate at a number of levels. For example, one
might experience oneself: walking towards a door in order to open it;
opening the door in order to feed

282

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

the dog; and feeding the dog in order to keep him quiet. The
phenomenology of a single action can include the nested purposes for
which the action is being performed. The range of definitions and
understandings of the various terms underlines the intrinsic complexity
of the subject area and the current absence of a unifying theory or
model for making sense of the subject.

Abnormalities of Need, Instinct, Motivation and Will In terms of the
self-­description of the subject, any of the following phenomenological
abnormalities resulting in observed disturbance of volition may occur.
There may be a disturbance of need, which may involve hunger, thirst,
exploratory behaviour or sleep. An absence of hunger can result in
anorexia occurring in chronic physical illness, an increase in hunger
causing hyperphagia in Kleine--Levin syndrome and a perversion in pica.
Abnormality of thirst can take the form of increased thirst in
lithium-­induced polydipsia (diabetes insipidus) or of compulsive water
drinking in psychosis (Singh et al., 1985), which can result in
hyponatraemia. Abnormality of exploratory behaviour can take the form of
diminution, which is manifest as lack of curiosity and exploration of
the environment. This can be found in schizophrenia and depression.
Exploratory behaviour can be increased in mania. Abnormalities of sleep
are common and varied. There are different patterns of insomnia,
including initial insomnia, which is more often associated with anxiety-­
based disorders, and early-­morning wakening, which is characteristic of
depression. Hypersomnia can occur in narcolepsy, Kleine--Levin syndrome
and Pickwickian syndrome. Abnormality of drive can involve diminution,
increase or perversion. Diminution of drive towards primary needs occurs
in schizophrenia and depression and is probably indistinguishable from
abnormalities of need. It is manifest as an absence of the activating
tension that initiates behaviour and is observable as apathy.
Exacerbation of drive to satisfy sexual need is most prominent in mania
but can occur as part of Kleine--Levin syndrome or, indeed, after
acquired brain injury or in L-­dopa-­induced hypersexuality in Parkinson's
disease. If drive determines strength and

selectivity of goal of behaviour, then perversion of drive will include
such conditions as fetishism. Abnormality of motivation may involve
diminution or exacerbation. In schizophrenia and depression, the
pleasurable intrinsic motivation that acts as incentive for behaviour
may be lost. This is most accurately described as anhedonia, the absence
of pleasure in relation to usually pleasurable activities. In mania, it
may be increased so that mundane activities become unduly fascinating
and rewarding. Disorder of motivation can also be understood as
involving the abnormalities of reasoning, justification and explanation,
as described in the psychoanalytical literature. This is outside the
scope of this book. Disturbance of will can be manifest as loss of
volition. As Jeannerod (2006) put it, disorder of volition should only
refer to those pathologic conditions in which the ability to make
choices, to express preferences, or possibly to experience pleasure and
freedom in making these choices or expressing these preferences is
affected. This can take the form of impairment of the will to act in
schizophrenia and severe depression. It is difficult to distinguish
between absence of need, drive, motivation or will. The observable end
result is lack of action in the absence of any motor abnormality
impairing action. Other abnormalities of will include indecisiveness in
depression, ambivalence or ambitendency in schizophrenia. These
abnormalities have, at their core, contrasting conceived goals with
oscillating decision making that is observable as indecision or
alternating and contrasted motor behaviours. Passivity experiences are
by definition abnormalities of volition (Box 18.1). Failure of volition
as a result of inability to experience pleasure, that is, as a result of
anhedonia has been discussed elsewhere (Chapter 16). ORGANIC CAUSES
Biological drives such as appetite, sleep and thirst are located
anatomically in and around the midbrain. Localized disease in this area,
of either a structural or biochemical nature, is therefore likely to
result in disturbance of drive and hence volition. Hormonal, metabolic
and neurophysiologic mechanisms affect volition. Thus the need for food,
expressed in hunger and resulting in seeking food, is affected by the
state of fullness of the gastrointestinal tract, by the secretion of

18 Disorders of Volition and Execution

BOX 18.1 CLASSIFICATION OF ABNORMALITIES OF NEED, DRIVE, MOTIVATION AND
WILL Abnormalities of Need Appetite • Absence in anorexia • Increase, as
hyperphagia in Kleine--Levin syndrome • Perversion in pica Thirst •
Increase in diabetes insipidus, resulting in polydipsia and in
compulsive water drinking, resulting in hyponatraemia Exploratory
Behaviour • Decrease in schizophrenia and depression • Increase in mania
Sleep • Decrease in anxiety and depressive disorders • Increase in
hypersomnia in Kleine--Levin syndrome and Pickwickian syndrome
Abnormalities of Drive • Decrease in schizophrenia and depression •
Increase in mania • Perversion in fetishism Abnormalities of Motivation
• Diminution, resulting in anhedonia in depression and schizophrenia •
Increase in mania Abnormalities of Will • Absence or loss, resulting in
apathy in schizophrenia and depression • Oscillating will, resulting in
indecisiveness, ambivalence or ambitendency • Anomalous will in
passivity experiences and made actions

insulin from the pancreas and by sensory innervation of the gut wall, as
well as by regulation in a putative 'appetite centre'. Physical
illnesses have both a specific and a generalized effect on volition.
Excessive appetite (bulimia) may occur with conditions such as tumour
affecting the hypothalamus and result in gross obesity, obesity may be
associated with hypoventilation and excessive sleeping (hypersomnia) in
the Pickwickian syndrome (Burwell et al., 1956), periodic somnolence and
intense hunger with voracious overeating occur in the Kleine--Levin
syndrome (Critchley, 1962). Excessive thirst and fluid intake
(polydipsia) occur with disease of the posterior pituitary or the kidney
(nephrogenic diabetes

283

insipidus, for example, with lithium treatment). Loss of appetite
(anorexia) may occur with localized disease of the midbrain, resulting
in severe cachexia; however, weight loss is much more common as a
general feature of any severe debilitating physical illness. DISTURBANCE
OF VOLITION IN SCHIZOPHRENIA In schizophrenia, the disturbance of
volition is much more at the level of motivation or will than of need.
There may be abnormality of appetite with polyphagia and consequent
obesity, as occurs in some patients with chronic schizophrenia; however,
this is not usual. Patients with schizophrenia who believe that their
food is being poisoned may refrain from eating as a consequence; that
is, of course, a deliberate act of will. The more conspicuous
disturbance, however, is loss of volition that results in withdrawal
from normal social interaction, for instance, lack of motivation to
obtain and continue in employment or diminished sexual drive resulting
in decreased fecundity, especially in male patients with schizophrenia.
This symptom was described by Bleuler (1911) as disturbance of
initiative, according to Lehmann (1967). It is also recognized among the
so-­ called negative symptoms of what Crow (1980) has designated type 2
schizophrenia. The negative traits---emotional apathy, slowness of
thought and movement, underactivity, lack of drive, poverty of speech
and social withdrawal---are a major barrier to effective rehabilitation
in chronic schizophrenic patients (Wing, 1978). Although positive
symptoms such as delusions, hallucinations and thought disorder are more
conspicuous, especially in the earlier stages of a schizophrenic
illness, the prognosis is probably affected to a greater extent by the
loss of volition. Andreasen (1982, 1989) has developed an instrument for
measuring the negative symptoms of schizophrenia, the Scale for the
Assessment of Negative Systems. It is clear that the patient's quality
of life and that of their carer are impaired by the consequences of
these negative symptoms, especially flatness of affect and loss of
volition. What is not so clear is whether they have a subjective
awareness of these symptoms or whether they suffer as a result of them.
Selten et al. (1993) developed a self-­rating scale, the Subjective
Experience of Negative Symptoms, to measure

284

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

the subjective experience of affective flattening, alogia, avolition and
apathy, anhedonia and asociality and impaired attention; the scale looks
at awareness, causal attribution, disruption and distress. DISTURBANCE
OF VOLITION IN MOOD DISORDERS Abnormalities of volition in affective
illnesses are associated with abnormality of activity, retardation being
prominent in depression and overactivity in mania. In depression,
motivation is impaired rather than will. A severely depressed managing
director continued to worry about their plans for their company, but
they found themselves unable to make themselves do anything about it.
Loss of motivation occurs alongside loss of other affect. Anhedonia (see
Chapter 16), or loss of ability to experience enjoyment, is a prominent
symptom in depressive illness (Snaith, 1993) that also occurs in
schizophrenia. Depressed patients normally describe loss of interest in
their previous hobbies and enjoyments in life. This anhedonia can be
construed as

Frig hte n

Eas

hat fw

eo

ed ily g ets and ann frus oyed Ca trat nm ed ake peo ple lau gh Is l ike
a fa nta sy Co nfid ent , in vin cib le Ca nc har mp eop le Ca nc onv
inc ep Life eop le and sou l of the par ty

Other self

to d o

A lo ner sur Un

De pre

sse d

Self

part of the loss of motivation to carry out these activities. Such
patients also describe lack of appetite and loss of all interest in
food; this may result in marked loss of weight. A 45-­year-­old male
patient, previously highly successful as a salesman, developed severe
and persistent depressive symptoms (Sims, 1994). As a result, 2 years
before admission he had left his job, his home, his wife and his two
children and drifted around the country, being admitted for short
periods of time to several psychiatric hospitals. He described his
subjective state: 'I feel very anxious, uncomfortable and depressed. It
is like having the same person in the same body as me. It is like two
different people inside one body. One person is holding back -- that's
like me. The other person is trying to let go -- the other is different,
quite strong'. 'Me' was described as 'frightened, depressed, unsure',
and the 'other person' as 'confident, affable, a great salesman'. 'Self'
and his 'other self' are compared in Fig. 18.2. When he was healthy, he
was energetic,

Fig. 18.2 'Myself and my other self.'

18 Disorders of Volition and Execution

an extrovert and able to function well in a pressured situation. When he
became depressed, he was miserable, unsure of what to do, frightened and
lacking in all energy for any sort of activity. When depressed, he saw
'self' as being his real identity and 'other self' as 'like a fantasy'.
In mania, commonly there is increased activity, a subjective feeling of
greater energy, effectiveness and self-­confidence; such a person may
initiate all sorts of new projects. Manic patients are prone to drink
too much alcohol, but they do not usually overeat, perhaps because they
are readily distracted and tend to interrupt their meals with other new
enterprises. Such people describe it as being easy to make decisions,
and their flight of ideas results in starting many tasks that they do
not carry through to completion. An elderly man lived with his wife in a
late 19th-­ century semidetached house in an industrial town. The first
intimation of his manic illness was a desperate cry for help from his
wife to their family doctor that he was destroying the house. At
interview at home, one could see his many uncompleted building projects
in the house. He said that he had thought it improper that every time
his wife went to the toilet, she should have to go through the backyard,
where she could be seen by the neighbours. He had therefore knocked a
hole in the wall between the kitchen and toilet to give internal access.
Before he could get round to tidying the brickwork and putting in a new
door, he had realized that the electric wiring was very old and so he
had removed all the cables from the ground floor of the house. He was
thinking next of renewing the wiring, but then decided that his wife
would like a brand new bathroom. It was at this point that his wife
realized that he was ill and consulted their doctor.

Impulsive and Aggressive Acts The term impulsivity is usually reserved
for maladaptive behaviour. The behaviour universe thought to reflect
impulsivity encompasses actions that appear poorly conceived,
prematurely expressed, unduly risky or inappropriate to the situation
and that often result in undesirable consequences. When such actions
have positive outcomes, they tend not to be seen as signs of impulsivity
but as indicators of boldness, quickness,

285

spontaneity, courageousness or unconventionality (Daruna and Barnes,
1993). Eysenck (1993) distinguishes between impulsivity and
venturesomeness as follows: 'Our concept of impulsiveness and
venturesomeness can best be described by analogy to a driver who steers
his car around a blind bend on the wrong side of the road. A driver who
scores high on Imp never considers the danger he might be exposing
himself to and is genuinely surprised when an accident occurs. The
driver who scores high on Vent, on the other hand, considers the
position carefully and decides consciously to take the risk.' Impulsive
acts are 'executed forcefully with no deliberation or reflection, under
the influence of a compelling pressure that restricts the subject's
freedom of will. Because reflective control or consideration is lacking,
the consequences of such acts are not thought out or taken into
consideration' (Scharfetter, 1980). It will be seen that this is not an
all-­or-­nothing phenomenon. Voluntary inhibitions will be present to a
varying extent from completely preventing the act, modifying it or
delaying it to not existing at all when the act takes place
unrestrained. In the past two decades or so, there has been increasing
interest in impulsivity as a concept as well as in defining a number of
impulse control disorders. Impulsivity is seen as a predisposition
towards rapid, unplanned reactions to internal or external stimuli and
without due regard to the potential negative consequences of these
actions for the impulsive individual or for others (Moeller et al.,
2001). The essential elements are predisposition, rapid unplanned action
and lack of regard for consequences. This suggests that the term is now
being used to identify a trait rather than isolated behaviour that is
associated with an episode of illness. The current psychological
literature, in turn, focuses on behaviourist concepts that are derived
from experimental animal models. These schemes identify the features of
impulsivity as: • perseverance of behaviours despite punishment, •
preference for a small but immediate reward over a delayed larger
reward, and • making premature responses or being unable to prevent a
response in a response disinhibition attentional paradigm. Once again,
these conceptualizations of impulsivity suggest that impulsivity is a
trait.

286

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

On the other hand, the older psychiatric literature focused on impulsive
behaviour as part of episodes of illness: 'of all the morbid desires,
the violent impulse \[my emphasis\] to muscular activity, to bodily
movement, is particularly to be noticed, as it is seen, especially in
states of mania, as a constant necessity to restless motion hither and
thither, beating about, screaming, etc., a state which frequently
involves the injury and destruction of what is within reach of the
patient, without his having any definite purpose in doing so' and 'the
involuntary nature of these acts; the patient often complains that he
cannot resist the desire; and further these acts have something
instinctive in the manner in which they show themselves; they come on in
fits with lucid intervals, they are frequently accompanied by other
symptoms of derangement' (Griesinger, 1845). Bleuler (1911)
distinguishes between impulsive acts and compulsive acts: 'The action
appears to him as something beyond his voluntary control ... The patient
does something he does not want to do; however he does not offer any
resistance.' Thus, in this view, it is resistance to the impulse to act
that defines compulsion. Disorders of impulse control include impairment
of control resulting in disinhibition and can be manifest in acquired
brain injury, schizophrenia, mania, episodic dyscontrol syndrome and
antisocial and emotionally unstable personality disorders. Excessive
control of impulses can result in inhibited behaviour and lack of
spontaneity present in anxiety-­related disorders including avoidant
personality disorder. Aggression is defined as 'a verbal or physical
attack on other living creatures or things' (Scharfetter, 1980), and
aggressiveness as a readiness to be aggressive. In general ethologic
terms, this is required by animals for survival and by humans to cope
with individual conflicts and problems in their society. However, in a
more restricted psychopathologic sense, aggression involves deliberate
or reckless damage and destruction and is accompanied by negative
emotions such as anger, fear, despair, spite or rage. The two concepts
of aggression that Scharfetter contrasts are an innate drive and an
acquired response. The former theory is followed both by ethologists
such as Lorenz (1963) and in classical psychoanalysis in the writings of
Freud and of Adler (1929); if aggression is an innate drive, it must
find some form of expression.

Learning theory would suppose that aggression is an acquired reaction in
response to external stimuli, especially the expression of others'
aggressive behaviour, and it is reinforced by the success it achieves.
Examples of impulsive acts follow: We had a party. On the way home I was
seized by an idea out of the blue -- swim across the river in your
clothes. It was not so much a compulsion to be reckoned with but simply
one, colossal, powerful impulse. I did not think for a minute but jumped
straight in ... only when I felt the water did I realize it was most
extraordinary conduct and I climbed out again. The whole incident gave
me a lot to think about. For the first time something inexplicable,
something quite sporadic and alien, had happened to me. Jaspers (1997)

A 19-­year-­old was hospitalized for mutism. She sat motionless for
prolonged periods, disinterested in her surroundings, although she
appeared alert ... She ate and moved slowly but was not stiff. On the
second day, suddenly and without warning, she leapt from the chair and
grabbed the throat of a passing therapist, severely damaging the
therapist's thyroid. Fink and Taylor (2003)

He complained of headaches, was irritable, and occasionally exploded in
a rage with minimal or trivial precipitants. Destruction of property
occurred, including holes punched in walls and furniture broken plus
poorly coordinated assaults on family members and some neighbours.
Benson and Blumer (1982)

Although impulsivity is often demonstrated by aggression, this is not
invariably the case. Gambling, misuse of substances, sexual acts
associated with disinhibition and stealing are but some of the
behaviours that can occur impulsively. PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF IMPULSIVE AND
AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOUR Criminal acts may arise from delusions of one kind
and another, from hallucinations of the various senses, from loss of
control, which may act in various different ways; the most difficult
point of all to decide upon is

18 Disorders of Volition and Execution

the so called impulsive insanity, in which a patient loses self-­control,
and commits an act, the details of which he remembers, but which he
truthfully says he was unable to prevent. Such insane impulses
undoubtedly do occur, and I have been consulted by patients who have
told me that loss of control of this kind would come upon them like a
storm, and that they would seek shelter anywhere to avoid the danger
which might arise to themselves or others. It is simple enough when
these impulses occur in persons who have suffered from mental
unsoundness, but it is much more difficult when the only evidence of
insanity is the existence of these impulses; for it may be said that
they are but the result of uncontrolled pleasure of power, which is
common to all. I should hesitate before accepting impulses, unless I had
evidences of insanity in other members of the family, or neuroses such
as neuralgia or epilepsy in the patient himself. Savage (1886)

There is nothing that is likely to result in referral to psychiatric
services more quickly than the public exhibition of inexplicable
impulsive and aggressive acts. Also, there is nothing more likely to be
labelled as madness by the lay public. In practice, such public
behaviour is quite commonly associated with mental illness. In a study
of mentally disturbed people coming to the attention of the police,
there was a tendency for such people to create their disturbance near
the city centre rather than at the periphery. Of the situations
resulting in the involvement of the police, assault and damage were
frequent, but it was the bizarreness of the behaviour that marked the
person as being mentally ill; for example, a man who proffered a
windscreen wiper as fare for travelling on a bus or a woman who
presented herself mute at a hostel. On subsequent admission to the
hospital, diagnosis was predominantly of psychotic illness (57%), with
schizophrenia accounting for 40% (Sims and Symonds, 1975). Excessive
aggression, and especially unprovoked inappropriate or misdirected
aggression, is much more often presented for psychiatric evaluation than
a pathologic lack of aggressive behaviour. However, the latter may also
be a manifestation of illness. Excessive aggression may be considered
both in relation to the underlying psychiatric illness and according to
the specific nature of the behaviour.

287

DIMINISHED AGGRESSION Decreased aggressiveness may accompany reduced
drive; it is seen sometimes in organic, psychotic and psychogenic
disturbance. It is frequently associated with apathy in acute organic
disorders such as encephalitis or in progressive dementia, although
irritability and fractiousness may also occur. Generalized debilitating
physical illness is normally accompanied by listlessness and apathy. In
schizophrenia, aggression is usually markedly reduced, with lack of
volition and failure to initiate any directed activity; however,
unprovoked violence may also occasionally occur. Also in depressive
psychosis, reduced aggression is much the most common presentation;
however, homicide, quite often associated with suicide, is certainly
described among severely depressed individuals with depressive
delusions. A consistently low level of aggressiveness may occur as a
personality characteristic, for example, with dependent disorder of
personality. It may be seen as part of a neurotic reaction or during
adverse life situations, for instance, with the grief of bereavement or
the unhappiness of feeling lonely. A certain degree of aggression is
necessary for many of the social activities of normal life, and its
absence impairs functioning. Pathologic lack of aggression is closely
associated with disorder of volition.

Disturbance of Movement and Behaviour Movement and behavioural
disturbances may have crucial diagnostic significance, especially when
there is difficulty with verbal explanation. However, as the emphasis of
this book is on subjective description of abnormality, these disorders
are discussed only briefly. The distinction between movement and
behaviour is arbitrary, as will be shown, especially when schizophrenia
is considered. DISTURBANCE OF MOVEMENT AND GESTURE The term movement can
be defined as the changing of position in space and is aligned to the
term locomotion, which implies the act or ability of an organism to
transport or move itself from one place to another. There are a number
of other associated terms including action and behaviour. Action is the
process of doing

288

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

something, usually voluntarily, and behaviour consists of an organism's
external reactions to its environment. In cognitive psychology it refers
to the organism's response given the inputs from the environment through
the senses and the requirement to act upon its environment via effector
(motor) systems. Behaviour can be influenced by culture, attitudes,
emotions, values, ethics, persuasion, coercion and personal
constitution. It is important to distinguish between voluntary and
involuntary movement. Voluntary movements have intended goals, that is,
they are conscious and deliberate and can be regarded as actions.
Involuntary movements, on the other hand, are spontaneous and often
automatic. Associated movements such as swinging of the arms during
walking is an example of involuntary movements. Eye blinking and some
gestures are other examples. Gestures are little studied but are defined
by David McNeill (1992) as 'the movements of the hands and arms that we
see when people talk'. According to McNeill, gestures are the
spontaneous, involuntary creation of individual speakers and are tightly
intertwined with spoken language in time, meaning and function. In this
regard, they are an integral part of language as are words, phrases and
sentences. There are different types of gestures including iconics,
metaphorics, beats, cohesives and deictics. Iconic gestures refer to
gestures that have a pictorial aspect representing from the speaker's
point of view a dynamic image concurrently with meaning expressed in
words. Metaphoric gestures refer to gestures that are similar to iconic
gestures except that the pictorial content represents an abstract
concept rather than a concrete object or event. Beats refers to gestures
that seem like the beating of musical time, moving along the rhythmical
pulsation of speech usually in the form of the flick of the hand or
finger up and down or back and forth. Cohesive gestures serve to tie
together thematically related but temporally separated parts of
discourse. And deictic gestures are the familiar pointing that function
to indicate objects and events in the concrete world but are also used
when there is nothing objectively to point at. It is important to
emphasize how interwoven are speech and gesture. As McNeill (2005) puts
it, 'synchronized speech and gesture events comprise

virtually unbreakable psycholinguistic units.' The strength of the
speech--gesture bond is manifest from the observations that (1) delayed
auditory feedback does not interrupt speech--gesture synchrony, (2)
gesture inoculates against stuttering and (3) the congenitally blind
make gestures to other blind people. Furthermore, McNeill (2005) argues
that the integration of gesture with language is an essential part of
the machinery that was selected in evolution. In other words, gesture is
not a behavioural fossil, an add on to language or an enhancement, but
rather it is an indispensable part of language. This is demonstrated by
the fact that individuals with amelia (congenital absence of arms)
perform gestures with their phantom limbs, and Ian Waterman who had a
sudden and total deafferentation of his body from the neck down had
preserved gesture morphokinetic accuracy in the presence of topokinetic
accuracy. His gestures were co-­expressive and synchronized with speech.
Finally, gestures are not signs, salutes or so-­called emblems. They are
frequent and accompany approximately 90% of utterances, and they seem to
occur in similar form across cultures. There is a gesture continuum
running from spontaneous gesticulation (what I have been describing
above) through to emblems (conventionalized signs such as thumbs up) to
pantomime (obligatory absence of speech) and to sign language (McNeill,
2005). Formal aspects of gestures include (1) timing, synchronization
and co-­expression with speech; (2) morphokinesis which is the shape of
gestures in terms of hand forms and use of space; (3) topokinesis, which
is the location of the hands relative to each other, including but not
restricted to the approach of one hand by the other; (4) character
viewpoint and (5) observer viewpoint. I have given a relatively detailed
description of the formal aspects of gestures above because this subject
is little taught or discussed in psychiatry, yet there are reports of
abnormalities of gesture and movement in psychiatric disorders with
little by the way of introduction of the basics of the subject (see
later). Movement may be increased or speeded up or reduced or slowed
down, or it may show various qualitative abnormalities. Some of these
disorders

18 Disorders of Volition and Execution

of movement are involuntary and are appropriately regarded as
neurologic, some are voluntary but carried out unconsciously and some
are deliberate actions (of the will). The words used mostly describe the
objective characteristics of the action to an outside observer, not the
subjective experience of the actor. These disorders of movement are now
considered briefly, starting with abnormalities of increased
movement---agitation and hyperactivity, and decreased
movement---retardation. The movement disorders of some psychiatric
conditions are then described. There are psychiatric sequelae of primary
movement disorders including parkinsonism, and often there is disorder
of movement associated with conditions that are primarily psychiatric.
Agitation

Agitation implies mental disturbance causing physical restlessness and
increased arousal; it is phenomenologically a description of a
subjective mood state associated with and resulting in physical
expression. The patient may describe their affect as 'feeling agitated',
and both they and the external observer see motor restlessness as being
logically connected with this. It is demonstrated in many mental states;
pathologically, it may occur with affective psychoses, with
schizophrenia, with organic psychosyndromes such as senile dementia or
with neurotic and personality disorders, especially states of anxiety.
Agitation is often a symptom of physical illness, for example,
hyperthyroidism or hypoparathyroidism. It is an important component of
some states of severe depressive illness. Although retardation is more
commonly seen with 'endogenous depression' or melancholia, agitation may
occur, either without retardation in alternating phase with retardation,
or concurrently with retardation in a mixed affective state. Agitated
depression is an old term for one variant of a severe depressive episode
with or without psychotic component. It is alternatively known as
melancholia. The practical clinical importance of this mood state ensues
from the fact that, whereas suicidal impulses may be prevented from
expression by retardation, agitation with restlessness may render such
behaviour more likely. An early response to treatment after
electroconvulsive treatment or effective antidepressant medication

289

may result in the patient becoming less retarded and therefore at
greater risk of suicide. Hyperactivity

This describes the state in which there is increased motor activity,
possibly with aggressiveness, over-­ talkativeness or uncoordinated
physical activity. The term is descriptive of behaviour rather than of a
subjective psychological state. Restlessness is poorly defined in the
psychiatric literature and has diverse and multitudinous causes (Sachdev
and Kruk, 1996). Restless hyperactivity or hyperkinesis may occur with a
variety of different physical assaults on the brain but is especially
prominent as a sequela to head injury in children in whom it may be
associated with impulsive disobedience and explosive outbursts of anger
and irritability (Black et al., 1969); it is also associated with
childhood epilepsy when there is brain damage. Over recent years, the
condition of attention deficit/ hyperactivity disorder (ADHD),
previously described as occurring only in children, has been diagnosed
in adults; the childhood disorder does sometimes persist into adult
life, but the prevalence of the disorder in adulthood is low compared
with that in childhood (Sachdev, 1999). There is a pattern of persistent
inattention in all areas of life, overactivity with fidgeting and
restlessness and impulsivity with impatience and difficulty in delaying
responses. These psychological characteristics result in disturbed
behaviour in all areas of life. In adult life, there are persistent
difficulties in relationships, usually a poor work record and sometimes
also a criminal record. The individual is particularly distractible and
prone to be disruptive in a group setting. Considerable comorbidity in
children occurs with conduct disorder, oppositional deficit disorder,
mood and anxiety disorders and mental retardation (Biederman et al.,
1991). Between 30% and 70% of children who are diagnosed as having ADHD
will continue to show symptoms of the condition as adults (Bellak and
Black, 1992). In a study of adults with ADHD, both genders had the
manifestations of the condition but females who, unlike the situation in
childhood, were in the majority had higher rates of depression, anxiety
disorders and conduct disorder than normal control subjects (Biederman
et al., 1994). This is clearly

290

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

a condition to which those practising in general adult psychiatry will
have to pay more attention. Retardation

Retardation has two quite different meanings in psychiatry. Motor
retardation, the sense in which it is used here, implies slowness of the
initiation, execution and completion of physical activity; it is
frequently associated with retardation of thought, for example, in
severe depressive illness. The patient subjectively describes themself
as having difficulty with thinking--- 'my thoughts are slowed up'---and
with initiating and carrying out spontaneous activity. Retardation is so
prominent a symptom of the severe endogenous type of depression that in
the past it was used to name the condition, retarded depression. There
is restricted movement, a static posture of dejection and decrease of
muscular tone. Gesticulation is reduced, as is the emotional component
of facial expression. Retardation with slowness of motor activity is
also seen with other causes of mental slowness, as in various organic
psychosyndromes and with physical illnesses. The extreme of
retardation---no voluntary movement at all---is known as akinesis and
occurs with muteness in stupor. Disorder of Movement in Schizophrenia

For the sake of convenience, three types of abnormality may be
recognized in schizophrenia: isolated abnormalities of movement and
posture, which are now discussed; more complex patterns of disordered
behaviour, described later in the chapter; and the presumed effects on
movement of the antipsychotic drugs, which are often used in large
dosages and for a long time in schizophrenia. Extrapyramidal side
effects are described later in this chapter, but brief mention should be
made of the neuroleptic malignant syndrome with rapid onset of severe
generalized muscular hypertonicity with hyperpyrexia and akinetic mutism
and autonomic disturbance; death occurs in about 15% of sufferers
(Kellam, 1987). Some of the odd motor disorders that occur are described
first, and then the disturbances of chronic schizophrenia are mentioned.
Isolated Disorders of Movement and Posture

Catatonia means a state of increased tone in muscles at rest abolished
by voluntary activities and thereby

distinguished from extrapyramidal rigidity. The syndrome catatonic
schizophrenia was originally described by Kahlbaum (1873) and is
characterized by the presence of the motor disorders described
subsequently. In reviewing Kahlbaum's concept, Johnson (1993) considers
catatonia, the 'tension insanity', to be a neuropsychiatric syndrome
caused by a large variety of organic disease processes manifesting as
catalepsy with an abnormal mental state. It is difficult to classify the
precise nature of the odd and abnormal posture in catatonic
schizophrenia. Waxy flexibility (flexibilitas cerea) and psychological
pillow occur but are both rare conditions. In waxy flexibility, when the
limbs of the patient are put into any posture by the interviewer they
will be retained in that position for a sustained period (a minute or
more). Psychological pillow, when the supine patient's head is
maintained a few inches above the bed, may continue for hours. In
stereotypy, a bizarre uncomfortable-­looking posture also may be retained
for some hours. The varied symptoms of catatonia always involve motor
activity and posture. There may be hyper-­or hypoactivity, mutism,
stereotypical posturing and movement, waxy flexibility, stupor and
uncontrollable excitement (Fink, 1993). Some variants of catatonia are
lethal (pernicious) catatonia, with high fever, rigidity and extreme
hyperactivity and/or stupor; neuroleptic malignant syndrome, with
rigidity, fever, autonomic instability and stupor, associated with the
use of antipsychotic drugs; periodic catatonia, characterized by periods
of excitement followed by catatonic stupor; manic excitement, with
confusion; and stupor in the context of delirium. It is now recognized
that catatonic movement disturbance is present in disorders other than
schizophrenia and has been most recently identified in
anti-­N-­methyl-­D-­aspartate receptor encephalitis and in self-­injurious
behaviours in autistic spectrum disorder in childhood (Fink, 2013).
There are two types of abnormal movement in schizophrenia: idiosyncratic
voluntary movements, or mannerisms, and spontaneous involuntary
movements. Mannerisms are shown in odd, stilted, voluntary movements and
patterns of behaviour. The patient may claim to be unaware of these acts
or explain them in terms of his delusions. It is sometimes difficult to
distinguish mannerisms from the purposeless movements or postures that
are

18 Disorders of Volition and Execution

not goal-­directed but are carried out in an unvarying way in any
individual patient. It is important to attempt to distinguish either of
these types of movement from the abnormal movements of parkinsonian
syndromes, which occur quite frequently in patients with schizophrenia
who are treated with typical (first-­ generation) antipsychotic drugs.
Grimacing is a common feature in schizophrenia; Schnauzkrampf (literally
'snout spasm') is a characteristic facial expression in which the nose
and lips are drawn together in a pout. Abnormality of the execution of
movement may result from the internal experiences of the schizophrenic
patient. At times, they resist stimuli, for example, the interviewer's
request to raise their right arm, and show negativism. At other times,
they demonstrate excessive compliance amounting to automatic obedience:
not only do they raise their right arm, but they raise the other arm and
then stand up with both arms raised in dramatic response to the request.
This alternation of cooperation and opposition produces the diffident,
unpredictable behaviour of ambitendency. Obstruction is the equivalent
in the flow of action to thought blocking in the flow of speech. While
carrying out a motor act, the patient stops still in their tracks. After
a pause, they continue with the act, or they may proceed to do something
else. Usually, they cannot account for their obstruction but may do so
in terms of passivity: 'my action was stopped'. Abnormal movements
manifested in the interaction with the interviewer may reveal excessive
cooperation or opposition. Mitgehen, echopraxia, automatic obedience and
advertence are symptoms of excessive cooperation. In Mitgehen
(literally, German, 'to go with'), the interviewer can move the
patient's limbs or body by directing them with fingertip pressure, 'as
if one was moving an anglepoise lamp' according to Hamilton (1984). When
the patient imitates the interviewer's every action, the symptom is
called echopraxia; this occurs despite the doctor asking them not to.
Automatic obedience denotes a condition in which the patient carries out
every command in a literal, concrete fashion, like an automaton. To
demonstrate these symptoms of excessive cooperation, the patient should
be asked to resist the interviewer. Mitgehen and echopraxia still occur.
This inability to accede to instructions to resist occurs with forced
grasping. The interviewer presents their hand to be shaken but at the

291

same time asks the patient not to shake it; every time the patient does
shake hands, the interviewer has great difficulty in getting their hand
away again. In advertence, the patient turns towards the examiner when
they address them; again, it has a bizarre, exaggerated and inflexible
quality. Opposition occurs as a negative response to all the approaches
of the examiner. The patient resists the examiner when the latter
attempts to move their limbs. When addressed, the patient turns away---
aversion. Negativism is not just a refusal by the patient to do what
they are asked: it is an active process of resisting all attempts to
make contact with them. Opposition may sometimes manifest itself in
muteness. The abnormal movements of schizophrenia are strongly
suggestive of neurologic abnormality. In the opinion of Cutting (1985),
the movement disorders of schizophrenia including catatonia,
perseveration, involuntary movements and disturbed voluntary movements
may, in some cases, represent a disorder of conation resulting from
hemispheric imbalance. Whether or not Cutting's formulation is correct,
there is continuing interest in abnormal movements in schizophrenia that
are distinct from those arising from treatment with antipsychotic drugs.
Indeed, as we see later, there is a variety of subtle and not so subtle
movement disturbances prevalent in schizophrenia that apparently predate
treatment. Disorder of Gesture in Schizophrenia

There appears to be impaired gestural language in schizophrenia. This
takes the form of impaired ability to demonstrate a gesture after
instruction, the so-­called pantomime skill and additionally an
impairment in the ability to mimic demonstrated gestures. These problems
emphasize impairments in fundamental gestural communicating skills
(Walther et al., 2013, 2020). Nonetheless, the skills described in these
studies only refer to certain aspects of gesture, namely pantomime
skills and the ability to copy demonstrated gestures. It is important to
point out that these studies do not refer to the detailed findings and
underpinning methodology or concepts described previously, as enunciated
by David McNeill. At the most they are investigations of what McNeill
terms emblems and pantomime.

292

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

It is noteworthy that Walther and colleagues (2015) specifically refer
to gestures that may substitute or aid language comprehension whereas
McNeill refers to gestures as integral to language and not add-­ons.
Walther and colleagues also use the terms transitive and intransitive
gestures. By this they mean that transitive gestures are those that are
tool related, simulating specific action in the absence of the object
(signalling the use of a comb or a hammer), and intransitive gestures
are those overlearned gestures that convey emblematic information such
as signalling stop or waving goodbye. Furthermore, Walther and
colleagues argue for a relationship between gestures and praxis. Praxis
is the ability to perform skilled and/or learned limb actions, and
impairments in this domain are demonstrated by inability to use tools
appropriately or inefficiently. These authors claim that praxis also
involves the ability to perform meaningful gestures. In their studies
they show 18% of patients with schizophrenia had frequent gesture
errors, usually minor and including hesitant or sloppy, low-­amplitude
performance, timing errors as well as inaccurate spatial configurations.
Wüthrich and others (2020) show that the impairments in gesture are
present in first-­degree relatives of patients with schizophrenia
although not to the same extent as in the patients. Furthermore, they
also demonstrated that, despite improvements in psychopathology, there
was deterioration in gesture deficits over time in patients with
schizophrenia. There is evidence that patients with schizophrenia
require more time for gesture planning and gesture performance. The
patients also presented increased movement per item of gesture and these
differences in comparison to the control group were more apparent in the
pantomime domain rather than in the imitation domain (Dutschke et al.,
2018). In addition, there was evidence that gestural deficits were
associated with other abnormalities of motor behaviour such as
psychomotor slowing, poor postural control and neurological soft signs.
There is evidence that impairments of gesture performance in patients
with schizophrenia are associated with impairments of gestural knowledge
and with impairments in nonverbal social perception. The

underlying abnormality linking these deficits appear to be impairments
in frontal and motor function (Walther et al., 2015). Young people at
high risk of psychosis are reported to have substantially more mismatch
and retrieval gestures than controls (Millman et al., 2014). In this
context speech--gesture mismatch refers to gestures that are
semantically incongruent with the corresponding lexical content, for
example, an individual speaking about 'climbing up a ladder' whilst
simultaneously pointing downwards. A retrieval gesture refers to
situations when during a pause, an individual is searching for a word or
phrase and for example while saying 'The sandwich was almost the very
best I ever tasted, it reminded me of that time I was travelling and ate
in that café in ...\[gesture such as grasping air, creating a baton
movement\]...France!' In summary, gesture deficit is an emerging area of
investigation in psychiatry. The studies to date have failed to fully
grasp the detail and complexity of what is already known about gesture
in the nonclinical setting. Motor Disorders in Chronic Schizophrenia
Motor disorder in the mentally ill may be ascribed to the abnormal
mental state, to treatment or to independent undiagnosed neurologic
disease (Rogers, 1985). Rogers studied motor disorders in 100 extremely
chronic psychiatric inpatients, 59 women and 41 men, with a mean length
of current admission of 42.8 years. Ninety-­two of these patients had had
a diagnosis of schizophrenia at some time, and all of them showed some
current motor disorder. Motor disorders are listed under the 10
categories of Table 18.1. These abnormalities are as follows: •
Difficulty with the initiation, efficient execution of or persistence
with purposive motor activity, resulting in restriction of the motor
repertoire available • Speech production with 22 patients usually mute;
25 never initiating spontaneous conversation; 53 showing 'outbursts' of
shouting, singing or talking and 51 inarticulate or barely audible at
interview • Posture and tone with a tendency to flexion associated with
varying degrees of rigidity and typically affecting the head or neck

18 Disorders of Volition and Execution

TABLE 18.1 Percentage of Patients with Current Motor Disorder (n = 100)
Motor Disorder Purposive movement Speech production Posture Tone Facial
movements or postures Head, trunk or limb movements Activity Stride or
gait Eye movements Blinking

Percentage of Whole Group 97 95 86 85 74 67 64 48 48 38

From Rogers, D., 1985. The motor disorders of severe psychiatric
illness: a conflict of paradigms. Br. J. Psychiatry 147, 221--232, with
permission.   

• Abnormal movement or postures of orofacial muscles with rapid or slow
contractions of different muscle groups • Abnormal movements of the
head, trunk or limbs, which might be brief, jerky and semipurposive in
quality • Abnormal activity might occur in outbursts or continuously
with behaviour, such as hitting at, stamping, touching or following
other people • Stride or gait might show shuffling, slowness, not
swinging the arms, or turning with head and neck 'in one piece' •
Conjugate deviation of the eyes, often up and laterally with deviation
of the head in the same direction • Blinking markedly increased or
decreased in rate, sometimes in 'bursts' Ninety-­eight of these 100
patients had had motor disorder recorded before 1955, before there was
any treatment with neuroleptic drugs. There was considerable variability
between the type of motor disorder recorded before 1955 and observed
currently. Disorder of eye movements, tone, gait and blinking were
recorded less commonly in the past. Movement disorder in this group of
patients was compared between those currently receiving neuroleptic
drugs; those not treated for 1 month, 1 year or 5 years; and those never
having received medication. With the possible

293

exception of facial movements, which were more frequent in those having
received treatment in the past year, there was no difference in the
frequency of abnormal movements. In addition to the description of
abnormal movements just described, overflow movements have been noted.
These are defined as involuntary movements that tend to accompany
voluntary movements and are recognized as neurological soft signs and
are thought to be characteristic of schizophrenia (D'Agati et al.,
2012). Motor Disorder in Brain Disease The disturbance of basal ganglia
resulting in parkinsonian symptoms has two main causes of relevance to
psychiatry: Parkinson's disease and symptoms secondary to exposure to
psychotropic drugs. Some of the motor symptoms are similar in these two
conditions, but the overall clinical picture differs. Parkinson's
Disease. In Parkinson's disease, as well as motor symptoms, there are
often sensory, autonomic and psychiatric abnormalities. Parkinson's
original description in 1817 implied an absence of perceptual (as
opposed to sensory) abnormality and does not comment on 'psychiatric
status', which would then have been an unknown concept. Primary or
secondary sensory abnormalities may occur, and there may be autonomic
under-­or overactivity. However, the most conspicuous symptoms are in
motor function: slowing of emotional and voluntary movement (Walton,
1985); muscular rigidity; akinesia; tremor; and disorders of gait,
speech and posture. There is not necessarily any mental change; however,
depression is very common (Mindham, 1970), intellectual deterioration
may occur and personality disorder is sometimes associated. Psychotic
episodes have also been described. A graphic description of the symptoms
and subjective experience of parkinsonism is given in Sacks' account
Awakenings (1973). Extrapyramidal Side Effects of Antipsychotic Drugs.
The extrapyramidal movement disorders produced by antipsychotic drugs
are described in detail by Marsden et al. (1986). These include
drug-­induced parkinsonism with the classic parkinsonian triad of muscle
rigidity, tremor and akinesia and such symptoms as abnormalities of
gait, speech and posture; excessive salivation; difficulty with
swallowing; the

294

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

characteristic facies; and greasy skin. Akinesia varies from being mild
in degree (dyskinesia) with an immobile, blank, expressionless face;
limited movements with loss of such associated motor activity as the
arms swinging when walking; and lack of spontaneity to more severe and
generalized absence of movement--- this may start soon after beginning
antipsychotic medication. Cogwheel rigidity and 'pill rolling' of the
fingers, tremor of the hands or periorbital tremor may occur but are
less common than akinesia. Extrapyramidal side effects of antipsychotic
drugs are listed in Box 18.2 (Gervin and Barnes, 2000). Akathisia, or
motor restlessness, occurs frequently. There is a subjective experience
of motor unease with a feeling of being unable to sit still and a need
to get up and move about and to stretch the legs, tap the feet, or rock
the body (Box 18.3). Akathisia may occur at the same time as the
akinesia of drug-­induced parkinsonism and presents the contrasting state
of a subjective urge to move and physical impairment of movement. To
distinguish akathisia from other causes of inner restlessness,
restlessness of the legs should be found to be especially prominent.
Acute dystonic reactions include a variety of intermittent or sustained
muscular spasms and abnormal postures. Dystonia has been defined as 'a
syndrome dominated by sustained muscle contractions, frequently causing
twisting and repetitive movements, or abnormal postures' (Fahn et al.,
1987). There may be protrusion of the tongue, grimacing, oculogyric
crises, blepharospasm, torticollis, opisthotonus and other hyperkinetic
exaggerated actions of the face, head, trunk or limbs. Owens (1990) has
considered the major clinical types of dystonia to be acute dystonias,
oculogyric spasms, focal dystonias including torticollis, blepharospasm,
writer's cramp and other occupational dystonias, and laryngopharyngeal
dystonia, segmental dystonias, generalized dystonia, drug-­ related
(symptomatic) dystonias and psychogenic dystonia. The frequency of
association of so-­called tardive dyskinesia, in which repetitive,
purposeless movements of the facial muscles, mouth and tongue occur
(sometimes with choreoathetotic limb movement and respiratory grunting)
with exposure to psychotropic drugs is disputed. There is no doubt that
faciobuccolinguomasticatory dyskinesia occurs in many

BOX 18.2 EXTRAPYRAMIDAL SIDE EFFECTS OF ANTIPSYCHOTIC DRUGS Acute
Movement Disorders • Parkinsonism • Acute akathisia • Acute dystonia
Chronic Movement Disorders • Tardive dystonia • Chronic akathisia •
Tardive dyskinesia From Gervin, M., Barnes, T.R.E., 2000. Assessment of
drug-­related movement disorders in schizophrenia. Adv. Psychiat. Treat.
6, 332--341, with permission.

BOX 18.3 SUBJECTIVE COMPONENTS OF AKATHISIA Commonly Experienced • Sense
of inner restlessness • Mental unease • Unrest or dysphoria • Feeling
unable to keep still • An irresistible urge to move the legs • Mounting
inner tension when required to stand still Less Commonly Experienced •
Tension and discomfort in the limbs • Paraesthesiae and unpleasant
pulling or drawing sensations in the muscles of the legs From Gervin,
M., Barnes, T.R.E., 2000. Assessment of drug-­related movement disorders
in schizophrenia. Adv. Psychiat. Treat. 6, 332--341, with permission.

chronic, especially elderly, psychotic patients on neuroleptic
medication, but is it causally connected with drugs? The word tardive is
used because the syndrome was considered to be a late consequence of
drug treatment; however, there are cases described in patients who have
never received neuroleptic drugs, and the precise relationship remains
to be elucidated---it may be simply a late stage of the illness. In
practice, the extrapyramidal symptoms secondary to medication are
difficult to evaluate and measure by severity---problematic in
accounting for aetiologically but important in the satisfactory
treatment of the patient. At a 3-­year follow-­up of psychiatric patients
receiving antipsychotic medication, orofacial dyskinesia increased from
39% to 47% of the sample, with a few individuals developing the disorder
anew

18 Disorders of Volition and Execution

295

and a few remitting (Barnes et al., 1983). There was an association
between dyskinesia and age older than 50 years and the presence of
akathisia, but none with the use of antipsychotic drugs; in fact, those
on high dosage were unlikely to have the condition. These dyskinesic
symptoms also occur in Huntington's chorea and in senile chorea.

An interesting study compared adult sufferers with depressed adults and
normal controls on measures of obsessionality, depression and anxiety
(Robertson et al., 1993). Gilles de la Tourette syndrome sufferers
scored as high as depressives on measures of obsessionality but were
intermediate between them and normal subjects for both depression and
anxiety.

Huntington's Chorea This is a hereditary condition inherited as a
Mendelian dominant, which manifests usually in early middle life and is
characterized by choreiform movements and dementia. Jerky, rapid,
involuntary movements start in the face and upper limbs. Dysarthria and
disorders of gait can also occur before intellectual impairment
develops. The progressive dementia, with inertia and apathy, may be
accompanied by irritability and occasional outbursts of excited
behaviour. Occasionally the dementia occurs as the first sign of the
illness. Various psychological abnormalities have been described in the
prodromal stage before manifestation of chorea and dementia. These may
be anxiety, reactive depression and the features of personality
disorder, especially antisocial behaviour. It is not known if this is
truly an early symptom of the illness or part of the psychosocial
reaction to this appalling and doom-­ laden condition.

DISTURBANCE OF BEHAVIOUR There is no clear demarcation between
disturbance of movement and behaviour, and the distinction made here is
arbitrary. Thus with parkinsonism and, to an even greater extent,
catatonic schizophrenia, an individual abnormal movement may be
elaborated into an abnormal pattern of behaviour.

Tics and Gilles de la Tourette Syndrome Tics are rapid, repetitive,
coordinated and stereotyped movements, most of which can be mimicked,
and are usually reproduced faithfully by the individual (Macleod, 1987).
In Gilles de la Tourette syndrome, multiple tics are accompanied by
forced vocalizations that often take the form of obscene words or
phrases--- coprolalia (Lishman, 1997). The condition starts in
childhood, before age 16; there are multiple motor tics and unprovoked
loud utterances that may amount to shouted obscenities. The condition is
more common in boys than in girls and usually starts between the ages of
5 and 8 years with simple tics. The vocalizations usually begin as
unrecognizable sounds but may progress to 'four-­ letter' swear words.
Both tics and utterances are likely to occur with emotional stress. The
subject often tries desperately hard not to vocalize the word, and this
may be accompanied by considerable anxiety.

Behavioural Disorders of Schizophrenia

Disorder of movement is characteristic of catatonia, in which the
patient may become immobilized in one attitude because of increased
muscle tone at rest; it is usually seen in schizophrenia but has been
described with frontal lobe tumour and some other organic conditions.
There are abnormalities of posture and of movement, frequently shown in
the actions made in relation to another person---the interviewer. Thus
in waxy flexibility the posture of the limbs is so described because it
is maintained indefinitely after being manipulated into that attitude by
the observer. Behaviour, the composite of movements, may also be
abnormal, and this is characteristic of catatonic schizophrenia, with
more than just one isolated abnormality of posture. It has often been
commented that the incidence of catatonic schizophrenia has markedly
declined. However, Mahendra (1981) has queried the existence of
catatonic schizophrenia as a condition with classic Kraepelinian
schizophrenic features and catatonia in the same patient. He believes
many of the patients with catatonia suffered from neurologic disease,
perhaps postencephalitis, after epidemic and endemic viral infections.
If this were so, the presumed association between schizophrenia and
catatonia was accidental. One could make a vast catalogue of the bizarre
and sometimes unpleasant behaviour demonstrated by patients with chronic
schizophrenia, but this would never be exhaustive. Certain types of
behaviour pattern are described here with examples.

296

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Schizophrenic stupor occurs, although rarely. The patient is mute and
akinetic, although from the alertness of the eyes and the occasional
excursion into abrupt activity or speech, they are clearly conscious. It
can be distinguished from depressive or manic stupor by the obvious
abnormalities of mood in the stupor of the affective psychoses. A
patient with schizophrenia sat mute and motionless with her arms held in
stereotyped, twisted posture for hours at a time. This symptom is almost
never seen nowadays with adequate treatment of schizophrenic symptoms.
Negativism, as described earlier under motor disorders, may influence
the behaviour of the patient substantially. A schizophrenic patient was
interviewed in prison. He was brought to the door of the doctor's
examination room. When the doctor invited him to enter, he took two
steps backwards. To get him to enter, the doctor had to ask him to go
away. When the doctor put his hand out to shake hands, the patient put
his hand behind his back and reversed behind the desk. He would not sit
down until he was politely asked to remain standing. Excitement may
occur associated with catatonia but can also be seen without this state;
sometimes a patient is mute and motionless for a time and then
unpredictably becomes overactive and aimlessly destructive. A chronic
schizophrenic patient, normally calm, would suddenly and unaccountably
rush headlong across the ward and charge head first into the wall. On
occasion this behaviour was directed at a window, and he had cut himself
severely on the glass in the past. Impulsive behaviour may not always be
manifested as excitement; it may be carried out in contradistinction to
the patient's habitual behaviour. A normally respectable and tranquil
elderly female patient would suddenly and unpredictably make sexual
assaults on unsuspecting male visitors to the hospital. Hoarding is a
common feature in chronic schizophrenics and is not confined to those in
institutions. A patient used to put insects and pieces of rubbish found
around the hospital, such as cigarette ends and small pieces of string,
into a small tin. She did not appear to use her assortment but was
constantly collecting more items.

Water intoxication due to grossly excessive water drinking has been
described in schizophrenia, although it may occur, but much less
commonly, in almost any psychiatric disorder (Ferrier, 1985). The
symptom is potentially dangerous (Singh et al., 1985) and can even
result in death from hyponatraemia often associated with convulsions.
The water drinking may be explained by the patient in terms of
delusions, or there may be a failure of the normal thirst--fluid intake
homeostatic mechanism or both. There may be mannerisms and
idiosyncrasies of behaviour as well as of single movements. One totally
mute male chronic patient used to retire to the top of a remote
staircase above a ward where he ingeniously and delicately cut keys that
would open any door in the hospital. He would exchange these for
cigarettes with other patients, despite remaining utterly silent. Gross
self-­neglect has been described, especially among elderly reclusives who
have sometimes been well educated, intelligent and wealthy. This
syndrome has, rather unfortunately, been called the Diogenes syndrome
after the Greek philosopher who rejected social norms and worldly
luxuries (Clark et al., 1975). An early case was described by Daniel
Hack Tuke (1874) of a rich old man, 'mad Lucas', who died in a filthy
state half-­naked and alone in his decaying mansion. He remained as a
hermit for 25 years, continually terrified that his younger brother
would seize his house and kill him. He and similar recluses usually
suffer from a paranoid schizophrenic illness, although the term Diogenes
syndrome itself is purely descriptive (Aquilina, 1992). Multitudinous
other forms of abnormal behaviour are manifested in schizophrenia.
Flagrant stealing occurs sometimes with a manneristic flavour, such as
the hospital inpatient who 'stole' bedsprings, much to the discomfort of
the occupants. Unprovoked aggression and 'nastiness' sometimes occur.
Patients may exhibit childish naughtiness or grotesque dirtiness, and
self-­ immolation and suicide have occasionally occurred. This may take
place in obedience to auditory hallucinations or as part of a delusion.
One patient regularly heard a voice that instructed him to jump out of
the window; he was prevented on many occasions but finally took the
reinforced window frames with him in leaping to his death.

18 Disorders of Volition and Execution

Behavioural Signs of Emotional Disturbance

Psychiatrists have learned that they must listen to their patients; it
is also important to observe them and form useful, testable hypotheses
from these observations. Internal medicine has, traditionally, made
great diagnostic use of physical signs, and psychiatry also would do
well to use behavioural signs as possible indicators, not positive
proof, of psychological disturbance. Trethowan (1977) has noted, in
addition to the evidence for catatonia and parkinsonism, the following
behavioural, as opposed to neurologic, signs, which may be of value
diagnostically in psychiatry: • The handshake may be limp and lifeless,
as in the asthenic adolescent or sufferer from simple schizophrenia or
vice-­like as in mania. The hand of the schizophrenic patient with
negativism may be withdrawn when the interviewer offers theirs, or the
manic or personality disordered patient may insist on shaking hands,
contrary to the doctor's intention. • Other forms of hand behaviour that
may be significant include bitten or picked nails, clenched hands with
blanched knuckles and restless fidgeting with the fingers; all of these
may indicate acute or chronic anxiety. Heavily cigarette-­stained fingers
obviously reflect the large number of cigarettes smoked and the extent
to which each cigarette is consumed; this may demonstrate a degree of
tension. Tremor may reveal alcoholism with alcohol withdrawal. In
'Trethowan's wedding ring sign', a woman during history taking
unconsciously reveals her marital difficulties by constantly sliding her
wedding ring on and off her finger. • The feet may be used for restless
pacing in agitated depression. Akathisia, as described earlier, with an
inability to keep the feet still may indicate excessive medication with
phenothiazine drugs. • Depressive facies and posture sometimes lead to
diagnosis before the patient speaks. The patient may be slumped in the
chair with a fixed expression of unmitigated grief on their face and
prominent 'crow's foot' between the eyebrows. Trethowan (1977) has
commented on the greatly reduced blink rate with severely retarded
depressives.

297

• Clothing in mania may be distinctive and suggestive of both the
diagnosis and the hypereroticism that sometimes accompanies it. Hair,
makeup and dress may be unequivocal demonstrations of manic mood: 'Thus
Stella, normally a fairly modest girl, appeared one day in my consulting
room wearing an all-­black outfit consisting of net stockings, a mini-­
skirt which extended barely to vulva level, and a top with so deep a
cleavage as almost to expose her umbilicus. As if this were not enough,
she had stuffed her red, white and blue jubilee panties into the top of
her open handbag, for all to see' (Trethowan, 1977). • Stroking the
cheek may be an indicator of emotional distress, as described by Gillett
(1986): 'During the initial history taking and assessment, there was one
over-­ridingly important emotive issue, as evident from observation of
her body language signs. When she spoke of her son dying at the age of
three, her body stiffened, the muscle tension in her face increased, as
if trying to stifle expression, lacrimation increased (though only just
perceptibly), and her voice rose in pitch and wavered. She then lightly
stroked her right cheek with the tip of her fore-­finger, as if wiping
away an imaginary tear---a common sign which usually indicates a desire
to cry at the same time as a wish not to show it'. This list is far from
exhaustive. The point is that clinicians should use their eyes and their
previous clinical experience to form hypotheses in observation that they
can subsequently test in the history or examination of mental state.
REFERENCES Adler, A., 1929. Problems of Neuroses. Kegan Paul, Trench,
Trubner, London. Andreasen, N.C., 1982. Negative symptoms in
schizophrenia. Definition and reliability. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 39,
784--788. Andreasen, N.C., 1989. Scale for the Assessment of Negative
Systems (SANS). Br. J. Psychiatry 155 (Suppl. 7), 53--58. Aquilina, C.,
1992. Diogenes syndrome. Psychiatr. Bull. 16, 573. Barnes, T.R.E.,
Kidger, T., Gore, S.M., 1983. Tardive dyskinesia: a three year follow-­up
study. Psychol. Med. 13, 71--81. Bayne, T., Levy, N., 2006. The feeling
of doing: deconstructing the phenomenology of agency. In: Sebanz, N.,
Prinz, W. (Eds.), Disorders of Volition. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
pp. 49--68. Bellak, L., Black, R.B., 1992. Attention-­deficit
hyperactivity disorder in adults. Clin. Ther. 14, 138--147. Benson,
D.F., Blumer, D., 1982. Psychiatric Aspect of Neurologic Disease,
vol. 2. Grune and Stratton, New York.

298

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Berrios, G.E., 1996. The History of Mental Symptoms. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge. Biederman, J., Faraone, S.V., Spencer, T.,
Wilens, T., Mick, E., Lapey, K.A., 1994. Gender differences in a sample
of adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Psychiatry Res.
53, 13--29. Biederman, J., Newcorn, J., Sprich, S., 1991. Comorbidity of
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder with conduct, depressive,
anxiety, and other disorders. Am. J. Psychiatry 148, 564--577. Black,
P., Jeffries, J.J., Blumer, D., Wellner, A., Walker, A.E., 1969. The
post-­traumatic syndrome in children. In: Walker, A.E., Caveness, W.F.,
Critchley, M. (Eds.), The Late Effects of Head Injury. Thomas,
Springfield. Bleuler, E., 1911. Dementia Praecox or the Group of
Schizophrenias (J. Zinkin, Trans, 1950). International Universities
Press, New York. Burwell, C.S., Robin, E.D., Whaley, R.D., Bickelmann,
A.G., 1956. Extreme obesity associated with alveolar hypoventilation --
a Pickwickian syndrome. Am. J. Med. 21, 811--818. Clark, A.N.G.,
Manikar, G.D., Gray, I., 1975. Diogenes syndrome: a clinical study of
gross neglect in old age. Lancet 1, 366--373. Critchley, M., 1962.
Periodic hypersomnia and megaphagia in adolescent males. Brain 85,
627--656. Crow, T.J., 1980. Molecular pathology of schizophrenia: more
than one disease process? Br. Med. J. 280, 66--68. Cutting, J., 1985.
The Psychology of Schizophrenia. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh.
D'Agati, E., Casarelli, L., Pitzianti, M., Pasini, A., 2012. Neuroleptic
treatments and overflow movements in schizophrenia: are they
independent? Psychiatry Res. 200, 970--976. Daruna, J.H., Barnes, P.A.,
1993. A neurodevelopmental view of impulsivity. In: McCown, W.G.,
Johnson, J.L., Shure, M.B. (Eds.), The Impulsive Client: Theory,
Research and Treatment. American Psychological Association, Washington,
DC. Dutschke, L.L., Stegmayer, K., Ramseyer, F., Bohlhalter, S.,
Vanbellingen, T., Strik, W., Walther, S., 2018. Gesture impairments in
schizophrenia are linked to increased movement and prolonged motor
planning and execution. Schizophr Res 200, 42--49. Epistle of Paul the
Apostle to the Romans, 1662. Chapter 7, 18--23, Authorized Version.
Eysenck, S.G.B., 1993. The 17: development of a measure of impulsivity
and its relationship to the superfactors of personality. In: McCown,
W.G., Johnson, J.L., Shure, M.B. (Eds.), The Impulsive Client: Theory,
Research and Treatment. American Psychological Association, Washington,
DC. Fahn, S., Marsden, C.D., Calne, B., 1987. Classification and
investigation of dystonia. In: Marsden, C.D., Fahn, R.S. (Eds.),
Movement Disorders 2. Butterworth, London. Ferrier, I.N., 1985. Water
intoxication. Br. Med. J. 291, 1594--1596. Fink, M., 1993. Catatonia: a
treatable disorder, occasionally recognized. Direct. Psychiatry 13,
1--8. Fink, M., 2013. Rediscovering catatonia: the biography of a
treatable syndrome. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. Suppl. 441, 1--47. Fink, M.,
Taylor, M.A., 2003. Catatonia: A Clinician's Guide to Diagnosis and
Treatment. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Freud, S., 1915.
Instincts and their vicissitudes. Translated by J Riviere and General
Editor J Strachey. In: Collected Papers, vol. 4. Hogarth Press, London.
Frith, C., 2013. The psychology of volition. Exp. Brain Res. 229,
289--299. Gervin, M., Barnes, T.R.E., 2000. Assessment of drug-­related
movement disorders in schizophrenia. Adv. Psychiat. Treat. 6, 332-- 341.

Gillett, R., 1986. Short term intensive psychotherapy -- a case history.
Br. J. Psychiatry 148, 98--100. Griesinger, W., 1845. Mental Pathology
and Therapeutics (C.L. Robertson, J. Rutherford, Trans, 1882). William
Wood and Co, New York. Hamilton, M., 1984. Fish's Schizophrenia, third
ed. John Wright, Bristol. Henderson, S., 2005. The neglect of volition.
Br. J. Psychiatry 186, 273--276. Hull, C.L., 1943. Principles of
Behaviour. Appleton-­Century-­Crofts, New York. Jaspers, K., 1997. General
Psychopathology (J. Hoenig, M.W. Hamilton, Trans). The Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore. Jeannerod, M., 2006. From volition to
agency: the mechanism of action recognition and its failures. In:
Sebanz, N., Prinz, W. (Eds.), Disorders of Volition. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, pp. 175--192. Johnson, J., 1993. Catatonia: the tension
insanity. Br. J. Psychiatry 162, 733--738. Kahlbaum, K.L., 1873. Die
Katatonie, oder das Spannungs Irresein. In: Catatonia (Y. Levi, T
Pridan, Trans, 1973). Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. Kellam,
A.M.P., 1987. The neuroleptic malignant syndrome, so called: a survey of
the world literature. Br. J. Psychiatry 150, 752--759. Lehmann, H.E.,
1967. Schizophrenia. In: Freedman, A.M., Kaplan, H.I. (Eds.),
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore.
Lishman, W.A., 1997. Organic Psychiatry, third ed. Blackwell Scientific,
Oxford. Lorenz, K., 1963. On Aggression (M. Latzke, Trans, 1966).
Methuen, London. Macleod, J., 1987. Davidson's Principles and Practice
of Medicine, thirteenth ed. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh. Mahendra,
B., 1981. Where have all the catatonics gone? Psychol. Med. 11,
669--671. Marsden, C.D., Mindham, R.H.S., MacKay, A.V.P., 1986.
Extrapyramidal movement disorders produced by antipsychotic drugs. In:
Bradley, P.B., Hirsch, S.R. (Eds.), The Psychopharmacology and Treatment
of Schizophrenia. Oxford University Press, Oxford. McDougall, W., 1908.
An Introduction to Social Psychology. Methuen, London. McNeill, D.,
1992. Hand and Mind. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago. McNeill,
D., 2005. Gesture and Thought. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Metzinger, T., 2006. Conscious volition and mental representation:
toward a more fine-­grained analysis. In: Sebanz, N., Prinz, W. (Eds.),
Disorders of Volition. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 19--48. Millman,
Z.B., Goss, J., Schiffman, J., Mejias, J., Gupta, T., Mittal, V.A.,
2014. Mismatch and lexical retrieval gestures are associated with visual
information processing, verbal production, and symptomatology in youth
at high risk for psychosis. Schizophr. Res. 158 (1--3), 64--68. Mindham,
R.H.S., 1970. Psychiatric symptoms in parkinsonism. J. Neurol.
Neurosurg. Psychiatry 33, 188--191. Moeller, F.G., Barratt, E.S.,
Dougherty, D.M., Schmitz, J.M., Swann, A.C., 2001. Psychiatric aspects
of impulsivity. Am. J. Psychiatry 158, 1783--17817 93. Owens, D.G.C.,
1990. Dystonia -- a potential psychiatric pitfall. Br. J. Psychiatry
156, 620--634. Reid, T., 1863. In: Hamilton, W. (Ed.), The Works of
Thomas Reid. Maclachlan and Stewart, Edinburgh.

18 Disorders of Volition and Execution Robertson, M.M., Channon, S.,
Baker, J., Flynn, D., 1993. The psychopathology of Gilles de la
Tourette's syndrome: a controlled study. Br. J. Psychiatry 162,
114--117. Rogers, D., 1985. The motor disorders of severe psychiatric
illness: a conflict of paradigms. Br. J. Psychiatry 147, 221--232.
Sachdev, P., 1999. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in adults
\[editorial\]. Psychol. Med. 29, 507--514. Sachdev, P., Kruk, J., 1996.
Restlessness: the anatomy of a neuropsychiatric symptom. Aust. N. Z. J.
Psychiatry 30, 38--53. Sacks, O.W., 1973. Awakenings. Duckworth, London.
Savage, G., 1886. Insanity and Allied Neuroses: Practice and Clinical.
Cassell, London. Scharfetter, C., 1980. General Psychopathology: An
Introduction. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Selten, J.P.C.J.,
Sijben, N.E.S., van den Bosch, R.J., Omloo-­ Visser, J., Warmerdam, H.,
1993. The subjective experience of negative symptoms: a self-­rating
scale. Compr. Psychiatry 34, 192--197. Sims, A., 1994. Myself and my
other self: the 'double phenomenon' in neurotic disorders. In: Sensky,
T., Katona, C., Montgomery, S. (Eds.), Psychiatry in Europe: Directions
and Developments. Gaskell, London. Sims, A.C.P., Symonds, R.L., 1975.
Psychiatric referrals from the police. Br. J. Psychiatry 127, 171--178.

299

Singh, S., Padi, M.H., Bullard, H., Freeman, H., 1985. Water
intoxication in psychiatric patients. Br. J. Psychiatry 146, 127--131.
Snaith, R.P., 1993. Anhedonia: a neglected symptom of psychopathology.
Psychol. Med. 23, 957--966. Trethowan, W.H., 1977. Psychiatry's physical
signs. World Med. 16, 19--21. Tuke, D.H., 1874. The hermit of red Coats'
green. J. Ment. Sci. 20, 361--372. Walther, S., Mittal, V.A., Stegmayer,
K., Bohlhalter, S., 2020. Gesture deficits and apraxia in schizophrenia.
Cortex 133, 65--75. Walther, S., Stegmayer, K., Sulzbacher, J., et al.,
2015. Nonverbal social communication and gesture control in
schizophrenia. Schizophr. Bull. 41 (2), 338--345. Walther, S.,
Vandellingen, T., Müri, R., Strik, W., Bohlhalter, S., 2013. Impaired
pantomime in schizophrenia: association with frontal lobe. Cortex 49,
520--527. Walton, J., 1985. Brain's Diseases of the Nervous System,
ninth ed. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Wing, J.K., 1978. Reasoning
about Madness. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Wüthrich, F., Pavlidou,
A., Stegmayer, K., et al., 2020. Nonverbal communication remains
untouched: no beneficial effect of symptomatic improvement on poor
gesture performance in schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res. 223, 258--264.

This page intentionally left blank

     

Chapter 19

Disorder of Aesthetic Perception and Praxis Chapter Outline Summary
Abnormal Aesthetic Perceptions Form Perception Aesthetic Adaptations
Abnormal Aesthetic Praxis

KEYWORDS Aesthetics Beauty Obsessive compulsive disorder Tourette
syndrome Body dysmorphic disorder Schizophrenia Mood disorder

Summary Abnormalities of aesthetic perception and aesthetic praxis are
yet to be fully recognized and described. This chapter introduces
concepts and develops the frameworks to further our understanding of
aesthetics and reviews some of the evidence for an evolutionary and
scientific basis of aesthetic perception and praxis. The newly emerging
findings of the relationship between psychiatric disorders and
fundamental aspects of aesthetic perception, including abnormalities of
symmetry, form and face perception, are discussed. The understanding of
how mood disorders impinge on the perception of landscapes is examined.
Finally, the rudimentary understanding of the impact of disease on the
production of visual art, particularly of how frontotemporal dementia
and primary progressive aphasia influence the production of visual art,
is described. As little as art is to be defined by any other element, it
is simply identical with form. Every other element can be negated in the
concept of form, even aesthetic unity, the idea of form that first made
the wholeness and autonomy of the artwork possible. Theodor Adorno
(1903--69), Aesthetic Theory (1997)

The beauty of art presents itself to sense, to feeling, to perception,
to imagination; its sphere is not that of thought, and the apprehension
of its activity and its 301

302

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

productions demand another organ than that of the scientific
intelligence...And lastly, the source of artistic creations is the free
activity of fancy, which in her imagination is more free than nature's
self. Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770--1831), Aesthetics: Lectures
on Fine Art (1975)

Aesthetics is concerned with the nature of beauty, the underlying
principles that determine why we come to find some things beautiful and
others unattractive or indeed, ugly. The subject is not restricted to
what influences our taste in matters of visual perception but also how
music, poetry, theatre and the physical environment affect us and how we
respond emotionally to engagement with these experiences. It is true
that visual perception, specifically the visual arts, have been
extensively investigated and will be the focus of this chapter. It is
not generally appreciated how fundamental matters of taste and
aesthetically pleasing perceptions are to human individual and social
life. Furthermore, the ways in which abnormalities of aesthetic
perception and practice are expressed in psychiatric disorders are
rarely discussed or investigated. In this chapter, I will introduce
relevant conceptual and empirical findings about aesthetic perception
and practice with a view to classifying and exemplifying abnormalities
of aesthetic perception and practice in psychopathology. The term
aesthetics itself derives from the Greek aistehetikos meaning aesthetic,
sensitive, sentient, pertaining to sense perception. This very clearly
puts aesthetics in the domain of perception. Nonetheless, studies of
aesthetics also focus on how artists imagine, create and perform art.
This means that aesthetics is also concerned with praxis, the practice
of art. It goes without saying that artists are as concerned with the
making of art as with what impact the artistic artefact will have on the
aesthetic judgement of the person who is engaging with the piece of art.
Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten (1714--62), a German philosopher, is
usually credited with the first definition of the term aesthetics as the
'science of sensible knowledge', and his preoccupation was to determine
the cognitive conditions for the appreciation of beauty, thereby laying
the foundations for the modern examination of the fundamental principles
and values

underpinning our appreciation of beauty. It is worth noting though that
discussions regarding the nature of beauty in the Western tradition go
back at least to Plato (428/427--348/347 BCE). Aristotle (384--322 BCE)
in Poetics applies the term mimesis to define what it is that
characterizes art and makes the point that it is rhythm, language or
harmony that either singly or jointly constitute mimesis. And, for
Aristotle, it is mimesis that distinguishes man from other living
creatures. Furthermore, the quality of a work of art is determined by
the structural union of its parts such that if any one part is displaced
or removed, the whole will be disjointed or disturbed. The problem with
Aristotle's approach is that there is no agreed feature that exemplifies
what harmony, for example, is or how to decide what structural union is.
This problem is true for other writers including Horace (65-­8 BCE) and
Longinus who do no more than give instructions on how to produce great
art, instructions that are, in the end, merely general principles that
are of little utility in practical life. Immanuel Kant (1724--1804), in
Critique of Judgment (1790/2000), wrote about the key distinguishing
features of the judgement of beauty. These were: •  A disinterested
approach to beautiful objects; and he meant by this that we take
pleasure in something because we find it beautiful rather than judging
it beautiful because we find it pleasurable. • Beautiful objects seem
universal and necessary by which is meant that beauty behaves as if it
were a universal and necessary property of an object, like its weight or
chemical composition, but that these properties are features of the
human mind as there is nothing in the object itself that makes it
beautiful. • Beautiful objects seem to be purposive but without purpose
and that they ought to affect us as if they had a purpose. Kant
identifies form as what is fundamental to aesthetic judgements, and form
refers to shape, arrangement and rhythm but excludes content such as
colour, tone, etc. This is the beginning of the attempts to define some
fundamental characteristics that may be said to underpin our judgement
of beauty. Kant's approach laid the groundwork for modern
conceptualizations of aesthetics and the nature

19 Disorder of Aesthetic Perception and Praxis

of beauty. There is a growing consensus that there is understandable and
discoverable basis to our responses to beautiful objects, and this is
the goal of scientific and evolutionary studies of aesthetics. Gustav
Theodor Fechner (1801--87) showed that the shape and dimension of
objects determine whether and how far we find them pleasing. For
example, he demonstrated that the golden ratio (0.62), which is the
ratio of a rectangle's width to length, was the most appealing to the
eye. He wrote: When an object of our contemplation undergoes random
variation in size and shape, then all things being equal, the mean
values seem to be preferred from the aesthetic point of view or appears
with the character of predominant pleasantness as the normal value in
comparison with the others, which, according to their degree of
variation from the mean, can appear less pleasing or, if certain limits
are exceeded, even displeasing. (Kirk, 2014). This approach suggests
that there are features that are intrinsic to visual objects that
influence our aesthetic responses, and that these features lie somewhere
between the simple and the increasingly complex. Following this
approach, Daniel Berlyne proposed a theory about the way in which
artworks arouse emotions by novelty, complexity, surprisingness,
uncertainty up and incongruity (Berlyne, 1971). This bottom-­ approach
culminates in Zeki's (1998) proposal that: (T)he general function of art
\[is\] a search for the constant, lasting, essential, and enduring
features of objects, surfaces, faces, situations, and so on, which
allows us not only to acquire knowledge about the particular object, or
face, or condition represented on the canvas but to generalize, based on
that, about many other objects and thus acquire knowledge about a wide
category of objects or faces. A full critical examination of Zeki's
proposal is outside the scope of this book (see Bergeron and Lopes,
2012). There is the sense in which features of objects in the external
world are judged to be pleasing, that is, to be beautiful because of
their interaction with aspects of neural and cognitive processing within
the visual cortex, and, as such, art evokes the sense of wonder, even of
sublimity by these intrinsic features. If it is accepted that the
foregoing is true, then Coss (2003) makes the point that there is a role
for natural selection on visual-­pattern recognition and

303

associated physiological arousal underpinning aesthetic perception. For
this to work efficiently, there must be (1) specificity of initial
pattern recognition, (2) recognition of visual-­pattern significance in
the appropriate organism--environment context, (3) emotional
significance that emerges in this context and (4) successful expression
of appropriate action in dealing with this visual pattern. Furthermore,
a taxonomy of aesthetic adaptations has been proposed (see Thornhill,
2003, for detailed discussion): • Aesthetic valuation of landscape
features • Aesthetic valuation of nonhuman animals • Aesthetic valuation
of acoustic behaviour of nonhuman animals • Aesthetic judgements arising
from daily or seasonal environmental cues that signal a need to change
behaviour • Aesthetic valuation of human bodily form • Aesthetic
valuation of social status cues • Aesthetic valuation of social
scenarios • Aesthetic valuation of skill • Aesthetic judgement of food •
Aesthetic judgement of ideas This taxonomy and proposed domains of
interest allow us to begin to consider what the nature of the
psychopathology of aesthetic perception may look like. Further
consideration of, for example, the nature of aesthetic valuation of
habitat affordances involves features of the habitat that are markers of
the physical environment that afford survival as refuge sites or
prospect sites. In this scheme, prospect refers to the ability to survey
the landscape and refuge to the ability to hide when in danger. The
presence of environmental structures that allow prospect views would
have increased the likelihood of spotting resources such as water and
food and of recognizing approaching threats such as predators, etc.
(Ruso et al., 2003). Landscape features that tend to be perceived and
assessed as beautiful include the perception of types of trees such as
acacias with broad moderately layered canopies as the most attractive
trees and of scenes with water that sparkles and ripples while
reflecting sunlight or moonlight being regarded as beautiful. These
features of water are

304

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

thought to be relevant to the perception of glossy and sparkling
surfaces as attractive (Coss, 2003). Sexual selection of aesthetic
preferences for male beards, male voice, facial attractiveness, female
hips and breasts have all been investigated. It is accepted that
symmetrical faces are rated as more attractive than asymmetrical ones,
and neotenic female faces are also rated as sexually attractive. The
role of a low female waist-­to-­hip ratio in mate choice is still
uncertain---this is indicative of a small waist and large hips, possibly
signalling the existence of significant energy reserves (Skamel, 2003).
Neonate features such as large eyes and a small nose convey an
exaggerated appearance of youthfulness, freshness, naïveté and openness
suggesting fitness as a beneficiary of resources. Hence the preference
for neotenic female faces. In addition to bodily traits that are
integral to the body, there are also controllable modifications of
appearance such as clothing, use of cosmetics, orthodontics, hair
styling and colouring, scarification, tattooing, body piercing, use of
jewellery, clothing, head and feet shaping during infancy, cosmetic
surgery and fattening or dieting that can alter judgements of physical
attractiveness (Cunningham and Shamblen, 2003). Ramachandran's universal
laws of aesthetics are an attempt to identify underlying principles that
determine what the features are that determine why particular visual
objects are aesthetically pleasing (Ramachandran and Seckel, 2014).
These laws underpin the appreciation of visual objects but profoundly
influence how artists construct their works. In other words, an
understanding of these implicit rules is at play in art practice. These
laws include (1) grouping in which there are groupings of items in
clusters of, for instance, a blue sky is reflected in the blue robes of
the people in a painting; (2) symmetry; (3) peak shift effect in which
the more an object resembles the underlying form the more pleasing it
is. This is exemplified in female figures that are more feminine than
real females by the exaggeration of breasts, hips and the typically
feminine triple flexion poise; (4) isolation, which is the
simplification of an object to mere part of it as a representation and
(5) perceptual problem-­solving, which is associated with the rewarding
discovery of a hidden object as in a puzzle.

Abnormal Aesthetic Perceptions FORM PERCEPTION Symmetry

The centrality of valuation of symmetry in the appreciation of beauty is
well established. The underlying rationale for its importance is yet to
be fully understood. There is the possibility that symmetry of the face
and body is a sign of physical fitness, including the absence of disease
and of infections, and a sign of normal early development. Secondly,
there is also the possibility that symmetry signals a distinction
between inanimate and animate objects. Radomsky and Rachman (2004) argue
that in obsessive compulsive disorder there is a compulsion to order and
arrange one's surrounding so as to avoid disorderly surroundings and to
ensure that objects are arranged in 'exactly the right way'. This
feature of obsessive compulsive disorder is thought to indicate a
heightened preference for symmetry. Patients often say that they need to
ensure that their belongings are in exactly the right place before they
can proceed with their day. In their study designed to develop a
psychometric scale, the Symmetry, Ordering and Arranging Questionnaire,
Radomsky and Rachman (2004) identified a number of items including: • It
is important that my belongings are placed in a symmetrical and evenly
distributed way. • The wall hangings (pictures, posters, etc.) in my
home must be exactly even or straight. • I feel compelled to arrange
objects so that they are balanced and evenly spaced. A 45-­year-­old
female patient could not leave her house for work in the morning until
she had ensured that the curtains were exactly perpendicular and the
edges were symmetrical and parallel to each other. This preoccupation
and compulsion meant that she was often late for work. Summerfeldt and
colleagues (2015) showed that individuals who scored highly on items for
a sense of incompleteness, better known as not-­just-­right experience
(including dissatisfaction with whether one's perceptions, actions or
intentions have been adequately achieved) have higher levels of
self-­perceived symmetry-­related concerns and behaviours and displayed
greater aesthetic sensitivity demonstrated by

19 Disorder of Aesthetic Perception and Praxis

heightened preferences for symmetry in images. These 'not-­just-­right'
experiences have also been reported in Tourette syndrome (Neal and
Cavanna, 2013). In Tourette syndrome this is exemplified by compulsions
involving counting, symmetry and 'just right' thoughts or actions
(Cavanna and Rickards, 2013). For example, a 25-­year-­old female patient
presented with the compulsion to intentionally move her other limb in
response to an involuntary tic in the first. This was intended to
'balance' the movements, illustrating the need for symmetry. Body
dysmorphic disorder is defined, in part, by recourse to the concept of
beauty and ugliness as it turns on the preoccupation with an imagined
defect in appearance that leads to significant distress, implicitly
because the defect is perceived as ugly, that is, not beautiful. Hence,
it is not surprising, perhaps, that it is in body dysmorphic disorder
that a heightened sensitivity to symmetry is most obvious. It is often
reported that patients with body dysmorphic disorder have a
preoccupation with 'uneven' or 'asymmetrical' eyebrows, eyes, hair or
other body areas (Hart and Phillips, 2013). So, for example, some
patients complain of asymmetrical beard growth, chin being too prominent
and asymmetrical, cheekbones being asymmetrical, one tooth larger than
another, etc. (Phillips, 2005). And it is not merely that there is a
preoccupation with symmetry but that there is also aesthetic
sensitivity, a combination of an ability to differentiate between
aesthetic proportions, heightened emotional response to beautiful or
ugly images, and aesthetic valuation comprising standards, images and
identity. Veale and Lambrou (2002) hypothesized that patients with body
dysmorphic disorder are more likely to have greater aesthetical
perceptual skills compared to other people and that this results in a
greater emotional response in reaction to their negative evaluation of
themselves in comparison with others. Lambrou et al. (2011) showed that
patients with body dysmorphic disorder were like a group of individuals
who had trained in art and design in having clear notion of the criteria
of beauty defined by symmetry, that they showed a greater awareness of
their aesthetic facial proportions and this facility extended to other
people's faces and to buildings too. In addition, patients with body
dysmorphic disorder and the art and design group, in this study,
displayed a higher attractiveness standard

305

probably due to their increased understanding of aesthetic proportions.
It is noteworthy that Hübner et al. (2015) did not find that patients
with body dysmorphic disorder have enhanced general aesthetic perceptual
sensitivity. Furthermore, Veale and colleagues (2002) reported that
patients with body dysmorphic disorder compared to other psychiatric
patients were five times more likely to have aesthetic interest and/or
skills. This relationship between body dysmorphic disorder and
heightened preference for symmetry and thereby to the notion of
'aestheticality' is drawn from Harris' notion of 'aestheticality' as a
trait that is linked to higher emotional response to beauty or ugliness
(Harris, 1982) and that has relevance in the context of plastic/cosmetic
surgery. In summary, obsessive compulsive disorder, Tourette syndrome
and body dysmorphic disorder are three conditions in which a heightened
aesthetic sensitivity seems to, at the least, play a part. For the
present, there are no reported phenomena that are based on a diminution
of aesthetic sensitivity. Shape of Objects

Zeki's proposal regarding the fundamental role of the visual perceptual
system to our perception and aesthetic evaluation points to the fact
that nonhuman objects in the world are likely to be evaluated as
beautiful based on their intrinsic features. Much of the neurology of
visual object perception deals with sensory awareness of objects,
perception of objects, their recognition including naming and ability to
use to the objects, in for example, visual agnosia.
Boutoleau-­Bretonnière et al. (2016) studied 15 individuals with probable
behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and compared them with 15
healthy adults with a view to investigate the emotional judgement of
artwork by patients with behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia.
The artwork targets were 32 abstract paintings. Patients with
behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia reported absent emotional
response to the artworks, and the paintings were more likely to be
judged ugly and unpleasant by the patients. The authors conclude that
patients with behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia have a
preserved ability to make aesthetic judgments but an inability to
experience

306

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

emotional response to artworks. There was a link between finding the
paintings as unpleasant and finding them ugly. Faces

The previous discussion with respect to symmetry concerns in obsessive
compulsive disorder, Tourette syndrome and body dysmorphic disorder
focused on judgements of beauty as determined by symmetry. It is notable
though that faces are not only evaluated with reference to symmetry to
determine their beauty but also to other features such as their
closeness to an averaged face. Thus in experimental studies,
participants preferred a composite averaged face to the faces of actual
individuals. This suggests that distinguishing features such as large
noses, etc. would be negatively evaluated. In addition to this, it is
also true that neotenic features such as large eyes and small chins are
preferred in females and, finally, that the absence of skin blemishes is
highly valued. Dentofacial aesthetics focusses on frontal aspects of the
face including the aesthetics of teeth, the smile, and the harmony of
the face as well the lateral aspect of the face as designated by the
face in profile. The features of relevance in lateral aspect include the
length of the nose, the prominence of the soft tissues of the chin, the
ratio of the nose to the lips and the inclination of the maxillary
incisors. Romsics et al. (2021) report that dental students showed a
preference for female faces with less prominent/slightly retruded chin
and an anteriorly shifted maxillary arch. As for the nose, the
preference was not in isolation for the length of the nose, but it was
the harmony of the nose and chin that overrode the importance of the
individual dimensions. Lambrou et al. (2011) demonstrated that in body
dysmorphic disorder, there was greater concern about the skin, whole
face, eyes, nose and hair on head compared with control groups comprised
of people with and without aesthetic training. In addition, there were
concerns too about calves, thighs, hips, bottom, waist/ abdomen,
breast/chest, back, shoulders, arms and hands but these individual areas
were only of significance when they were grouped into upper body, lower
body and shape of whole body (see later for further discussion about
evaluation of human bodily form). The subjective descriptions included
misshapen nose, hair never right, eyes too small, lines around the

mouth, crooked teeth, sunken cheeks, dark circles under the eyes, lips
too thin, etc. (Phillips, 2005). The important role of the skin in
determining the aesthetic value of the self is exemplified by the
statements made by dermatology patients in a study of body dysmorphic
disorder presenting to dermatology. Statements included 'Acne bothers me
a lot; in general, I feel ugly'; These spots make me ugly and I have low
self-­esteem; I don't want to go out'; 'Before there was no spot, and now
there is this horrible one on my face'; 'The lesions appear on the face,
they are ugly and everyone stares'; 'Wrinkles and blemishes really
bother me, I can't look in the mirror'; 'I have many wrinkles, my skin
is ugly'; 'I used to be beautiful, but now I'm old and I feel
ridiculous'; 'I don't like the wrinkles around my eyes, especially when
I smile' (Morita et al., 2021). These statements illustrate the
importance of what Ramachandran and Seckel (2014) refer to as the
'smoothness and suppleness of youthful oestrogen-­charged skin' and
departures from this aesthetic ideal is highly negatively valued.
Finally, neotenia can itself be a sought-­after ideal form. A young man
sought surgery from maxilla-­facial surgeons, requesting to have his
upper jaw reduced in size, because he believed that his upper jaw was
too prominent. He also requested that his low jaw be made less chiselled
and more rounded. In addition, he wanted his laryngeal prominence
reduced in size. The underlying desire was for androgyny, because it was
more aesthetically pleasing, but this desire did not arise either in the
context of gender dysphoria or homosexual preference. But perhaps even
more surprising is subjective descriptions of abnormal aesthetic
perception of the face and sometimes, too, of the body. This is
illustrated by statements such as the following: 'There's a clash
between what I see and what I think. I think my worries are ridiculous.
But I see it!' (italics in the original); 'I sometimes think I don't see
my face correctly, that I'm like my mother after she had a stroke'
(Phillips, 2005). AESTHETIC ADAPTATIONS Valuation of Landscape Features

The valuation of landscape features such as open ground that is sparsely
populated by trees with a wide canopy resembling the ancestral human
origins in

19 Disorder of Aesthetic Perception and Praxis

the East African savannah and with visible sources of water are
positively valued and regarded as beautiful. As described previously,
this is understood according to the Prospect and Refuge theory, as
probably due to the survival value of these landscape features. It is
well recognized that this sense of beauty can be attenuated or indeed
abolished in severe depression where the patients often remark that
looking at nature no longer provokes the usual sense of warmth, charm or
beauty as it previously did. In their narrative review of the term
anhedonia, De Fruyt et al. (2020) quote from classical descriptions of
depression in textbooks by Bevan Lewis, Kraepelin, Henderson and
Gillespie and Aubrey Lewis' classical description of melancholia to show
that the visual representation of the physical environment is
attenuated, lacking in vigour, and gives no ready delight to the
patient. This abnormality is best exemplified by Aubrey Lewis (1934):
\[I\]n a clinic such as that at Heidelberg, where most of the patients
are peasants from the Palatinate, or Baden, one is amazed at the
frequency with which depressive patients mention this failure to enjoy
the sight of their fields, the sky and trees and the flowers as one of
the most distressing of their symptoms, a deprivation most keenly felt
(my italics for emphasis). Aubrey Lewis includes this anomaly within his
description of feelings of unreality and depersonalization. De Fruyt and
colleagues (2020) include it within the ambit of anhedonia. What is
important is that the underpinning abnormality that is relevant here is
directly linked to the usual normative predisposition to evaluate
particular types of physical natural environments as beautiful and
evocative of pleasure. Valuation of Human Bodily Form

Much of the work on the aesthetics of bodily form examines the role of
evolution in determining what is perceived as physically attractive. I
have discussed the features of faces that are recognized as influencing
our perception of beauty. I now turn to the body. Cunningham and
Shamblen (2003) make the point that in females, visible breasts and hips
that convey reproductive health and strength and that suggest fitness to

307

fulfil sex responsibilities are recognized as important. In males, thick
eyebrows, a large chin and shoulders are important and senescence
features such as male pattern baldness, grey hair convey social
maturity, reduced competitiveness and fitness as a mentor. The absence
of senescence features increases romantic attractiveness. Anorexia
nervosa is perhaps a condition that has been most discussed with regard
to the aesthetic valuation of bodily form. For example, Julian Robinson
wrote, 'Today, in this ... quest for beauty and an admired social
identity, men and women of the Western world ... diet to the point of
anorexia, have parts of their intestines surgically removed, so as to
reduce the waistline and lower their caloric intake, or have their
buttocks, breasts, and thighs or nose reshaped' (Robinson, 1998). It is
important to recognize the role of culture in determining the
relationship between female body weight and curvaceousness (see
Cunningham and Shamblen, 2003, for a full discussion). Cultural
preferences for slenderness are associated with reliable and effectively
distributed food supply, with education and professional success, and
may also indicate sex ratios that suggest a poor marriage market for
females. Cunningham and Shamblen (2003) conclude that 'as long as the
job market is good, focusing on controllable aspects of one's life, such
as grooming oneself to be slender for one's career, seems more adaptive
than dressing for romantic partners who may not materialise'. In this
schema, some women emphasize their self-­control and de-­emphasize their
sexuality to the point of anorexia. It is in the misapprehension of body
size and overestimation of body weight and body form that abnormality of
aesthetic perception is most obvious in anorexia nervosa. Slade and
Russell (1973) showed that patients with anorexia nervosa overestimated
the width of their bodies in comparison with normal female controls and
that this attribute did not extend to the perception of physical
objects. Furthermore, this attribute was less pronounced in judging the
size of a female model, and there was no difficulty in estimating the
height of a model or their own height. The overestimation was true for
all bodily regions including face, chest, waist and hips. It is now
established that this tendency is not restricted to people with anorexia
nervosa (Cash and Deagle, 1997; Slade, 1988). What is more remarkable is
the degree that this overestimation flies in the face

308

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

of the physical reality of a malnourished and grossly underweight
person. One of Hilde Bruch's (2001) patients, Bert, was 180 pounds when
he decided to go on a diet.

aesthetics of masculine bodily form is probably relevant in muscle
dysmorphia, a condition in which disturbed body image is associated with
disordered eating and excessive exercising (see Chapter 14).

\[W\]hen his weight was down to one hundred twenty-­six pounds and
everybody admired him, said he looked great, something happened; he
suddenly could not see how he looked. Until then he had watched his size
dwindle and noticed that he looked slimmer from week to week. Now he
actually feared that he would get fat again, and he actually saw himself
larger, though the figure on the scale indicated that he had lost more
weight. He drastically cut down on his previous diet, stopped watching
the scale, and was frantically preoccupied with becoming fat again. He
claims that he saw himself swelling up.

ABNORMAL AESTHETIC PRAXIS The art of the mentally ill has been written
about, published and studied since Philippe Pinel (1745--1826) wrote
about two patients who drew and painted, in his Medical Treatise on
Mental Disorder or Mania in 1801 (Beveridge, 2001). Other contributors
to this subject include John Haslam (1764--1844), WAF Browne (1805--85)
and Cesare Lombroso (1835--1909). The question that the art of the
mentally ill raises, as Beveridge, puts is 'Is there anything
distinctive about the work of the mentally ill?' Various authors have
taken differing positions on this question. Paul Meunier (1873--1957),
writing under the pseudonym Marcel Reja, thought that the art of the
mentally ill was primitive in character, whereas Walter Morgenthaler
(1882--1965) thought that art by the mentally ill might assist our
understanding of the roots of creativity and Hans Prinzhorn (1886--1933)
argued that the artistic work of the mentally ill should not be examined
for diagnostic clues, but rather it should be recognized as works by
individuals.

There is a further aspect to the picture of anorexia nervosa, namely
that the dieting results in a prepubertal bodily form, and this
approximates the idealized form suggested by neoteny, even if it is a
markedly exaggerated pursuit. Writing about one of her patients, Hilde
Bruch (2001) reported: She was also troubled about seeing her body
change. From childhood on, she felt it was not 'nice' to look like a
woman, that her tissues would bulge, that the female body was not
beautiful. Her mother was in her forties when Joyce was born, and she
had no memory of how her older sisters had looked as teenagers or how
she had felt about them. In order to avoid the sagging flesh later on,
she decided as an adolescent to avoid the curves and roundness of her
own development. She wanted to have a body as good as it could possibly
be, which meant to her to be thin. She brought her weight down to
seventy pounds, taking inordinate pride in being so slim, with no
curves, and in having achieved this herself. In males, broader shoulders
and chests are rated as more sexually attractive than average male
physiques. Nonetheless, 'pumped-­up' body builder physique is not highly
sexually attractive to most females. Furthermore, rates of body building
increase in times of economic stress when males feel under threat and
the hyper masculine body idea may be an attempt to shore up masculine
anxiety (Cunningham and Shamblen, 2003). This fundamental understanding
of the

Increased Artistic Production

Silvano Arieti (1914--81) in his book Interpretation of Schizophrenia
noted that patients with schizophrenia paint more frequently than
expected given the general level of inactivity observed in
schizophrenia. He accounted for this impression by the fact that the
monotony and consequent boredom of asylum life triggers artistic output
even in people with modest talent. Another possible explanation that he
put forward was artistic production was a means of restoring or
compensating for the psychological loss and emptiness attendant on
schizophrenia (Arieti, 1974). Miller and colleagues in a series of
papers (Miller et al., 1996, 1998; Miller and Miller, 2014) have shown
that some individuals who suffer from left-­sided frontotemporal
dementia, with predominant temporal involvement, develop new onset of
visual art productivity. These patients appear to have left anterior
temporal lobe dysfunction. Miller et al. (2000) reported on 12

19 Disorder of Aesthetic Perception and Praxis

patients with frontotemporal dementia who had new or preserved musical
or visual ability. These patients manifested musical or visual talents
but never verbal talents. The authors report that the artistic works
lacked a symbolic or abstract component and that painters copied or
remembered realistic landscapes, animals or people or perfected visual
designs. They concluded that their findings suggested recall of
previously learned information or images. The authors also report that
the artists approached their works with a high degree of focus, fixated
on their compositions, obsessively working and reworking their creations
almost to the detriment of other aspects of their lives. Often the
preoccupying nature of the artistic creation was associated with other
behaviours such as coin collecting, spitting, tooth picking and copying
the Bible. Miller and Miller (2014) hypothesized that preserved
right-­sided and posterior functions and spared dorsolateral and medial
cortices were needed to be able to appreciate, integrate and create a
composition. Seeley et al. (2008) report on a single case study of an
individual, Anne Adams, who suffered from primary progressive aphasia.
In the decade before her language deficits became overt, she developed
an intense drive to produce visual art. She is reported as creating
expressive transmodal art, such as rendering music in paint. As her
aphasia progressed her art moved in the direction of photorealism. There
was evidence of increased grey matter volume and hyperperfusion in right
posterior neocortical areas despite severe degeneration of left inferior
frontal-­ insular, temporal and striatal regions. Her increased artistic
ability is thought to demonstrate released inhibition or paradoxical
facilitation. In summary, the role of neuropathology and/or
psychopathology in facilitating aesthetic praxis is yet to be fully
unravelled. Content of Visual Art Production

Cesare Lombroso in his study of 108 patients concluded that there were
recognizable features in the art of the mentally ill, namely
eccentricity, symbolism, minuteness of detail, obscenity, uniformity and
absurdity (Beveridge, 2001). Emil Kraepelin (1856--1926) wrote in
Dementia Praecox and Paraphrenia that: In the drawings of patients also
there invariably appears on the one hand incoherence, on the other hand

309

persistence \[italics in the original\] of impulse to movement. Fig 10
reproduces one of the senseless, childish drawings which a patient
produced in large numbers; there are wonderful combinations of strokes
and flourishes with hints of stereotypy ... there were endless
variations of the same recurring fundamental form. Kraepelin (1919)
Arieti's contribution was not dissimilar to Kraepelin's. He argued that
regression which is part of the natural process of schizophrenia
rekindles fantasies and motivational impulses, finding actualization on
paper or canvas. He claims that the works are rigid, schematic,
stereotypical, confused, irregular and freedom-­seeking. He concludes
'schizophrenic art is the result of a struggle between motivational
impulses and the specific ... cognitive media available to the patient.
The sudden availability of primary process forms and the disinhibition
of wishes and aspirations become substitutes for the technique, skill,
and commitment that many patients never had before they became ill'
(Arieti, 1974). It is plain from the foregoing that psychiatrists who
comment on the art of the mentally ill have little or no training in art
criticism or in art history, and their comments are suspect given the
absence of expertise in art criticism. This is not to say that art
critics' views are unproblematic. Beveridge examines this and, using
Jean Dubuffet (1901--85) as an example, wrote: There is in the writings
of Dubuffet a curious paradox in which, on the one hand, the mentally
ill are accorded special abilities, and, on the other, the existence of
such a thing as mental illness is denied. Further, there is another
paradox in which psychiatrists are derided for reducing people to
diagnostic categories, while the writings hail patients as schizophrenic
and as the undisputed masters of the genre. Beveridge (2001)

Finally, as already hinted at in the preceding section, sometimes there
is an attempt to use the quality of the artwork as a proxy for the
severity or as evidence of clinical deterioration (see the case of Anne
Adams). The danger of this approach is exemplified in the examination of
Louis Wain, the Edwardian cat-­painter who spent his last years in London
mental hospitals and whose artwork was used as evidence for clinical

310

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

diagnosis and mental disintegration when, in fact, Wain was simply
experimenting with design; the most bizarre images were not necessarily
produced while he was most ill (Beveridge, 2001). In summary, we are not
yet at the stage when the content of the artwork of people with mental
illness can be used as evidence of psychopathology, nor is it possible,
at present, to conclusively draw attention to forms that are
systematically abnormal and that point to underlying but covert
disrupted mechanisms. REFERENCES Adorno, T., 1997. Aesthetic Theory (R.
Hullot-­ Kentor, Trans.). Bloomsbury, London. Arieti, S., 1974.
Interpretation of Schizophrenia. Basic Books, New York. Berlyne, D.E.,
1971. Aesthetics and Psychobiology. Appleton-­ Century-­Crofts, New York.
Bergeron, V., Lopes, D.M., 2012. Aesthetic theory and aesthetic science:
prospects for integration. In: Aesthetic Science: connecting minds,
brains, and experience. Shimamura A.P., Palmer, S.E.,(Eds). Oxford
University Press, Oxford. Beveridge, A., 2001. A disquieting feeling of
strangeness? The art of the mentally ill. J. R. Soc. Med. 94 (11),
595--599. https://doi. org/10.1177/014107680109401115.
Boutoleau-­Bretonnière, C., Bretonnière, C., Evrard, C., 2016. Ugly
aesthetic perception associated with emotional changes in experience of
art by behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia patients.
Neuropsychologia 89, 96--104. Bruch, H., 2001. The Golden Cage: The
Enigma of Anorexia Nervosa. Harvard University Press, Cambridge. Cash,
T.F., Deagle III, E.A., 1997. The nature and extent of body‐ image
disturbances in anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa: a meta‐analysis.
Int. J. Eat. Disord. 22 (2), 107--126. Cavanna, A.E., Rickards, H.,
2013. The psychopathological spectrum of Gilles de la Tourette syndrome.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 37 (6), 1008--1015. Coss, R.G., 2003. The role
of evolved perceptual biases in art and design. In: Voland, E., Grammer,
K. (Eds.), Evolutionary Aesthetics. Springer, Berlin, pp. 69--130.
Cunningham, M.R., Shamblen, S.R., 2003. Beyond nature versus culture: a
multiple fitness analysis of variations in grooming. In: Voland, E.,
Grammer, K. (Eds.), Evolutionary Aesthetics. Springer, Berlin,
pp. 201--237. De Fruyt, J., Sabbe, B., Demyttenaere, K., 2020. Anhedonia
in depressive disorder: a narrative review. Psychopathology 53, 274--
281. Harris, D.L., 1982. Cosmetic surgery---where does it begin. Br. J.
Plast. Surg. 35 (3), 281--286. Hart, A.S., Phillips, K.A., 2013.
Symmetry concerns as a symptom of body dysmorphic disorder. Journal of
Obsessive-­Compulsive and Related Disorders 2 (3), 292--298. Hegel,
G.W.F., 1975. (T.M. Knox, Trans.). Aesthetics: Lectures on Fine Art,
vol. 2. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Hübner, C., Wiesendahl, W.,
Kleinstäuber, M., Stangier, U., 2016. Facial discrimination in body
dysmorphic, obsessive-­ compulsive and social anxiety disorders.
Psychiatr. Res. 236, 105--111.

Kant, I., 1790/2000. Critique of Judgment (P. Guyer & E. Matthews,
Trans.). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Kirk, U., 2014. The
modularity of aesthetic processing and perception in the human brain.
In: Shimamura, A.P., Palmer, S.E. (Eds.), Aesthetic Science: Connecting
Minds, Brains, and Experience. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
pp. 318--336. Kraepelin, E., 1919. Dementia Praecox and Paraphrenia
(R.M. Barclay, Trans.). Medical Book Company, Chicago. Lambrou, C.,
Veale, D., Wilson, G., 2011. The role of aesthetic sensitivity in body
dysmorphic disorder. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 120 (2), 443. Lewis, A.J.,
1934. Melancholia: a clinical survey of depressive states. J. Ment. Sci.
80 (329), 277--378. Miller, Z.A., Miller, B.L., 2014. A cognitive and
behavioural neurological approach to aesthetics. In: Shimamura, A.P.,
Palmer, S.E. (Eds.), Aesthetic Science: Connecting Minds, Brains, and
Experience. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 356--374. Miller, B.L.,
Ponton, M., Benson, D.F., Cummings, J.L., Mena, I., 1996. Enhanced
artistic creativity with temporal lobe degeneration. Lancet (London,
England) 348 (9043), 1744--1745. Miller, B.L., Boone, K., Cummings,
J.L., Read, S.L., Mishkin, F., 2000. Functional correlates of musical
and visual ability in frontotemporal dementia. Br. J. Psychiatr. 176
(5), 458--463. Miller, B.L., Cummings, J., Mishkin, F., et al., 1998.
Emergence of artistic talent in frontotemporal dementia. Neurology 51
(4), 978--982. Morita, M.M., Merlotto, M.R., Dantas, C.L., Olivetti,
F.H., Miot, H.A., 2021. Prevalence and factors associated with body
dysmorphic disorder in women under dermatological care at a Brazilian
public institution. An. Bras. Dermatol. 96 (1), 40--46. Neal, M.,
Cavanna, A.E., 2013. Not just right experiences" in patients with
Tourette syndrome: complex motor tics or compulsions? Psychiatr. Res.
210, 559--563. Phillips, K.A., 2005. The Broken Mirror. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. Radomsky, A.S., Rachman, S., 2004. Symmetry,
ordering and arranging compulsive behaviour. Behav. Res. Ther. 42 (8),
893--913. Ramachandran, V.S., Seckel, E., 2014. Neurology of visual
aesthetics. In: Shimamura, A.P., Palmer, S.E. (Eds.), Aesthetic Science:
Connecting Minds, Brains, and Experience. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, pp. 375--389. Robinson, J., 1998. The Quest for Human Beauty: An
Illustrated History. WW Norton, New York, NY. Romsics, L., Segatto, A.,
Boa, K., et al., 2021. Patterns of facial profile preference in a large
sample of dental students: a cross-­ sectional study. Int. J. Environ.
Res. Public Health 18 (16), 8554. Ruso, B., Renninger, L., Atzwanger,
K., 2014. Human habitat preferences. In: Voland, E., Grammer, K. (Eds.),
Evolutionary Aesthetics. Springer, Berlin, pp. 279--294. Seeley, W.W.,
Matthews, B.R., Crawford, R.K., Gorno-Tempini, M.L., Foti, D.,
Mackenzie, I.R., Miller, B.L., 2008. Unravelling Bolero: progressive
aphasia, transmodal creativity and the right posterior neocorte. Brain,
131(Pt 1) 39--49. Skamel, U., 2003. Beauty and sex appeal: sexual
selection of aesthetic preferences. In: Voland, E., Grammer, K. (Eds.),
Evolutionary Aesthetics. Springer, Berlin, pp. 174--200. Slade, P.D.,
1988. Body image in anorexia nervosa. Br. J. Psychiatr. 153 (S2),
20--22. Slade, P.D., Russell, G.F.M., 1973. Awareness of body dimensions
in anorexia nervosa: cross-­sectional and longitudinal studies. Psychol.
Med. 3 (2), 188--199. Summerfeldt, L.J., Gilbert, S.J., Reynolds, M.,
2015. Incompleteness, aesthetic sensitivity, and the
obsessive-­compulsive need for symmetry. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatr.
49, 141--149.

19 Disorder of Aesthetic Perception and Praxis Thornhill, R., 2003.
Darwinian aesthetics informs traditional aesthetics. In: Voland, E.,
Grammer, K. (Eds.), Evolutionary Aesthetics. Springer, Berlin,
pp. 9--35. Veale, D., Ennis, M., Lambrou, C., 2002. Possible association
of body dysmorphic disorder with an occupation or education in art and
design. Am. J. Psychiatr. 159 (10), 1788--1790.

311

Veale, D.M., Lambrou, C., 2002. The importance of aesthetics in body
dysmorphic disorder. CNS Spectr. 7 (6), 429--431. Veale, D., Ennis, M.,
Lambrou, C., 2002. Possible association of body dysmorphic disorder with
an occupation or education in art and design. Am. J. Psychiatr. 159
(10), 1788--1790. Zeki, S., 1998. Art and the brain. Daedalus 127 (2),
71--103.

This page intentionally left blank

     

Section VI

VARIATIONS OF HUMAN NATURE      

313

This page intentionally left blank

     

Chapter 20

The Expression of Disordered Personality Chapter Outline Summary
Paranoid Personality Disorder Schizoid Personality Disorder Dissocial
Personality Disorder Emotionally Unstable Personality Disorder Impulsive
Type Borderline Type Histrionic Personality Disorder Anankastic
Personality Disorder Anxious (Avoidant) Personality Disorder Dependent
Personality Disorder Persistent Mood Disorders Other Personality
Disorders Narcissistic Personality Disorder Avoidant Personality
Disorder

KEYWORDS Personality Personality disorder Paranoid personality disorder
Schizoid personality disorder Dissocial personality disorder Emotionally
unstable personality disorder Histrionic personality disorder Anankastic
personality disorder Anxious (avoidant) personality disorder Dependent
personality disorder

Summary Personality is the unique way that an individual expresses
themself. It includes their characteristic gait, their mode of
experiencing the world and reacting to it. Their typical affective
responses, their conduct and moral attitude, what values guide them and
what they do, what they create and how they act. Abnormalities of
personality on the other hand are enduring patterns of experience and
behaviour affecting cognition, affect, interpersonal functioning and
impulse control that are inflexible, pervasive and lead to clinically
significant impairment. It is important to emphasize that the types of
abnormal personality currently described are at most tentative and
inconclusive attempts to render in words complex aspects of human
functioning. The categories have clinical utility but are problematic
for many reasons including lack of reliability, validity and instability
over time. But the impressions and actions of human beings are not
solely the result of their present circumstances, but the joint result
of those circumstances and of the characters of the individuals: and the
agencies which determine human character are so numerous, (nothing which
has happened to the person throughout life being without its portion of
influence), that in the aggregate they are never in any two 315

316

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

cases exactly similar. Hence, even if our science of human nature were
theoretically perfect, that is, if we could calculate any character as
we can calculate the orbit of any planet, from given data; still, as the
data are never all given, nor even precisely alike in different cases,
we could neither make positive predictions, nor lay down universal
propositions. John Stuart Mill (1811)

In the preceding quote from a System of Logic, Mill states succinctly
the difficulty of forming a theory of personality that is useful in
clinical practice in predicting behaviour. Nonetheless, theories of
personality abound. Jaspers' (1997) definition of personality is as good
a place to start as any other definition: We see the personality in the
particular way an individual expresses himself, in the way he moves, how
he experiences and reacts to situations, how he loves, grows jealous,
how he conducts his life in general, what needs he has, what are his
longings and aims, what are his ideals and how he shapes them, what
values guide him and what he does, what he creates and how he acts. In
short, personality is the term we give to the individually differing and
characteristic totality of meaningful connections in any one psychic
life. There is an implicit but erroneous notion that a description of
personality somehow captures all that there is to say about a person.
Reflection makes obvious that it is impossible to describe the totality
of any human being in a single, simple term. Furthermore, as Jaspers
remarked, 'The personality as understood is not what an individual
actually is but an empirical and inconclusive phenomenon' that is
limited in its scope precisely because human beings are free to act in
the world and 'at any moment freedom can have birth and give everything
a different meaning'. Descriptions of personality, in other words, are
tentative and fragile. The individual's life and choices are not fixed
and predetermined by any description that we may have. Every individual
has an infinite reality and potential. Our feeble attempts at
description are mainly to make communication between practitioners
efficient. Attempts at classifying personality fall into two main
categories: nomothetic and idiographic. The nomothetic approach assumes
that human beings

only vary to the degree in which they share certain traits or
personality dimensions. On the other hand, the idiographic approach
assumes that human beings are unique individuals and the theories here
point to the characteristics that make individuals unique and
distinctive. Sadly, there is a gulf between psychological personality
theories such as that by figures such as Gordon Allport (1897--1967),
Hans Eysenck (1916-- 97) and Raymond Cattell (1905--98) and the approach
that is favoured by psychiatrists that deals predominantly with
abnormalities of personality. The term personality disorder is an
abstraction built on several tenuous theories. It is an untidy concept,
but it carries clinical usefulness. The way in which the term has been
developed and its relationship with neurosis is dealt with elsewhere
(Sims, 1983). The intention here is only to discuss the effects that
different types of personality have on actions and behaviour. The
clinician builds on a profile for personality disorder. This leads to a
characteristic pattern of behaviour that allows us, to some extent, to
predict their future actions and to describe what makes this individual
different. The clinical designation of personality is purely descriptive
and carries no theoretical implications, otherwise there is a logical
flaw in describing personality type in terms of consistent behaviour and
at the same time claiming the type accounts for definite patterns of
behaviour. Acute and detailed observation of the characteristics of
personality and its evaluation is a useful psychiatric skill that has,
regrettably, been much neglected for many years. These characteristics
of behaviour, including the capacity for and nature of relationships
with other people, are brought together to describe traits or
personality types; obviously, to be clinically relevant these traits
must have implications for the functioning of the individual. The
distinction between trait, the predisposition associated with
personality, and state, the current mental condition, is very important.
These classifications of personality disorder, based on such lists of
traits, were categorized by Schneider (1923) and more recently in
International Classification of Diseases (10th revision \[ICD-10\];
World Health Organization, 1992) and in Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (5th edition \[DSM-­5\]; American Psychiatric
Association \[APA\], 2013). Certain characteristics have clinical
significance, such as the degree to which the

20 The Expression of Disordered Personality

person is aware of the feelings and is sensitive to the judgements of
other people. Abnormal personality is found when a personality trait
considered to be clinically significant is present to either too small
or too great an extent to conform statistically with the mass of
mankind. The concepts of personality and personality disorder were
discussed by Tantam (1988), and more recently personality disorder has
been reviewed by Tyrer and Stein (1993). There are considerable problems
with the descriptions of types of personality disorders. The most
significant are the lack of specificity in the definitions of
personality disorders, the excessive comorbidity among personality
disorders, the questionable validity of the identified categories and
the instability of these diagnostic terms over time (Skodol, 2012).
Furthermore, it is recognized that part of the problem with the current
classification system is the unsatisfactory nature of personality
typologies and the need for an integration of dimensional thinking into
how personality and personality disorder are conceptualized. This
development in thinking about personality disorders is also drawing
attention to the need to base discussions about personality disorder on
what is understood about normal personality traits. This has led to an
evaluation of the Five-­Factor model of personality as a potential
foundation for a theory of abnormal personality (Widiger et al., 2012).
The Five-­Factor model of personality includes neuroticism, extraversion,
openness, agreeableness and conscientiousness as the relevant factors.
The hope is that an integration of normal and abnormal personality
within a common hierarchical structure would allow for a more precise
and individualized description of personality structure for each
individual (Widiger et al., 2012) but this hope is not widely shared
(Paris, 2013). A different approach to the classification of personality
disorders that is starting to gain traction is that proposed by Crawford
et al. (2011). They emphasize the point that categorical methods that
utilize personality disorder typologies do not take account of the wide
variations in terms of personality disturbance and associated
disturbance. They emphasize how prevalent personality disorders are
within the adult population, estimating it to be approximately 10%, and
that it influences response to treatment of mental disorder as well as
the long-­term outcome of disorders (Tyrer and Evans, 2000). Their
proposal is to do away

317

with the current personality disorder typologies and to classify all
personality disorders along a single dimension ranging from normal
personality on one end to severe personality disorder at the other
(Tyrer et al., 2015). The intention seems to be to replace typologies by
five dimensions of severity along five nomothetic trait domains
including asocial, emotionally unstable, obsessional (anankastic),
anxious/dependent and dissocial groups and additionally to provide a
simple algorithm for clinical use (Tyrer et al., 2011). There is little
doubt that there are serious problems with personality typologies but
whether a dimensional approach as proposed will solve the problems is
yet to be determined. Abnormality of personality at present is probably
best described in terms of trait. What then is personality disorder?
Here Schneider's definition is a good starting point: 'Personality
disorder is present when that abnormality of personality causes either
the patient himself or other people to suffer' (Schneider, 1958).
Alternatively, from DSM-­5 (APA, 2013): 'An enduring pattern of inner
experience and behaviour that deviates markedly from the expectations of
the individual's culture'. This pattern is manifested in two or more of
the following areas: cognition, affectivity, interpersonal functioning
or impulse control. The enduring pattern is inflexible and pervasive
across a broad range of personal and social situations. The enduring
pattern leads to clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational or other important areas of functioning. The
pattern is stable and of long duration, and its onset can be traced back
at least to adolescence or early childhood. •  A highly conscientious
and meticulous post office sorter was promoted to foreman sorter after
many years' reliable service. The appropriate response might have been
to be pleased at the increased pay and to spend the first week's
increment before receiving it. However, this man was fearful about the
promotion. He worried that he might not be able to cope with the job,
that he might not be able to persuade the men in his charge to sort
letters to his own high standards, that he would not be able to mix
socially with his superiors and equals, that he would make a fool of
himself and that other people would laugh at him. He became miserable,
anxious and lacking

318

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

confidence, and he had to stop work. Because of his abnormal,
obsessional (anankastic) personality, he responded to the stress of
promotion by becoming acutely distressed and developing depressive
symptoms. •  A bland and plausible confidence trickster extracted
without compunction the means of subsistence from an elderly widow.
Their psychopathic blunting of appreciation for the way others would
experience their behaviour and their consequent feelings resulted in
them causing suffering to others. Personality abnormality is a part of
the individual's constitution. Whether it manifests as personality
disorder depends to a considerable extent on social circumstances. A
highly abnormal personality that in one situation may be considered
criminal psychopathy and be possessed by a convicted prisoner, in
another situation will be the driving force in a highly successful and
relatively creative political revolutionary. Personality in an
individual cannot be divorced from its social and cultural setting.
Indeed, some have argued that the personality disorder constructs that
we currently utilize are derived from and calibrated against Western
middle-­class cultural norms (Mulder, 2012). Having ascertained whether
personality disorder is present, its type should be categorized using an

accepted system. However, a caution is needed here. It is often
extremely difficult to fit people into arbitrary categories of
personality, and the whole topic of classification is still highly
unsatisfactory. It may be much better to use a few descriptive sentences
for the personality, and probably it is best to combine description with
categorization. The systems used in ICD-­10 and DSM-­5 can be recommended;
the typological classification of personality disorder introduced by
Tyrer and Alexander (1979) was also satisfactory but has not been widely
used. Table 20.1 is a composite of these classifications. They all start
from the same bases: the definition of personality, the evaluation of
abnormality and the observation of certain influential and regularly
occurring traits. Tyrer and Alexander's five discrete categories of
abnormal personality followed from a cluster analysis of personality
data and is therefore a simplification of ICD-­9 (World Health
Organization, 1977), which itself was based originally on Schneider.
DSM-­IV and DSM-­5 have certain different terms that have proved important
in American psychiatry, although they are not necessarily found helpful
elsewhere. These include narcissistic personality disorder, which is
discussed later in this chapter; avoidant, which is similar to anxious
personality disorder in ICD-­10; and schizotypal personality disorder,
which ICD-­10 classifies with schizophrenia, schizotypical and delusional
disorders.

TABLE 20.1 Comparison of Personality Types Tyrer and Alexander(1979)a
Schizoid Sociopathic

Anankastic Dysthymic Passive dependent aTyrer and Alexander (1979).
bWorld Health Organization (1992). cAmerican Psychiatric Association
(1994).

ICD-10b

DSM-IVc

F60.0 Paranoid F60.1 Schizoid

Paranoid Schizoid Schizotypal Antisocial

F60.2 Dissocial F60.3 Emotionally unstable .30 Impulsive .31 Borderline
F60.4 Histrionic F60.5 Anankastic F60.6 Anxious F60.7 Dependent F60.8
'Other'

Borderline Histrionic Obsessive compulsive Avoidant Dependent
Narcissistic

20 The Expression of Disordered Personality

The following descriptions are based on the categorization found in
ICD-­10. It is important to realize that these categories are not
mutually exclusive: mixed personality types are more frequent than a
single personality type in pure form. Readers in the United Kingdom or
in countries influenced by British psychiatry should be aware of an
ongoing source of confusion perpetuated by recent discussion of the
legal and administrative aspects concerning 'dangerous people with
severe personality disorder' (Mullen, 1999; Haddock et al., 2001). In
descriptive psychopathology, this debate is almost entirely concerned
with dissocial personality disorder, but those taking part in the
discussion tend to ignore other personality types, thus causing
confusion for the assessment and classification of those with other
personality disorders such as anankastic or anxious avoidant personality
disorder. This can result in inappropriate treatment or lack of
treatment being administered by mental health professionals and
unjustifiable stigmatization being experienced by the sufferers.

Paranoid Personality Disorder The essential feature of this type of
personality disorder is self-­reference, the proper psychiatric sense of
the word paranoid; such people misinterpret the words and actions of
others as having special significance for, and being directed against,
themselves. Theoretically, self-­referent ideas could imply that others
are always noticing them in an admiring and benevolent way; in practice,
such people would not consult a psychiatrist and those presenting in
psychiatry have ideas of persecution. They mistrust other people and are
very sensitive and suspicious, believing that others are against them
and that what they say about them is derogatory. There are active and
passive types of paranoid personality disorder; both types feel that
others are 'getting at them' but their response differs. The active
paranoid personality manifests suspiciousness and is hostile and
untrusting. Such a person is quarrelsome, litigious, quick to take
offence, intensely suspicious and sometimes violent; they will go to
enormous lengths to defend their rights or to address real or imagined
injustices. They are extremely vigilant and tenacious in taking
precautions against any perceived threat. This is the sort of person who

319

will march fearlessly across a field of young corn because they see
there is a public right of way on the map and the farmer has no right to
violate this. They repudiate blame and may be regarded by others as
devious, scheming and secretive. Such a person is intensely jealous of
what they regard as their own belongings, which may be people as well as
objects, and they spend a lot of time planning to 'get their own back'.
They may be self-­important and fanatical. Morbid jealousy may be shown,
and such a person may be involved in acts of violence because of
imagined injustice. Such a personality may find creative expression in
social and political life but is likely to be very destructive within
the family. A patient commented on this ruefully, 'I have scarcely
talked to my wife for the last 10 years', because of his succession of
court cases against those with whom he came into contact. A person with
passive paranoid personality faces the world from a position of
submission and humiliation. They assume that whatever happens to them
will be damaging. Like the active type, they are suspicious, sensitive
and self-­referent and misconstrue circumstances and other people. They
believe that other people will dislike them and that they will
ultimately let them down. However, they accept 'the slings and arrows of
outrageous fortune' passively, bowing to the inevitable; they are
vulnerable and frequently feel humiliated and unable to initiate any
assertive activity. Other people tend to take advantage of them, thus
fulfilling their pessimistic expectations. A frequent manifestation of
psychopathology within the context of paranoid personality is the
presence of an overvalued idea (see Chapter 8). This, alternatively
described as a fixed idea (idée fixe), is a belief that might seem
reasonable both to the patient and to other people. However, it comes to
completely dominate the person's thinking and life, and, instead of
testing its validity, they tend to consider that every circumstance of
life substantiates it; it becomes the basis for action that is sometimes
aggressive or self-­destructive. It is quite distinct phenomenologically
from both delusion and obsessional ideas.

Schizoid Personality Disorder This personality disorder is characterized
by a lack of need for, and defect in, the capacity to form social

320

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

relationships. Such people show withdrawal from social involvement,
emotional coolness and detachment and indifference to the praise,
criticism and feelings of other people. These individuals are 'loners'
with a disinclination to mix, and they appear somewhat aloof. They lack
tender feelings, have little interest in sexual experience and are not
interested in the company of others. They are not depressed in mood, nor
are they shy or sensitive towards other people, but they are solitary
and prefer not to be involved in social occupations. Their interests and
hobbies usually tend to increase their isolation from other people, as
they are more interested in things, objects and machines. Close
relatives may complain of the subject's emotional detachment, an
inability to inspire strong feelings in others, a lack of any real sense
of pleasure, oddness and eccentricity and callous indifference to
others' suffering. In a follow-­up of former schizoid subjects, they were
found to use psychological constructs less than a control group, and
this pointed to the schizoid individuals' lack of empathy (Chick et al.,
1979). Those with schizoid personality and poor social adjustment have
been considered more likely to develop schizophrenia. In a large study
based on the previous personality assessment of 50,054 male recruits to
the Swedish army, aspects of personality were found to be risk factors
for the subsequent development of schizophrenia (Malmberg et al., 1998).

Dissocial Personality Disorder The essential, phenomenological
abnormality of dissocial (asocial, antisocial or psychopathic)
personality disorder is primarily one of empathy. There is a defect in
the capacity to appreciate other people's feelings, especially in
comprehending how other people feel about the consequences of this
person's own actions. This personality type, or abnormality, includes
those people considered to suffer from psychopathic personality within
the meaning of the Mental Health Act, 1983 (Bluglass, 1983). A normal
person is prevented most of the time, by shame or by their capacity for
empathy, from carrying out unpleasant actions towards other people. They
do not want to be disliked and feel keenly how it would be passively to
be the recipient

of such behaviour. It is this inability to feel for themself the
discomfort that others experience as a result of their antisocial
activities that appears to be absent in the psychopath. Despite such
comprehensive descriptions as that of Cleckley (1941), in The Mask of
Sanity, and others, there are still considerable doubts as to whether
this personality type forms a distinct category, and if it does, whether
it should be considered within or outside psychiatry. This is succinctly
expressed by Wooton (1959): psychopaths are 'extremely selfish persons
and no one knows what makes them so'. The confusion of terminology is
explained partly by the varied nature of presentation; partly by the
conflicting desires of professionals not to stigmatize and also not to
cast blame on those who cannot control their actions; and partly by the
requirements of classification for different professional groups and
settings---lawyers, criminologists, psychiatrists, psychologists and so
on. A comprehensive account of diagnostic issues, developmental history
and methods of treatment is to be found in Dolan and Coid (1993). The
concept of moral derangement was introduced by Benjamin Rush (1812), and
of moral insanity by Prichard (1835), who considered this to occur among
criminals who showed loss of feeling, of control, and of ethical sense,
equivalent to mental disease but at a different level. It is important
to stress that not all psychopaths are criminal, nor are all criminals
psychopathic. Henderson (1939) described creative, inadequate and
aggressive psychopathy, citing Lawrence of Arabia as an example of a
creative psychopath. Dissocial personality disorder, with conspicuous
lack of conscience and human sympathy, is found more often in males than
in females. This personality disorder should not be diagnosed unless the
subject is older than 18 years. However, in childhood or adolescence,
many of the following may have been demonstrated by the person
subsequently diagnosed as dissocial: truancy, expulsion or suspension
from school for misbehaviour, delinquency, running away from home,
persistent lying, repeated casual sexual intercourse, repeated
drunkenness, substance abuse, theft, vandalism, school performance below
expectation, repeated violation of rules at home and school and
fighting. Of course, such behaviour may occur in normal children,
especially with social deprivation, but it is their persistence and the
presence of so

20 The Expression of Disordered Personality

many of these signs of disturbed behaviour that may predict subsequent
psychopathy. There is also debate concerning the manifestation of
attention deficit disorder in childhood and subsequent antisocial
behaviour in young adult life (Hinshaw, 1994). Such a person may be
meaninglessly cruel, callous, aggressive and emotionally cold, rejecting
social norms and showing irresponsibility in their relationships. They
are often unable to maintain consistency at work, with frequent
unemployment, changes of occupation, absenteeism and poor relationships.
Similarly, there are unsatisfactory relationships with sexual partners,
with a history of several separations or divorces, promiscuity with
heterosexual or homosexual preferences, desertion and repeated marital
arguments. Poor parenting results in conspicuous physical and
psychological problems among their children, and the individual's
aggressiveness may result in child abuse with nonaccidental injury. As
they age, they are less likely to be in conflict with the law and less
likely to be violent, but their affectionless inability to see the
consequences of their actions and the way other people suffer because of
them remains destructive within the family and in other institutions.
There is a failure to accept society's norms as regards social
behaviour, drugs and alcohol and personal property. A lengthy criminal
record is frequently seen because they fail to learn from their
experiences (Craft, 1966). Such a person may feel miserable and even
suicidal when discovered in an unacceptable act, but this does not
amount to the normal sense of feeling guilt. There is a failure to
identify with the victim. The definition of psychopathy proposed by
Whiteley (1975) is as follows. The psychopath is an individual: 1. who
persistently behaves in a way that is not in accord with the accepted
social norms of the culture or times in which they live; 2. who appears
to be unaware that their behaviour is seriously at fault; and 3. whose
abnormality cannot be readily explained as resulting from the 'madness'
we commonly recognize nor from 'badness' alone. Failure to plan ahead
and failure to honour obligations, for example, matrimonial or financial
commitments, are repeated. There is a disregard for truth and also for
safety, both for the individual themself and for others.

321

Emotionally Unstable Personality Disorder IMPULSIVE TYPE This
personality disorder is not often encountered. The essential feature is
liability to intemperate and uncontrolled outbursts of mood, most
frequently violent anger but occasionally inconsolable grief, extreme
anxiety or uproarious hilarity. It is usually aggressiveness that brings
individuals with this disorder to the attention of the psychiatrist;
with very slight provocation, they may have become irritable and on
occasions violent. They are treated with extreme circumspection by other
people, and their ill humour therefore becomes reinforced as it enables
them to get their own way. They may exploit other people's fears of them
to achieve their objectives, for example, the arbitrarily violent
husband whose wife is completely dominated by him through fear. Such
personalities are disruptive and unpopular. Those with this personality
structure behave normally for most of the time and only occasionally
explode in impulsive irritability, which is more common in younger
people and may appear in either sex (Snaith and Taylor, 1985). In the
system of classification advocated by Tyrer and Alexander, this
personality type is not retained as distinct but combined with paranoid
and asocial personality to form a category of sociopathic personality
disorder. BORDERLINE TYPE This very confused diagnostic term has been
used variously to describe a group of apparently neurotically disturbed
patients who became psychotic while undergoing psychoanalysis; an
enduring, unstable and vulnerable personality structure; and a group of
patients who 'almost' had schizophrenia (Anonymous, 1986). It is
considered that at least five of the following should be present for the
diagnosis to be made (DSM-­5; APA, 2013): •  frantic efforts to avoid
real or imagined abandonment; • a pattern of unstable and intense
interpersonal relationships; • identity disturbance in areas such as
self-­image, gender identity or long-­term goals; • impulsivity or
unpredictability in areas that are potentially self-­damaging;

322

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

• recurrent suicidal behaviour, gestures or threats or self-­mutilating
behaviour; • affective instability due to a marked reactivity of mood; •
chronic feelings of emptiness; • inappropriate intense anger or
difficulty in controlling anger; and •  transient, stress-­ related
paranoid ideation or severe dissociative symptoms. Although
psychodynamically inclined psychiatrists have used this category
extensively, there appears to be no phenomenological thread linking the
very different criteria that are required for its diagnosis. Carrasco
and Lecic-­Tosevski (2000) have described it as the most controversial of
all personality disorders and 'best understood as a heterogeneous
syndrome manifested by ego-­syntonic affective instability and
impulsivity (behavioural dyscontrol) and propensity to cognitive-­
perceptual distortions in the context of chronically unstable
interpersonal relationships'. Both genetic factors and early childhood
adversity are implicated in its aetiology with implications for the
neural circuits that regulate affect, behaviour and cognition (Hooley et
al., 2012).

Histrionic Personality Disorder The word histrionic is derived from
'playing on the stage'; it is a better term than hysterical for this
disorder, which is characterized by theatrical behaviour, craving for
attention and excitement, excessive reaction to minor events and
outbursts of mood, especially temper tantrums. In summarizing the
descriptions of 22 authors, De Alarcon (1973) found the greatest
agreement for hysterical personality disorder in the following features:
histrionic behaviour, egocentricity, emotional lability, excitability,
dependency, suggestibility and seductiveness. Characteristic of the
disturbance of histrionic personality is the nature of relationships
with limited ability to experience profound affect and communicate such
feelings. There is a shallowness and lability of emotion, and this is
seen by others as lacking in genuineness, even though they are
superficially charming---'the life and soul of the party'. They form
excellent and rapid acquaintanceships with new

people, but they have great difficulty sustaining a close long-­term,
mutually rewarding, exclusive relationship. Mood is fluctuating and
inconsistent, and they display towards other people a craving for
attention, affection and appreciation. They are seen as egocentric,
self-­indulgent and inconsiderate of others. There is often extreme but
superficial involvement with many different people in a short space of
time, and such a person is seen as being manipulative, vain and
demanding; the manipulativeness is often ineffectual and
self-­destructive. They are often superficially found very attractive and
achieve their short-­ term goals while being unable to sustain long-­term
relationships; for instance, marriage frequently ends in divorce. They
may be dependent and helpless, constantly seeking reassurance and the
approval of others. Gestures of self-­harm, dissociative conversion
symptoms and abuse of alcohol and other drugs are common. Depressive
symptoms are also frequently encountered, especially when a breakdown of
relationships occurs. In a hospital study of those with histrionic
personality disorder, Thompson (1980) found 83% of subjects to be
female; there was a clear association with depression, drug overdoses,
self-­mutilation, abuse of alcohol and a history of criminality and
sometimes violence. Tyrer and Alexander do not regard this as a distinct
personality disorder but combine it with dependent personality disorder
in a category of passive dependence.

Anankastic Personality Disorder Anankastic personality traits in
moderate amount are valuable in society and for the success of the
individual; they are frequently observed in professionals such as
lawyers or doctors. However, when these are developed to an abnormal
extent and interfere with the person's functioning, personality disorder
is present and is characterized by perfectionism, rigidity, sensitivity,
indecisiveness, a lack of capacity to express strongly felt emotion and
excessive conscientiousness. The anankast's pervading sense of
insecurity is associated with extreme self-­doubt and feelings of
sensitivity concerning how other people view them. Perfectionism and
excessive attention to detail interfere with the overall grasp of
subjects or situations. There is gross preoccupation with rules,
efficiency, trivial details, procedures and protocol. One patient

20 The Expression of Disordered Personality

was making lists of the lists she had previously set herself. She could
not throw away a list until everything on it had been completed and, as
some of the items on the lists were things that she wished to remind
herself to do regularly, she was accumulating such an ever-­ increasing
number of lists as to be unmanageable. Efficiency and perfection are
aimed at, but the excessively detailed manner in which the attempt to
achieve them is made undermines the possibility of success. Often,
extreme orderliness in one area of life results in chaos in another, for
example, the medical practitioner who kept the top of his desk in
immaculate tidiness but tipped all his case notes and other papers into
the back of his car. Rigidity in patterns of behaviour is
characteristic. The individual values accuracy and thoroughness highly
and respects other obsessional people for these qualities. They tend to
keep fixed times and live to a regular programme, altered only with the
greatest misgivings. These constraints are extended to other people in
that they insist that they submit to their way of doing things. There is
often a lack of awareness of the feelings in others evoked by their
behaviour. This anankastic control of other people is typified by Mrs
Ogmore-­Pritchard in Dylan Thomas' Under Milk Wood (1954), who imposes on
her dead husband the dictum 'I must put my pyjamas in the drawer marked
pyjamas ... I must take my cold bath which is good for me'. The anankast
is extremely sensitive to the criticism, real or suspected, of other
people; the slightest censure is 'taken very much to heart'. This
awareness of other people's opinion makes them a conformist, not
prepared to step out of line, always wishing 'to keep up with the
Joneses'. They are rigid, formal and self-­controlled, not only in their
public business but also at home and with their more intimate
relationships. Insecurity about their abilities and their relationships
makes the anankast indecisive. They doubt their own capacity and only
too easily find themself agreeing in secret with those who criticize
him. They vacillate and have great difficulty in making choices,
constantly looking at situations from different points of view,
'weighing up the pros and cons'. They often find themself in a position
of ambivalence and may overcompensate for this indecisiveness by making
arbitrary decisions that then become immutable on

323

insufficient evidence, or they may compensate for their legalistic
rigidity by flaunting the law ostentatiously. Even in this, their basic
perfectionism is still manifest. The anankast finds the initiation or
completion of any activity difficult, but hard work is highly prized,
and they are therefore prepared to carry on the middle part of the task
indefinitely. There is a need for formality, and their feelings of
sensitivity about how other people view them results in restricted
ability to express tender emotion. They are unduly conventional, serious
and formal. Stinginess may be shown both with money and with the
expression of feelings. Such a person actually experiences strong affect
but is quite unable to express this appropriately towards other people.
The different facets of the anankastic personality disorder are, of
course, interlocked. As traits of personality, they are seen frequently,
not least among members of the medical profession. However, developed as
a personality disorder, this way of life may be incapacitating,
especially the indecisiveness and inability to express strong emotion.
Depression, obsessive compulsive disorder, eating disorder and
hypochondriasis are not uncommonly associated with this abnormality of
personality (Samuels and Costa, 2012).

Anxious (Avoidant) Personality Disorder This is a disorder of trait,
whereas anxiety disorder is a disorder of state (see Chapter 17). There
is often free-­ floating anxiety that is exacerbated by any overt
predisposing cause. Such people often find the public side of life, for
example, at work, very much more stressful than the private side, within
the family. Trait anxiety is present when the development of the
individual's personality results in some level of abnormal anxiety being
a persistent background part of their constitution (Sims and Snaith,
1988); this could alternatively be described as anxious temperament or
anxiety-­ prone personality. Such people describe themselves as 'born
worriers'. This personality disorder is characterized by persistent and
pervasive feelings of terror and apprehension; a belief that one is
socially inept, unattractive or inferior; excessive preoccupation with
criticism and rejection by others; hesitancy in new social
relationships; restriction of lifestyle because of the need for

324

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

security; and avoidance of those social situations that might provoke
disapproval (ICD-­10; World Health Organization, 1992).

Dependent Personality Disorder The dependent personality is
characterized by feelings of inadequacy concerning self and dependence
on other people. There is gross lack of self-­confidence, initiative and
drive. Such a person is unable to react to the changing demands of life
and allows other people, sometimes one other person, to assume
responsibility for major areas of life. They may function reasonably
well and appear inconspicuous when carried along through life by a
dominant close relationship. However, when external stress occurs they
lack confidence, are unable to cope and crave long-­term support and
encouragement from relatives, a close friend, their family doctor, their
social worker, their minister, their employer or their surrounding
social organizations. They may, for example, flourish in the armed
forces but be unable to adjust to civilian life. Such people tend to go
through life with one dominant dependent relationship; for a man, this
may be initially his mother and subsequently his wife, who takes over
his mother's role. Crises resulting in psychiatric referral may occur
when a parent dies or becomes incapable, his marriage breaks down, he
loses his job, after detection in crime or after physical illness. It is
usually only after such situations that a person with this type of
personality disorder comes to the attention of the caring professions.
Dependence amounts to passive compliance with the aims and demands of
the more dominant partner. There is a lack of vigour in maintaining aims
and goals and in attempting to achieve these. They may describe
themselves as depressed, but it is more a feeling of inertia and an
inability to cope with their problems than the symptoms of affective
disorder. Originally, this personality disorder was conceptualized as
arising out of problematic early parent--child relationships but
pathologic dependency is now seen as stemming from a perception of the
'self' as weak accompanied by the belief that other people are
comparatively competent and confident. As a result of this the
individual becomes preoccupied with obtaining and maintaining
relationships with potential caregivers (Bornstein, 2012).

Persistent Mood Disorders In the ICD-­9 (World Health Organization,
1977), these conditions were classified as disorder of personality.
However, in the ICD-­10, they have been listed as a subcategory of
affective disorders because they are genetically related to mood
disorders and sometimes respond to the same methods of treatment. They
are retained in this chapter because they conform with the
psychopathology of personality disorders. Akiskal (1993) has made a
convincing case for depressive personality to be returned to the generic
category of personality disorders rather than being classified with axis
1 mood (affective) disorders. There is a persistent lifelong abnormality
of mood, not amounting to illness, as opposed to those reactive or
endogenous disturbances of affect that are of shorter duration and are
regarded as illness. The most frequent types of affective personality
disorder show excessive lability of mood or persistent depressive stance
towards life. Other abnormalities of personality may occur, such as
persistent hypomania, but these rarely present to the psychiatrist.
Those with cyclothymia show marked fluctuations of mood. For instance,
for a day or a week they may be optimistic, energetic, creative and
garrulous, then for a period they may become gloomy, morose, taciturn
and unable to turn themselves to any useful activity. These cycles may
be linked to other biological rhythms such as the menstrual cycle; they
may, however, appear out of the blue, apparently unprovoked. A premorbid
cyclothymic personality is thought to predispose to manic-­depressive
psychosis. Certainly, Goodwin and Jamison (1990), in a study of
manic-­depressive illness and creativity, found that among poets
especially there was an excess of cyclothymic personality, depressive
illness and suicide. Dysthymia is manifested by all-­pervasive and
permanent gloom and apprehension. It leads to the diagnostic quandary:
'is this depressive state or depressive trait?' Such people are usually
gentle and sensitive; they take themselves and their activities
seriously; they are often safety-­conscious and hypochondriacal in
disposition. An acquaintance with this personality structure coined
aphorisms that revealed his mental state, such as 'there is no situation
in life so bad as to be incapable of further deterioration' or 'every
silver lining has its cloud'.

20 The Expression of Disordered Personality

Other Personality Disorders DSM-­5 (APA, 2013) includes two other
personality disorders. They are briefly described here for completeness.
NARCISSISTIC PERSONALITY DISORDER This is categorized by a grandiose
sense of self-­ importance or uniqueness; preoccupation with fantasies of
unlimited success, power, brilliance, beauty or ideal love; an
exhibitionistic need for constant attention and admiration;
indifference, anger or humiliation in response to criticism or
indifference from others and characteristic disturbances in
interpersonal relationships, such as feelings of entitlement to special
favours, taking advantage of other people, relationships with others
that alternate between the extremes of over-­idealization and devaluation
and lack of empathy. AVOIDANT PERSONALITY DISORDER This personality
disorder is, in fact, close to the anxious personality disorder of
ICD-­10; it is characterized by excessive sensitivity to rejection,
humiliation or shame. There is unwillingness to enter into a
relationship unless the person receives strong guarantees of uncritical
acceptance. There is social withdrawal despite a need for affection and
acceptance, and the person has very low self-­esteem, devaluing their own
achievements, and is very aware of their personal shortcomings. Such
people are exquisitely sensitive to the way they believe others will
react to them. In DSM-­5, the helpful notion of three clusters of
personality types is based on descriptive similarities. Cluster A
includes paranoid, schizoid and schizotypal personality disorders. In
cluster B are antisocial, borderline, histrionic and narcissistic
personality disorders. Cluster C contains avoidant, dependent and
obsessive compulsive personality disorders. In practice, of course,
patients may show features from different clusters, and the validity of
this subclassification is still being questioned. Why is a text on
psychopathology concerned with personality classification and disorder?
The accurate observation and delineation of personality characteristics
is valuable in clinical practice for diagnosis, prognosis and the
rational planning of treatment. The

325

skills of a trained psychopathologist are ideally suited to the
observation of consistent personality traits and forming an opinion
unprejudiced by preconceived theoretical considerations. REFERENCES
Anonymous, 1986. Management of borderline personality disorders
\[leading article\]. Lancet 2, 846--847. Akiskal, H.S., 1993. Proposal
for a depressive personality (temperament). In: Tyrer, P., Stein, G.
(Eds.), Personality Disorder Reviewed. Gaskell, London. American
Psychiatric Association, 1994. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, fourth ed. American Psychiatric Association,
Washington, DC. American Psychiatric Association, 2013. Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth ed. American Psychiatric
Association, Washington, DC. Bluglass, R.S., 1983. A Guide to the Mental
Health Act, 1983. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh. Bornstein, R.F.,
2012. Dependent personality disorder. In: Widiger, T.A. (Ed.), The
Oxford Handbook of Personality Disorders. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. Carrasco, J.L., Lecic-­Tosevski, D., 2000. Specific types of
personality disorder. In: Gelder, M., López-­Ibor, J.J., Andreasen, N.C.
(Eds.), New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. Chick, J., Waterhouse, L., Wolff, S., 1979. Psychological
construing in schizoid children grown up. Br. J. Psychiatry 135,
425--430. Cleckley, H.M., 1941. The Mask of Sanity. Kingston, London.
Craft, M., 1966. Psychopathic Disorders. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Crawford, M.J., Koldobsky, N., Mulder, R., Tyrer, P., 2011. Classifying
personality disorder according to severity. J. Personal. Disord. 25,
321--330. De Alarcon, R.D., 1973. Hysteria and hysterical personality
disorder. Psychiatr. Q. 47, 258--275. Dolan, B., Coid, J., 1993.
Psychopathic and Antisocial Personality Disorders: Treatment and
Research Issues. Gaskell, London. Goodwin, F.K., Jamison, K.R., 1990.
Manic-­Depressive Illness. Oxford University Press, New York. Haddock,
A., Snowden, P., Dolan, M., Parker, J., Rees, H., 2001. Managing
dangerous people with severe personality disorder: a survey of forensic
psychiatrists' opinions. BJPsych Bull. 25, 293-- 296. Henderson, D.K.,
1939. Psychopathic States. Norton, New York. Hinshaw, S.P., 1994.
Attention Deficits and Hyperactivity in Children. Sage, Thousand Oaks,
CA. Hooley, J.M., Cole, S.H., Gironde, S., 2012. Borderline personality
disorder. In: Widiger, T.A. (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Personality
Disorders. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Jaspers, K., 1997. General
Psychopathology (J. Hoenig, M.W. Hamilton, Trans). The Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore. Malmberg, A., Lewis, G., David, A.,
Allebeck, P., 1998. Premorbid adjustment and personality in people with
schizophrenia. Br. J. Psychiatry 172, 308--313. Mill, J.S., 1811. third
ed. A System of Logic, vol. II. John W. Parker, London. Mulder, R.T.,
2012. Cultural aspects of personality disorder. In: Widiger, T.A. (Ed.),
The Oxford Handbook of Personality Disorders. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. Mullen, P.E., 1999. Dangerous people with severe personality
disorder. Br. Med. J. 319, 1146--1147.

326

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

Paris, J., 2013. The Intelligent Clinician's Guide to the DSM-­5. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. Prichard, J.C., 1835. A Treatise on Insanity
and Other Disorders Affecting the Mind. Sherwood, Gilbert and Piper,
London. Rush, B., 1812. Medical Inquiries and Observations upon the
Diseases of the Mind. Kimber and Richardson, Philadelphia. Samuels, J.,
Costa, P.T., 2012. Obsessive-­compulsive personality disorder. In:
Widiger, T.A. (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Personality Disorders.
Oxford University Press, Oxford. Schneider, K., 1923. Psychopathic
Personalities. 1958. Cassell, London. Schneider, K., 1958. Clinical
Psychopathology, fifth ed. Grune and Stratton, New York, p. 1959.
Skodol, A.E., 2012. Diagnosis and DSM-­5: work in progress. In: Widiger,
T.A. (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Personality Disorders. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. Sims, A.C.P., 1983. Neurosis in Society.
Macmillan, Basingstoke. Sims, A., Snaith, R., 1988. Anxiety in Clinical
Practice. John Wiley, Chichester. Snaith, R.P., Taylor, C.M., 1985.
Irritability: definition, assessment and associated factors. Br. J.
Psychiatry 147, 127--136. Tantam, D., 1988. Personality disorders. In:
Granville-­Grossman, K. (Ed.), Recent Advances in Clinical Psychiatry,
vol. 6. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh. Thomas, D., 1954. Under Milk
Wood. Dent, London. Thompson, D.J., 1980. A Comprehensive Study of
Hysterical Personality Disorder. MSc thesis, University of Manchester.
Tyrer, P., Alexander, J., 1979. Classification of personality disorder.
Br. J. Psychiatry 135, 163--167.

Tyrer, P., Crawford, M., Mulder, R., et al., 2011. The rationale for the
reclassification of personality disorder in the 11th revision of the
International Classification of Diseases. Personal. Ment. Health 5,
246--259. Tyrer, P., Evans, K., 2000. Personality disorders. Principles
of Medical Biology 14, 451--461. Tyrer, P., Reed, G.M., Crawford, M.J.,
2015. Classification, assessment, prevalence, and effect of personality
disorder. Lancet 385, 717--726. Tyrer, P., Stein, G., 1993. Personality
Disorder Reviewed. Gaskell, London. Whiteley, J.S., 1975. The psychopath
and his treatment. In: Silverstone, T., Barraclough, B. (Eds.),
Contemporary Psychiatry. Headley Brothers, Ashford. Widiger, T.A.,
Samuel, D.B., Mullins-­Sweatt, S., Gore, W.L., Crego, C., 2012. An
integration of normal and abnormal personality structure: the
five-­factor model. In: Widiger, T.A. (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
Personality Disorders. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Wooton, B.F.,
1959. Social Science and Social Pathology. Allen and Unwin, London.
World Health Organization, 1977. International Statistical
Classification of Diseases, Injuries and Causes of Death, Ninth
Revision. World Health Organization, Geneva. World Health Organization,
1992. The ICD-­10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders:
Clinical Description and Diagnostic Guidelines. World Health
Organization, Geneva.

Section VII

DIAGNOSIS

     

327

This page intentionally left blank

     

Chapter 21

Psychopathology and Diagnosis Chapter Outline Summary Concepts of Health
and Psychopathology Use of Symptoms to Form Diagnostic Categories The
Present State Examination Postscript Uses of Psychopathology Need for
Research

KEYWORDS Diagnosis Health

Summary Diagnosis allows the naming, defining and identification of a
singular malady so that it can become an object for consideration,
comparison, explanation and control. It is therefore self-­evident that
the diagnostic process is fundamental to the practice of psychiatry. The
importance and relevance of psychopathology is that it is the
constellation of abnormal phenomena that are elicited by the clinical
interview, reinforced by the phenomenological approach, that constitute
psychiatric syndromes. In other words, psychopathology is the foundation
upon which clinical psychiatry is built. 'There's glory for you!' 'I
don't know what you mean by "glory",' Alice said. 'I meant, there's a
nice knock-­down argument for you!' 'But "glory" doesn't mean "a nice
knock-­down argument",' Alice objected. 'When I use a word,' Humpty
Dumpty said in a rather scornful tone, 'it means just what I choose it
to mean, -- neither more nor less.' Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking
Glass (1872)

Diagnosis is much more than a word plucked out of the air and pinned on
to a hapless 'patient'. It conveys meaning about the antecedents of the
present state, about other conditions that are similar and, most
important of all, about what is likely to happen in the future and,
therefore, what should be done about it. Diagnosis is a means of
communication between doctors; it should encompass a full formulation
(see Chapter 2) rather than just a single word used in an idiosyncratic
manner. The importance of making a diagnosis and the range of diagnoses
are as great in psychiatry as in the rest of medicine; the conceptual
differences between different diagnostic categories are actually
greater, as 329

330

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

mental disorders include situational, social, emotional and
psychological disturbance as well as physical illness. Understandably,
most of the medical illnesses that have been described are based on
signs or symptoms; this is true also for psychiatry. There is therefore
a very close association between the observation and classification of
'symptoms in the mind' (Burton, 1621) and psychiatric diagnosis. The
importance with which diagnosis is regarded in psychiatry has developed
alongside the introduction of effective remedies for many conditions.
There has been a substantial change in the attitude of psychiatrists
since Stengel wrote in 1959 that there was 'almost general
dissatisfaction with the state of psychiatric classification, national
and international'. Much of the progress made has arisen directly from
the more careful application of descriptive psychopathology, for
instance, Kendell (1975). Schwartz and Wiggins (1987) have shown that to
make a diagnosis an experienced clinician uses a mechanism of
typification: 'This more fundamental capacity to recognize various
mental disorders arises, not through mastering conceptual definitions,
but rather through directly encountering individual patients who
manifest these disorders. Through such direct encounters we learn the
typical forms of the various mental disorders. We learn what is
distinctive to each condition and how to distinguish these conditions
from one another'. This process of 'typification' seeks to recognize
what is emblematic of different conditions, what is unusual but yet
representative, and what is untypical and so highly unusual as to be
uncharacteristic. Thus the detailed examination of psychopathologic
functions that forms the substance of this text is a prerequisite to
this, the first step for clinical diagnosis in psychiatry. Abnormal
phenomena, then, are the foundation of the diagnostic process. Diagnosis
allows the naming, defining and identification of a singular malady so
that it can become an object for consideration, comparison, explanation
and control (Sadler, 2004). In general medicine, diagnosis is based on
the complete clinical process: detailed history taking, examination of
the patient and carrying out appropriate special investigations. This is
true also for psychiatry. However, because of the limitations of its
subject, this book does not deal with physical examination nor

with physical (radiologic, laboratory) or psychological (psychometric)
investigations.

Concepts of Health and Psychopathology The late Peter Sedgwick (1981)
made the important point that 'disease is a human invention ... there
are no illnesses or diseases in nature', hence the quotation at the
beginning of this chapter. He rightly pointed out that human beings
describe potato blight as a disease solely because they want to grow
potatoes: 'if man wished to cultivate parasites (rather than potatoes)
there would be no "blight" but simply the necessary foddering of the
parasite crop'. Sedgwick claimed that it was the human social meaning
attached to the fracture of a septuagenarian femur that constituted
illness or disease. Out of his anthropocentric self-­interest, man has
chosen to consider as 'illness' or 'diseases' those natural
circumstances which precipitate the death (or the failure to function
according to certain rules) of a limited number of biological species;
man himself, his pets and other cherished livestock, and the plant
varieties he cultivates for gain or pleasure. Such arguments point us to
the fact that medicine is not 'objective, scientific' applied biology
but is necessarily value-­laden. This is true of the disruption of the
internal state that 'patients' bring as 'complaints' to the doctor and
true also of those complaints that the doctor regards as 'symptoms'. For
Sedgwick (1982), all diseases start as illness states recognized as such
because of the negative value attached to the symptoms or complaints.
All illness, whether conceived in localized bodily terms or within a
larger view of human functioning, expresses both a social value
judgement (contrasting a person's condition with certain understood and
accepted norms) and an attempt at explanation (with a view to
controlling the disvalued condition). Another view of the effect of
social values on the presentation of illness is the notion of the sick
role as developed by Talcott Parsons (1902--79) (1951a). Whatever the
underlying causes of conditions, the role that the subject themself, the
patient, chooses to play and the role that is forced on them by those
around them because of their illness are highly significant in the way
their symptoms manifest. Parsons (1951b)

21

argued that health is included in the functional needs of the individual
member of society so that, from the point of view of the functioning of
the social system, too low a general level of health or too high an
incidence of illness is dysfunctional. Disease in this formulation
incapacitates the effective performance of social roles, and there is
therefore social interest in the alleviation of disease. To put this in
another way, disease is not purely or merely a natural phenomenon but a
state of disturbance of the total human being, including the state of
the organism as a biological system and of their personal and social
adjustments, including their ability to fulfil social roles. This
approach introduces the notion that behavioural deviance itself can be
the source of disease. Yet how is such deviance to be recognized and
defined? Social deviance can be recognized by self-­definition. The
individual may come to hold the belief that they have a problem or there
may be a societal reaction that indicates that an individual's behaviour
constitutes a problem. Societal reaction of this type might occur when a
community comes to recognize a person's inability or reluctance to
respond in a particular expected way. According to David Mechanic
(1968), 'the view taken of the deviant depends in large part on the
frame of reference of the observer and the extent to which the deviant
appears to be able or willing to control his responses. The evaluator
views the act within the context of what he believes the actor's
motivation to be. If the action appears reasonable in terms of the
assumed motivation of the actor, there is a very good chance that
deviant behaviour will be defined in terms of the goodness-- badness
dimension. If the behaviour appears to be peculiar and at odds with
expectations of how a reasonable person might be motivated, such
behaviour is more likely to be characterized in terms of the sickness
dimension'. The problem with this is self-­evident. Disease definition in
this formulation seems significantly prone to error and subjective
judgement and is liable to be used as a tool of social control. With
regard to self-­definition of illness, people differ in the way they
perceive, evaluate and act on or fail to act on the symptoms they
experience. Mechanic (1986) has called this illness behaviour. This is
influenced by the salience of the complaint, the degree to

Psychopathology and Diagnosis

331

which it disturbs social roles, the folk understanding of the
seriousness and consequences of the complaint or implied disease, and
the competing claims on the person's time and resources. Somatic or
psychological symptoms do, of course, frequently occur without any
evidence of organic disease. When attempting to describe and classify
such symptoms, it is helpful to establish a phenomenological basis;
conditions are recognized because of the particular characteristics of
the patient's complaints, not because of some presumed theoretical
notion of cause. The bizarre lengths that result from the application of
a preformed theory of disease aetiology to symptoms, rather than
developing from symptoms to theory, is admirably illustrated in
Engelhardt's (1981) essay 'The disease of masturbation'. In the 19th
century, masturbation was widely believed to produce many signs and
symptoms including dyspepsia, constriction of the urethra, epilepsy,
blindness, vertigo, loss of hearing, headache, impotence, loss of
memory, insanity, cardiac arrhythmia, rickets, leucorrhoea in women,
conjunctivitis and generalized weakness, and it was held to be a
dangerous disease entity. Lewis (1953) pointed out that mental illness
could be characterized in terms of psychopathology: 'disturbance of part
functions as well as general efficiency'. The term Part functions refers
to the different aspects of psychological experience and behaviour
described in previous chapters: memory, perception, forming beliefs and
so on. Thus Lewis saw a disturbance in perception, for example
hallucination, as a reason for establishing a case of mental
illness---on psychopathologic grounds. This approach antedated
Christopher Boorse's contribution to our understanding of the nature of
mental disorders. His distinction between disease and illness is
deservedly influential. He argued that an organism is healthy to the
degree that it is not diseased. And, he defined a disease as a type of
internal state of an organism that interferes with some function that
contributes to survival and reproduction. In addition, that the disease
state is not simply in the nature of the species; that is, it is either
atypical of the species or, if typical, mainly due to environmental
causes. Diseases become illnesses only when they satisfy certain
further, and normative, conditions. A disease is an illness only if it
is serious enough to be incapacitating and therefore is regarded as
undesirable, a title for special treatment and a valid excuse for
normally

332

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

criticizable behaviour. For Boorse, mental functions such as perceptual
processing, intelligence and memory clearly serve to provide information
about the world that can guide effective action. Drives serve to
motivate it. Anxiety and pain function as signals of danger, language as
a device for cultural co-­operation and cognitive enrichment, and so on.
He concludes: 'it seems certain that a few of the recognized mental
disorders are genuine diseases, whether mental or physical. Even without
any knowledge of the relevant functional systems, one can sometimes
infer internal malfunction immediately from biologically incompetent
behaviour'. Finally, Boorse thought that diseases are what doctors treat
and illnesses are what people suffer from (Boorse, 1976).

Use of Symptoms to Form Diagnostic Categories The relationship between
signs and symptoms in psychiatry was discussed in Chapter 1.
Traditionally, symptoms have been divided into those causing suffering
and pain (distress) and those causing loss of function (disability).
When the only disharmony is between the individual and their society,
the disturbance is not regarded as mental illness. For the great
majority of mental disorders, diagnostic classification is made
according to the profile of symptoms presented. Exceptions to this are
as follows: • when the aetiology is known, for example, dementia in
human immunodeficiency virus disease; • when the genetic basis and
structural pathology are known, for example, Huntington disease; and •
when cause is hypothesized to result from a process without conclusive
evidence, for example, dissociative fugue. Descriptive psychopathology
is almost atheoretical in nature and thus allows the development of a
generally descriptive diagnostic terminology. Symptoms are collected
into constellations that commonly occur together to form the syndromes
of mental illness. It is usual to make a distinction between illness,
with a definite onset after normal health, and the lifelong
characteristics of learning disability or personality disorder. Another
fundamental distinction often made by psychiatrists and based ultimately
on psychopathology

is that between psychoses and neuroses. Psychoses 'are major mental
illness. They are exceedingly hard to define although they are usually
said to be characterized by severe symptoms, such as delusions and
hallucinations, and by lack of insight' (Gelder et al., 1983); there is
loss of contact with reality. It is probable that the everyday use of
the concept of psychosis by clinicians is based on the notion of
'unitary psychosis'; the development of this concept has been discussed
by Berrios and Beer (1994). Neurosis 'is a psychological reaction to
acute or continuous perceived stress, expressed in emotion or behaviour
ultimately inappropriate in dealing with that stress'; phenomenological
characteristics held in common by neurotic patients include disturbances
of self-­ image, of the experience of relationships and, often, bodily
symptoms without organic cause (Sims, 1983). Although the term neurosis
has fallen out of favour, the concepts that the term refers to are still
important as organizing principles: an understandable reaction to
stress; the emotional disturbance is a variant of normal response,
possibly only exaggerated in degree and intensity; a condition in which
insight is retained; and finally the extent of disruption to personality
and self-­identity is minimal. Psychiatric diagnosis is often
hierarchical, organic syndromes taking precedence over functional
psychoses, these over neuroses and neuroses over situational or
adjustment reactions. A patient with schizophrenia and super-­added
anxiety will usually receive only the diagnosis of schizophrenia. This
can be a considerable disadvantage in practice for planning treatment
programmes as, for instance, the prognosis of chronic schizophrenia may
be determined more by the presence of neurotic symptoms than by the
response of schizophrenic symptoms to treatment (Cheadle et al., 1978).
Foulds (1976) used this hierarchical approach to establish a system of
classification of personal illness, with delusions of disintegration at
the apex, taking priority over intervening levels down to dysthymic
states as the lowest level. An example of categorical classification is
shown in Box 21.1. Various noncategorical methods of classification have
also been used. In the dimensional approach as advocated by Eysenck
(1970), the variations of presentation of mental illness are accounted
for on just three dimensions: psychoticism, neuroticism and

21

BOX 21.1 CLASSIFICATION OF MENTAL DISORDERS Psychoses • Organic
disorders: -- Acute organic syndrome -- Chronic organic syndrome
(dementia) -- Dysamnestic syndrome • Schizophrenia: -- Schizoaffective
disorders -- Paranoid states • Affective disorders: -- Mania --
Depressive disorder Neuroses and Related Disorders • Neuroses: --
Depressive neurosis -- Anxiety neurosis -- Phobic neurosis --
Obsessional neurosis -- Hysteria -- Depersonalization syndrome --
Nonspecific and mixed • Personality disorders • Adjustment disorder •
Other disorders: -- Sexual dysfunction and sexual deviations -- Alcohol
and drug dependence -- Miscellaneous syndromes -- Psychological factors
associated with medical conditions • Mental retardation • Disorders
specific to childhood After Gelder, M., Gath, D., Mayou, R., 1983.
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford, with
permission of Oxford University Press.

extroversion/introversion. Multiaxial classification codes different
sets of information separately. THE PRESENT STATE EXAMINATION An example
of psychiatric phenomenology applied in nosologic research is the
development of the Present State Examination (PSE; Wing et al., 1974):
'The Present State Examination (PSE) schedule is a guide to structuring
a clinical interview, with the object of assessing the present mental
state of adult patients suffering from one of the neuroses or functional
psychoses.' It aims to enquire about the patient's condition and
subjective state and to record this information as symptoms. When there
is conflict between clinical and statistical judgements, clinical
judgement is allowed to prevail. Symptoms are aggregated into a list of

Psychopathology and Diagnosis

333

syndromes. The classification of symptoms is carried out on a programme
known as 'Catego', which reduces the 500 PSE items to a maximum of six
descriptive categories and thence into one descriptive group for the
individual patient. An aim of the PSE has been to determine whether
there are clinically recognizable symptoms on which all psychiatrists
can agree and label in the same way. Wing et al. (1974) pose two
questions: First, whether certain psychological and behavioural
phenomena which have generally been thought by psychiatrists to be
symptoms of mental illnesses can be reliably recognized and described,
irrespective of the language and culture of the doctor or patient;
secondly, whether rules of classification can be specified with such
precision that an individual with a given pattern of symptoms will also
be allocated to the same clinical grouping. Thus the PSE starts from a
psychopathologic standpoint. The interviewer is trained to note the
presence or absence of listed symptoms in the glossary. Groups of
symptoms are collected together into syndromes by use of computerized
Catego class. The end product of the PSE is diagnosis as a research tool
based on phenomenology and available for study by other workers in other
cultures. An example of the relationship between syndromes and symptoms
in the PSE is shown in Fig. 21.1. This example of an excerpt from the
PSE involves the terms used for the symptoms of schizophrenia. The
nuclear syndrome of Wing et al. (1974) is composed of Schneider's (1958)
first-­rank symptoms. The symptoms they listed as comprising this
syndrome in the ninth edition of the PSE are thought intrusion, thought
insertion, thought broadcast, thought commentary, thought withdrawal,
voices about the patient, delusions of control, delusions of alien
penetration and primary delusions. They make the useful point that
thought insertion is likely to be rated with a false positive if the
examiner does not have the symptom in mind but some general
approximation to it. Voices about the patient implies nonaffective
verbal hallucinations heard by the subject talking about him in the
third person. Delusions of control refers, of course, to passivity
experiences. Delusions of alien forces penetrating or controlling the
mind

334

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology
Syndrome no. Syndrome name (a) 1 (NS)

Symptoms (list II)

(b) 
(c) 

Nuclear syndrome

55 Thought intrusion

62 Voices about patient

56 Thought broadcast

71 Delusions of control

57 Thought commentary

81 Delusions of alien penetration

58 Thought withdrawal

82 Primary delusions

0

No symptoms

1

NS? = partial delusions only

2

NS+ = 1 symptom

3

NS+ = 2+ symptoms

Fig. 21.1 Excerpt from the Present State Examination. (From Wing, J.K.,
Cooper, J.E., Sartorius, N., 1974. The Measurement and Classification of
Psychiatric Symptoms: an Instruction Manual for the PSE and Category
Program. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, with permission.)

or body is a special form of symptom already listed as belonging to the
nuclear syndrome. By primary delusions, Wing et al. imply delusional
perception and give the example of a patient undergoing liver biopsy who
came to believe, as the needle was inserted, that they had been chosen
by God. The 10th edition of the PSE was further developed into the
Schedules for Clinical Assessment in Neuropsychiatry (SCAN; Wing et al.,
1990), which then mapped into the diagnostic categories in International
Classification of Diseases (World Health Organization, 1992) and
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd revised
edition (American Psychiatric Association, 1987). The emphasis placed
here on the PSE is intended because it is such a direct application of
descriptive psychopathology to psychiatric diagnosis (Table 21.1).

Postscript Fundamental to psychiatry is the need to understand what the
patient is experiencing. Eisenberg (1986) has succinctly summarized the
aspirations of the biological school of psychiatry: 'For every twisted
thought there is a twisted molecule.' Ironically, if this association
were to be achieved it would make the need for expert phenomenological
skills more, rather than less, important, as it is likely to remain,
from the patient's point of view, more comfortable to have their
thoughts than their molecules explored. At the opposite pole of
psychiatry, psychodynamics, there is also great value in

descriptive psychopathology, unembellished by interpretation, as a
starting point for further understanding. USES OF PSYCHOPATHOLOGY It has
been said of William of Ockham, who so courageously navigated the murky
and dangerous waters of medieval philosophy and science, that he was 'an
empiricist refusing to stretch knowledge beyond the bounds of
ascertainable experience' (Leff, 1958). This is the position of
descriptive psychopathology: aiming not to draw conclusions beyond the
subjective experience of the patient and its judicious exploration by
the interviewer. Every psychiatrist uses phenomenology to some extent,
but it is a much more valuable tool if used rigorously. The four
practical applications of descriptive psychopathology, then, are as
follows. • Communication. It enables clinicians to speak and write to
each other about the problems of their patients in a mutually
comprehensible way. This is clearly of value both in clinical practice
and for research. • Diagnosis. Psychiatric diagnosis is based to a
considerable extent on psychopathology, and this is wholly appropriate,
especially until there is more evidence for aetiology and underlying
pathology for the different conditions. • Therapy. The method of
empathy, that is using phenomenology to explore the patient's subjective
experience, is a rational way of establishing a therapeutic
relationship. It enables the therapist

21

TABLE 21.1 First-­Rank Symptoms of Schizophreniaa and Symptoms from the
Present State Examinationb First-­Rank Symptom

Equivalent Symptom from Present State Examination

Delusional Delusional percept

Primary delusion

Auditory Hallucinations Audible thoughts Voices arguing or discussing
Voices commenting on the patient's action

Thought echo or commentary Voices about the patient Voices about the
patient

Thought Disorder: Passivity of Thought Thought withdrawal Thought
insertion Thought broadcasting (diffusion of thought)

Thought block or withdrawal Thought insertion Thought broadcast or
thought sharing

Passivity Experiences: Delusion of Control Passivity of affect ('made'
feelings) Passivity of impulse ('made' drives) Passivity of volition
('made' volitional acts) Somatic passivity (influence playing on the
body)

Delusions of control Delusions of control Delusions of control Delusions
of alien penetration

aSchneider, K. 1958. Clinical Psychopathology, fifth ed.

(M.W. Hamilton, Trans, 1959). Grune and Stratton, New York. bWing, J.K.,
Cooper, J.E., Sartorius, N., 1974. The Measurement and Classification of
Psychiatric Symptoms: an Instruction Manual for the PSE and Category
Program. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.   

to understand the subjective experience of their patient and will give
the patient confidence in further entrusting the secrets of his internal
environment to the therapist. • The law. Descriptive psychopathology is
the only reasonable way of determining what is mental illness and what
are the differences between mental illnesses from a forensic point of
view. Mutual enlightenment in the area between the law and psychiatry,
where there is at present so much misunderstanding, will result from a
clearer

Psychopathology and Diagnosis

335

acknowledgement of the value of psychopathology by lawyers and doctors.
The patient's symptoms, their sufferings, are a logical starting point
for the doctor's sympathy, curiosity and therapeutic endeavour. To start
elsewhere turns medicine on its head and, ultimately, one arrives in a
topsy-­ turvy world like Samuel Butler's Erewhon (1872), where 'illness
of any sort is considered ... to be highly criminal and immoral; and
that I was liable, for catching cold, to be had up before the
Magistrates and imprisoned for a considerable period' and 'if a man
forges a cheque, or sets his home on fire or robs with violence from a
person, or does any such things that are criminal in our own country, he
is either taken to a hospital and is carefully tended at the public
expense, or if he was in good circumstances, he lets it be known to all
his friends that he is suffering from a severe fit of immorality ... and
they come and visit him with great solicitude'. You may think this is
too far-­fetched; however, the less pleasant aspects of this certainly
appear to have been the situation for some of the dissidents in
psychiatric custody in the previous USSR (Bloch and Reddaway, 1977). The
ultimate aim of psychiatry is not, of course, knowledge, but to help
people to function and feel better; phenomenology is a valuable
therapeutic tool. Ideally, it gives the patient, in their doctor, a
person who understands what they are feeling but does not try to explain
causes in terms of theory, which the patient may find unconvincing. The
patient often has a great sense of relief when the doctor, however
falteringly, describes back to them the symptoms, or the internal
experience, that they, the patient, have found so difficult to describe.
NEED FOR RESEARCH Psychopathology was introduced into psychiatry before
the current emphasis on quantification, population surveys and
experimental method. It is now imperative both for the further
development of descriptive psychopathology and, more importantly, for
continued progress in psychiatric research that more rigorous research
methods be applied. Phenomenology has a place in psychiatric research
that has not yet been fully exploited. It forms a logical bridge between
research findings emanating from clinical and applied psychology and the
increasing

336

Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology

knowledge of disordered neuroanatomy---physiology and chemistry---that
is resulting from more sophisticated methods of neuroimaging and assay.
This is the direction that research in descriptive psychopathology
should go. Investigation of the experience of the individual has to be
linked to an understanding of their biology, and it is also important to
assess how normal phenomena are distributed within the population. The
scientific bases of psychiatry include, as well as biological and
behavioural sciences, epidemiology and phenomenology. Recognition of
homogeneity includes both the symptoms within an individual patient and
the features of an affected population. The PSE has been discussed
earlier as a method of quantifying psychopathologic information. To
introduce experimental methods into research in descriptive
psychopathology will sometimes involve single case studies in which
variables that have been evaluated phenomenologically are altered. For
example, Green and Preston (1981) amplified the quiet whispering of a
chronic schizophrenic patient during the time they were auditorily
hallucinated. They whispered at the same time as they heard voices, and
the content of their vocalization corresponded to what the voices were
reported to have said, thus demonstrating the disturbance of boundaries
of self found in schizophrenia. This type of investigation has been
extended further, and there are several examples in this book (see
Chapters 7 and 11). There has been a danger in that some other
psychological studies, not quoted here, have used phenomenology
imprecisely and hence vitiated the significance of their findings. An
interesting development in research based on descriptive psychopathology
is the application of particular psychological techniques to specific
phenomenological entities. Examples of this are the use of cognitive
behaviour therapy in the treatment of persistent auditory hallucinations
(Bentall et al., 1994) and more general application of psychological
interventions in schizophrenia (Haddock and Lewis, 1996). It is
important that progress in the treatment of patients and in research
that advances in biological aspects of psychiatry are assisted by
accurate psychiatric diagnosis based on phenomenology that is both
reliable (i.e., capable of reproduction by the same interviewer at a
different time or by different interviewers)

and quantifiable. Never were the skills of the clinical phenomenologist
more necessary or more likely to yield beneficial results both in
understanding and in therapy. The introduction of improved
neuropsychiatric methods of investigation increases the need for
reliable findings from descriptive psychopathology rather than rendering
it obsolete. Jaspers (1997) commented, 'phenomenology, though one of the
foundation stones of psychopathology, is still very crude'. This is
still true, but it is now high time that descriptive psychopathology
became more sophisticated. Phenomenology takes the doctor's art and
discipline of observation inside their patient's mind. David Hume (1804)
described the absence of physical examination in medicine in his essay
Of Polygamy and Divorces. He tells of the physician brought into the
Grand Signior's seraglio in Constantinople. He was not a little
surprised in looking along a gallery to see a great number of naked arms
standing out from the sides of the room. He could not imagine what this
could mean; until he was told that those arms belonged to bodies which
he must cure without knowing any more about them than what he could
learn from the arms. He was not allowed to ask a question of the
patient, or even of her attendants, lest he might find it necessary to
enquire concerning circumstances which the delicacy of the seraglio
allows not to be revealed. Hence physicians in the east pretend to know
all diseases from the pulse, as our quacks in Europe undertake to cure a
person merely from seeing his water. Psychiatry must now come out of the
seraglio and use all available information in the service of its
patients, including phenomenology, for diagnosis, for understanding and
for treatment. REFERENCES Bentall, R.P., Haddock, G., Slade, P.D., 1994.
Cognitive behaviour therapy for persistent auditory hallucinations: from
theory to therapy. Behav. Psychother. 25, 51--56. Berrios, G.E., Beer,
D., 1994. The notion of unitary psychosis: a conceptual history. Hist.
Psychiat. V 13--36. Bloch, S., Reddaway, P., 1977. Russia's Political
Hospital. Gollancz, London. Boorse, C., 1976. What a theory of mental
health should be. J. Theory Soc. Behav. 6, 61--84. Burton, R., 1621. The
Anatomy of Melancholy, what it Is. With All the Kinds, Causes, Symptoms,
Prognostickes, and Severall Cures of it by Democritus Junior. Cripps,
Oxford. Butler, S., 1872. Erewhon. Cape, London.

21 Carroll, L., 1872. Through the Looking Glass, and what Alice Found
There. Macmillan, London. Cheadle, A.J., Freeman, H.L., Korer, J., 1978.
Chronic schizophrenic patients in the community. Br. J. Psychiatry 132,
221--227. Eisenberg, L., 1986. Mindlessness and brainlessness in
psychiatry. Br. J. Psychiatry 148, 497--508. Engelhardt, H.T., 1981. The
disease of masturbation: values and the concept of disease. In: Caplan,
A.L., Engelhardt, D.T., McCartney, J.J. (Eds.), Concepts of Health and
Disease. Addison-­Wesley, Reading. Eysenck, H.J., 1970. A dimensional
system of psychodiagnosis. In: Mahrer, A.R. (Ed.), New Approaches to
Personality Classification. Columbia University Press, New York,
pp. 169--207. Foulds, G.A., 1976. The Hierarchical Nature of Personal
Illness. Academic Press, London. Gelder, M., Gath, D., Mayou, R., 1983.
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Green,
P., Preston, M., 1981. Reinforcement of vocal correlates of auditory
hallucinations using auditory feedback: a case study. Br. J. Psychiatry
139, 204--208. Haddock, G., Lewis, S.W., 1996. New psychological
treatments in schizophrenia. Adv. Psychiatr. Treat. 2, 110--116. Hume,
D., 1804. Essays and Treaties on Several Subjects, vol. 1. Bell and
Bradfute, Edinburgh. Jaspers, K., 1997. General Psychopathology (J.
Hoenig, M.W. Hamilton, Trans). The Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore. Kendell, R.E., 1975. The Role of Diagnosis in Psychiatry.
Blackwell, Oxford. Leff, G., 1958. Medieval Thoughts. Penguin,
Harmondsworth. Lewis, A.J., 1953. Health as a social concept. Br. J.
Sociol. 4, 109-- 124.

Psychopathology and Diagnosis

337

Mechanic, D., 1968. Medical Sociology. The Free Press, New York.
Mechanic, D., 1986. The concept of illness behaviour: culture, situation
and personal predisposition. Psychol. Med. 16, 1--7. Parsons, T., 1951a.
Illness and the role of the physician: a sociological perspective. Am.
J. Orthopsychiatry 21, 452--460. Parsons, T., 1951b. The Social System.
The Free Press, New York. Sadler, J.Z., 2004. Values and Psychiatric
Diagnosis. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Schneider, K., 1958.
Clinical Psychopathology. In: (M.W. Hamilton, Trans, 1959), fifth
ed. Grune and Stratton, New York. Schwartz, M.A., Wiggins, O.P., 1987.
Typifications: the first step for clinical diagnosis in psychiatry. J.
Nerv. Ment. Dis. 175, 65--77. Sedgwick, P., 1981. Illness -- mental and
otherwise. In: Caplan, A.L., Engelhardt, H.T., McCartney, J.J. (Eds.),
Concepts of Health and Disease: Interdisciplinary Perspectives.
Addison-­Wesley, Reading, pp. 119--130. Sedgwick, P., 1982. Psycho
Politics. Harper and Row, New York. Sims, A.C.P., 1983. Neurosis in
Society. Macmillan, London. Stengel, E., 1959. Classification of mental
disorders. Bull. World Health Organ. 21, 601--603. Wing, J.K., Babor,
T., Brugha, T., et al., 1990. SCAN: schedules for clinical Assessment in
Neuropsychiatry. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 47, 589--593. Wing, J.K., Cooper,
J.E., Sartorius, N., 1974. The Measurement and Classification of
Psychiatric Symptoms: An Instruction Manual for the PSE and Category
Program. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. World Health
Organization, 1992. The ICD-­10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural
Disorders: Clinical Description and Diagnostic Guidelines. World Health
Organization, Geneva.

This page intentionally left blank      

Self-­Assessment 1 Instructions

Chapter 2

Each set of numbered items is followed by five lettered options. Select
the ONE lettered option that is BEST in each case.

Specific communication skill techniques include the following EXCEPT: a)
Summary statements b) Attentive listening c) Normalizing statements d)
Looped questions e) Open questions Aspects of observation of appearance
and behaviour include the following EXCEPT: a) Posture b) Gesture c)
Talk d) Facial expression e) Self-­hygiene Assessment of insight involves
the following domains EXCEPT: a) Fluency of talk b) Recognition of
subjective psychological change c) Attribution of the change to
pathology d) Recognition of need for treatment e) Compliance with
treatment

Chapter 1 Descriptive psychopathology is: a) The study of ego defence
mechanisms that underlies behaviour change b) Concerned with the
selection, delimitation, differentiation and description of abnormal
psychological phenomena c) Directly the outcome of analysing the content
of dreams d) A method of describing the interaction between doctors and
patients e) An introspective system of understanding and describing
abnormal cognitions Empathy in descriptive psychopathology is: a)
Achieved by precise, insightful, persistent and knowledgeable
exploration of the patient's experience b) A communication technique
aimed at putting the patient at ease c) Metacommunication d) The basis
of sympathy for the patient's situation e) An aspect of transference The
term understanding in psychopathology: a)  Derives from Freud's
structural theory of the psyche b) Describes the causal mechanisms
underlying abnormal experiences c) Has no limit in the capacity to
describe and comprehend experience d) Derives from Dilthey's conception
of the distinction between the sciences and humanities e) Has no place
in contemporary psychiatry

Chapter 3 Automatism is characterized by the following EXCEPT: a)
Involuntary behaviour b) Behaviour that is inappropriate to the
circumstances c) Complex and coordinated behaviour d) Unimpaired
judgement e) Apparently purposeful and directed behaviour Mania à potu
is a syndrome characterized by the following EXCEPT: a) Insomnia b)
Total or partial amnesia for the aberrant behaviour c) Alcohol
consumption d) Senseless violence e) Prolonged sleep 339

340

Self-Assessment 1

Delirium is a condition characterized by the following EXCEPT: a)
Insidious onset b) Global impairment of cognitive functions c) Reduced
level of consciousness d) Impaired attention e) Disordered sleep--wake
cycle

Long-­term memory functions include the following EXCEPT: a) Registration
b) Retention c) Repression d) Retrieval e) Recall

Chapter 4

Chapter 6

Dreams: a) Occur in non--rapid eye movement (REM) sleep b) Are
associated with paralysis c) Involve an accentuation of self-­awareness
d) Involve consolidation of spatial and temporal connections e) Are
synonymous with night terror Kleine--Levin syndrome is characterized by:
a) Severe hypersomnia b) Sleep paralysis c) Short REM latency d)
Hypnogogic hallucinations e) Cataplexy Attention: a) Is the focusing of
consciousness on any aspect of experience b) Is synonymous with
concentration c) Involves disinhibition of memory d) Is distinct from
vigilance e) Relies solely on active processes

Formal characteristics of time include all of the following EXCEPT: a)
Duration b) Sequence c) Synchrony d) Rhythm e) Bidirectionality Déjà vu
experience is an example of abnormality of: a) Rhythm b) Sense of
uniqueness of time c) Time duration d) Temporal order e) Direction of
time Features of seasonal affective disorder include the following
EXCEPT: a) Hypersomnia b) Insomnia c) Craving for carbohydrates d)
Overeating e) Lethargy

Chapter 5

Chapter 7

The following are TRUE of confabulation EXCEPT: a) It is a false memory
b) It is associated with organic amnesia c) It can involve embellishment
of actual memories d) It is typically 'fantastic' in nature e)
Suggestibility is a prominent feature Short-­term memory: a) Is an
unlimited capacity system b) Comprises a central action system c)
Involves a 'phonological loop' that holds memory traces for up to 5
minutes d) Involves a visuospatial scratch pad that allows for
manipulation of visual information e) Cannot be distinguished from
attention

Abnormalities of the elementary aspects of visual perception include the
following EXCEPT: a) Palinopsia b) Macropsia c) Hemacropsia d)
Palinacousis e) Achromatopsia In synaesthesia the following are TRUE
EXCEPT: a) The perception of a sensory object is presented in another
sensory modality b) The perception occurs in peri-­personal space c)
Music to colour transformations occur d) Elaboration of form constants
is a feature e)  Emotional distress is a common accompaniment

Self-Assessment 1

Formal characteristics of images include the following EXCEPT: a) Images
are not clearly delineated b) Images have a character of objectivity c)
Images appear in inner subjective space d) Images are actively created
e)  Images dissipate rapidly and have to be re­ created

Chapter 8 The following are examples of primary delusions EXCEPT: a)
Autochthonous delusions b) Delusional percept c) Persecutory delusions
d) Delusional atmosphere e) Delusional memory Secondary delusions are:
a) Secondary to other abnormal experiences b) Understandable in the
light of the patient's social context c) Not held with conviction d)
Amenable to counterargument e) Transient Delusions are examples of: a)
Perseveration b) Impairment of consciousness c) False perception d)
False beliefs e) Autoscopy

Chapter 9 Schneider's first-­rank symptoms include the following EXCEPT:
a) Somatic hallucinations b) Audible thoughts c) Passivity experiences
d) Thought withdrawal e) Thought insertion Delusions of control of
thought include EXCEPT: a) Thought broadcasting b) Thought echo c)
Thought insertion d) Thought withdrawal e) Thought blocking

341

The term circumstantiality refers to: a) Flight of ideas b) Loosening of
association c) Concrete thinking d) Over-inclusive thinking e) Impedance
of flow of thinking by unnecessary detail

Chapter 10 Recognized abnormalities of language in schizophrenia include
the following EXCEPT: a) Lack of use of cohesive ties b) Alogia c)
Neologism d) Clang associations e) Telegony The Cloze technique is a
measure of: a) Predictability of speech b) The proportion of the number
of different words to the total number of words c) Cohesive ties d)
Rules of proposition e) Fluency of language Primary sensory dysphasia
is: a) The inability to produce names or sounds at will b) A gross
disturbance of words and syntax resulting in unintelligible speech c) A
disorder of indistinct speech d) The loss of comprehension of the
meaning of words e) The inability to read with understanding

Chapter 11 Insight in schizophrenia has been shown to be positively
correlated with the following EXCEPT: a) The likelihood of developing
depression b) The likelihood of hospitalizations c) Compliance with
treatment d) Long-­term outcome e) Working memory Valid measures of
insight must take into consideration the following EXCEPT: a) The
multidimensional aspect of insight b) The relationship of insight to
affect c) The influence of cultural factors

342

Self-Assessment 1

d)  The variation of insight across different symptom domains
e)  The added value of behavioural observations Insight involves all of
    the following EXCEPT:
f)  Awareness of change
g)  Recognition of illness in others
h)  Attribution of change to illness
i)  Recognition of the need for treatment
j)  Cooperation with treatment

Chapter 12 Autoscopy can involve all of the following EXCEPT: a) Feeling
of presence b) Failure to perceive self in a mirror c) Visual
hallucination of internal organs within bodily space d) Visual
hallucination of exact copy of the self in mirror image e) Projection of
the observing self in extrapersonal space Ego vitality is: a) Awareness
of being an agent b) Awareness of unity and coherence of self c)
Awareness of being d) Awareness of continuity of self over time e)
Awareness of boundaries to the self Nihilistic delusion is an example
of: a) Disorder of ego boundary b) Disorder of continuity of self over
time c) Disorder of activity d) Disorder of vitality e) Disorder of
unity of self

Chapter 13 Definitive features of depersonalization include the
following EXCEPT: a) The experience is pleasant b) There is a feeling of
strangeness c) It is a subjective experience d) Insight is preserved e)
It can affect bodily sensation Depersonalization has shown to consist of
a number of components including the following EXCEPT: a) Perceptual
alteration

b)  Unreality of surroundings
c)  Temporal integration
d)  Unreality of self
e)  Emotional numbing Depersonalization is known to be associated with
    the following EXCEPT:
f)  Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)
g)  Cannabis
h)  Mescaline
i)  Sensory deprivation
j)  Narcolepsy

Chapter 14 Individual determinants of hypochondriasis include the
following EXCEPT: a) Feelings of disgust b) Preoccupation with bodily
function c) Serious illness or injury in childhood d) Fear of infection
e) Fascination with the Internet Mass psychogenic illness: a) Occurs
most commonly in young males b) Often starts in a child of low status in
the peer group c) Affects most severely the most adjusted people d)
Symptoms spread by line-­of-­sight transmission e) Is unaffected by media
response The concepts of conversion and dissociation suggest: a) That
physical symptoms can only have an organic basis b) That causation is
unconscious c) That symptoms carry no obvious advantage for the patient
d) That symptoms are unlikely to be psychologically meaningful e) That
the patient is acting a part

Chapter 15 Pain asymbolia: a) Presents with absent pain response b) Is
associated with increased thermal sensitivity c) Is associated with
hyperhidrosis d) Presents with self-­stimulation e) Is usually an
acquired disorder that occurs after vascular lesions

Self-Assessment 1

Pain associated with psychopathology is: a) Better localized b) Clearly
delineated along recognized neuroanatomic distribution c) Easy for the
patient to describe d) Constant and unremitting e) Tends to be provoked
by definite agents Central pain (thalamic syndrome): a) Presents with a
cutting sensation b) Is activated by cutaneous stimulation c) Presents
as hypoalgesia d) Is unaffected by temperature change e) Does not
present with allodynia

Chapter 16 Alexithymia refers to: a) Inability to experience pleasure b)
Reacting to sad news with laughter c) Absence of unity between different
modes of experience of emotions d) Inability to verbalize affect and
elaborate fantasy e) Selective deficiency in correctly appraising vocal
expression of emotion Ekman's basic emotions include all of the
following EXCEPT: a) Anger b) Disgust c) Fear d) Jealousy e) Sadness
Mood is defined as: a) A positive or negative reaction to an experience
b) A prolonged prevailing inner state or predisposition c) A spontaneous
and transitory experience in response to an experience d) The external
behavioural manifestation of inner state e) An evaluative attitude
towards an object

Chapter 17 The respiratory subtype of panic disorder is characterized by
all of the following EXCEPT: a) Fear of dying b) Chest pain and
discomfort

343

c)  Shortness of breath
d)  Provocation by inhalation of 35% carbon dioxide
e)  Induced by specific situations Selye's general adaptation syndrome
    includes one of the following stages:
f)  Shock and numbness
g)  Sadness
h)  Guilt and hostility
i)  Flight-­or-­fight response
j)  Resolution The constituent elements of obsessive compulsive
    phenomenon include all of the following EXCEPT:
k)  Inflated sense of responsibility, even for events over which the
    patient has no control
l)  Avoidance of cues likely to trigger obsession
m)  Fear of disaster that the patient believes will come to pass
n)  Resistance
o)  Increased discomfort following compulsive act

Chapter 18 Abnormal movement in catatonia include all of the following
EXCEPT: a) Waxy flexibility b) Psychological pillow c) Stereotypy d)
Cataplexy e) Mitgehen Motivation can be defined as: a) Innate
disposition that determines what objects to attend to in the world b) A
state that initiates directed action c) A striving towards an object
that is experienced as a desire d) A reward system that governs and
regulates behaviour e) The power to put into effect voluntary action
Impulsivity involves all of the following EXCEPT: a) Predisposition
towards rapid, unplanned action b) Lack of regard for consequences c)
Preference for delayed larger reward over small but immediate reward d)
Perseverance of behaviour despite punishment e) Inability to prevent
response in response disinhibition attentional paradigm

344

Self-Assessment 1

Chapter 19 Abnormalities of form perception include which of the
following: a) Heightened preference for symmetry b) Marked reduction in
preference for symmetry c) Reduced emotional response to beauty d)
Reduced preference for neotenic facial features e)  Reduced aesthetic
valuation of distinguishing facial features Aesthetic valuation of
landscape features is affected in: a) Anxiety b) Behavioural variant
frontotemporal dementia c) Depression d) Obsessive compulsive disorder
e) Tourette syndrome Development of new onset visual art production is
associated with: a) Midline brain lesions b) Left anterior temporal lobe
lesions c) Left posterior temporal lobe lesions d) Occipital lobe
lesions e) Dorsolateral frontal lobe lesions

Chapter 20 Paranoid personality disorder can be defined as a disorder in
which: a) An individual mistrusts others and is unduly suspicious b)
There is a lack of need for and defect in capacity to form relationships
c) A defect in empathy is evident d)  Uncontrollable outbursts of
intemperate and uncontrolled mood occurs e) Theatrical behaviour and
craving for attention occurs In dependent personality disorder, all of
the following features occur EXCEPT: a) Lack of self-­confidence b)
Perfectionistic disposition

c)  Craving for support and encouragement of others
d)  Difficulty in coping with changing demands of life
e)  Presence of a dominant close relationship The following conditions
    have been shown to be frequently associated with anankastic
    personality disorder EXCEPT:
f)  Eating disorder
g)  Hypochondriasis
h)  Alcohol dependence syndrome
i)  Obsessive compulsive disorder
j)  Recurrent depressive disorder

Chapter 21 Illness behaviour is influenced by all of the following
EXCEPT: a) Salience of the complaint b) Extent of disturbance of social
roles c) Cultural understanding of the seriousness of the complaint d)
Competing claims on the sufferer's resources e) The underlying biology
of the condition All the following individuals have made contributions
to our understanding of health and disease EXCEPT: a) Christopher Boorse
b) Aaron Beck c) Peter Sedgwick d) Talcott Parsons e) David Mechanic
Practical applications of psychopathology include all of the following
EXCEPT: a) Communication between clinicians b) Cognitive neuroscience
research c) Diagnosis d) Nosology e) Therapy

Self-­Assessment 2 Instructions Each set of matching questions consists
of a list of 10 lettered options (A--J) followed by four numbered items.
For each numbered item, select the appropriate lettered option. Each
lettered option may be selected only once.

Chapters 3 and 4 A. Confusion B. Coma C. Delirium D. Disorientation E.
Hypersomnia F. Insomnia G. Oneiroid state H. Parasomnia I. Stupor J.
Twilight state 1. A 75-­year-­old female patient is found wandering the
streets. On examination, she does not know the date, day, time, season,
where she is or her own address. 2. An 18-­year-­old male patient presents
with a history of several irresistible periods of drowsiness during the
day. At night he reports periods when he is fully awake but unable to
move his limbs. 3.  The partner of a 25-­ year-­ old male patient
accompanies him to the outpatient appointment. She reports that he talks
in his sleep, wanders aimlessly in the bedroom for a few minutes at
night and has no recollection of these incidents. 4. A 47-­year-­old
female patient with a history of recurrent depression is admitted in a
mute state. She is immobile but fully conscious and alert. She is able
to make eye contact but does not respond to any attempt at verbal
communication.

Chapter 5 A. Anterograde amnesia B. Confabulation C. Cryptoamnesia D.
Dissociative fugue E. False memory F. Ganser state G. Perseveration H.
Pseudologia fantastica I. Recovered memory J. Retrograde amnesia 1. A
20-­year-­old male patient was involved in a road traffic accident. He
sustained a head injury. He was only able to recall events that happened
approximately 5 minutes before the collision. 2. A 20-­year-­old male
patient presented in prison while on remand. When examined, he responded
to questions about the date and the capital of France with approximate
answers and disorientation for time and place. 3. A 45-­year-­old male
patient was involved in an accident at work where he sustained a serious
head injury and lost consciousness. On regaining his consciousness, he
could only recall events that happened approximately 36 hours after the
incident. 4. A 57-­year-­old male patient with an established history of
impairment of short-­term memory in the context of alcohol abuse
responded to questions about how he had spent the previous day with
objectively false accounts that included embellishments and intrusions
from previous occasions.

Chapter 7 A. Imagery B. Palinopsia C. Macropsia 345

346

Self-Assessment 2

D.  Micropsia
E.  Paraprosopia
F.  Alloaesthesia
G.  Pelopsia
H.  Dyschromatopsia
I.  Teleopsia
J.  Metamorphopsia

<!-- -->

1.  A 45-­year-­old man presents with a complaint that he first saw a
    black cat at the corner where his drive joined the main street.
    After this, for the next 72 hours or so, he kept seeing the same cat
    at various times and situations. What is the term for this
    experience?
2.  A 19-­year-­old man with a recent diagnosis of schizophrenia
    complained that the faces of people looking at him would suddenly
    look different, as if they were pulling faces at him. Sometimes, the
    faces would appear sinister, lopsided and strange. What is the term
    for this experience?
3.  A 25-­year-­old female patient with a history of complex focal
    seizures complained of scenes and objects becoming smaller before a
    seizure. What is this experience termed?
4.  A 25-­year-­old male patient complained that objects look far away. He
    found this surprising and distressing. What is this experience
    termed?

Chapter 8 A. Delusional percept B. Delusional intuition C. Delusional
memory D. Delusional atmosphere E. Secondary delusion F. Overvalued idea
G. Delusion of love H. Delusional misidentification I. Delusion of
persecution J. Delusional jealousy 1. A 20-­year-­old male patient was
admitted into hospital after an attack on his father. He reported that
his father had been replaced by a robot who looked almost exactly like
him but was definitely not him. He feared that this 'robot' had
malignant intentions and that his life was in danger. What is this
belief called?

2.  A 40-­year-­old female patient complained that her local priest was
    sending her secret messages, declaring his feelings for her. She
    complained that, although he was the father of her child, he was yet
    to visit them.
3.  A 21-­year-­old female patient suddenly became convinced that she was
    the rightful heir to the throne of Norway. She was not Norwegian by
    birth or ancestry. When asked the reason for this belief, she said
    that she had suddenly come to this realization. She denied any other
    unusual experience.
4.   A 54-­ year-­ old male patient with a long-­ standing history of
    schizophrenia reported persistent and stressful auditory verbal
    hallucinations of derogatory and threatening content. The voices
    would often tell him that he deserved to be killed and that new
    immigrants into his local area from Romania were going to murder
    him. He then held a firm belief that he was at risk from immigrants,
    particularly Romanians. This belief was held with conviction and was
    impervious to counterargument.

Chapter 9 A. Fantasy thinking B. Imaginative thinking C. Conceptual
thinking D. Circumstantial thinking E. Thought block F. Concrete
thinking G. Over-inclusive thinking H. Thought insertion I. Thought
withdrawal J. Audible thought 1.  A 21-­ year-­ old male university
student described spending a lot of time thinking about the future and
about the possibility of becoming a famous musician, becoming rich and
being able to live in a mansion in Florida. 2.  A 25-­ year-­ old female
patient, newly admitted into hospital, complained that her thoughts were
being interfered with. She was particularly distressed by the experience
of having thoughts manipulated and taken from her.

Self-Assessment 2

3.  In a test, a 19-­year-­old patient with a diagnosis of schizophrenia
    responded to a question as follows: 'Which of the following are
    essential parts of a room: walls, chairs, floor, window?' 'Chairs'.
4.  A 57-­year-­old female patient said, 'I was starting to feel high, so
    I tied dumb-­bell weights round my ankle'.

Chapter 10 A. Aphonia B. Logoclonia C. Echolalia D. Paragrammatism E.
Nominal dysphasia F. Asyndesis G. Metonym H. Jargon aphasia I. Receptive
dysphasia J. Neologism 1. A 65-­year-­old, right-­handed male patient who
was recovering from a left-­sided stroke was unable to follow the verbal
command, 'Take the paper with your left hand, fold it in two and put it
on the floor'. 2. A 25-­year-­old patient said, 'Phlogons have invaded my
lungs turning first sideways and now medways'. 3.  A 64-­ year-­ old male
patient with a long-­ standing history of schizophrenia replied to the
question, 'What have you got in your cup?' 'A fluid that while being
colourless turns dark on brewing'. 4. A 72-­year-­old male patient with a
diagnosis of Parkinson's disease said, 'I'm star ..., star ..., starting
to think of mo ..., mo ..., mo ..., moving house'.

Chapter 14 A. Misoplegia B. Dysmorphophobia C. Palinaptia D.
Alloaesthesia E. Exosomesthesia F. Microsomatognosia

347

G.  Macrosomatognosia
H.  Muscle dysmorphia
I.  Paraschemazia
J.  Aschemazia

<!-- -->

1.  A 23-­year-­old male patient presented with the belief that his
    muscles were too small, a preoccupation with physical build,
    excessive exercising and disturbed eating.
2.  A 56-­year-­old female patient complained of hating her left hand.
    Although it looked normal, she said that she hated it and had always
    wished that it were different in size, shape and feel.
3.  A 27-­year-­old male patient presented with a long-­standing belief
    that his face was ugly, in particular, his nose, which he thought
    was far too large and crooked. Objectively, his nose was not
    excessively large or crooked.
4.  A 40-­year-­old female patient presented with the complaint that she
    could continue to feel her toothbrush in her hands for up to 15
    minutes after she used it.

Chapter 16 A. Anhedonia B. Echolalia C. Hyperekplexia D. Coenaesthesia
E. Prosopoaffective agnosia F. Receptive emotional dysprosody G.
Cyclothymia H. Ecstasy I. Echomimia J. Alexithymia 1. An 8-­year-­old male
patient presented with a history of heightened startle reflex
characterized by eye blinking, head flexion, abduction of the upper
arms, movement of the trunk and bending of the knees in response to a
loud noise. 2. A 40-­year-­old female patient with a history of recurrent
depression and current depression gave a history of inability to
experience pleasure in her usual hobbies and interests, as well as a
general inability to experience any feeling.

348

Self-Assessment 2

3.  A 36-­year-­old male patient presented to the local dental hospital
    with an aching pain in both sides of the lower jaw radiating to the
    temporomandibular joints and to the neck. In response to the
    question, 'How are you feeling in your spirits?', he seemed puzzled
    and asked for the question to be repeated. He then said, 'My body is
    heavy and I am aching all over'.
4.  A 75-­year-­old male patient with a diagnosis of Parkinson's disease
    spoke in a monotonous voice. In addition he seemed not to recognize
    the emotional meaning of variations in tone of voice.

Chapter 17 A. Anxiety B. Anankastic personality C. Compulsion D. Disgust
E. Irritability F. Panic G. Phobia H. Obsession I. Rumination J. Social
phobia 1. A 32-­year-­old female patient presented with discrete episodes
of intense and extreme fear. 2. A 23-­year-­old female patient presented
with excessive fear, self-­consciousness and avoidance of social
situations due to the possibility of embarrassment or humiliation. 3. A
27-­year-­old male accountancy trainee presented with a history of
repetitive and intrusive thoughts about cleanliness and hygiene, which
were associated with increasing tension and worry and which he
recognized as his own thoughts. He tried to resist these thoughts but
found that they became even more urgent and intrusive.

4.  A 32-­year-­old female patient who had recently given birth presented
    with a 6-­week history of temper outbursts, feelings of hostility
    towards her husband, an unpleasant feeling of distress and
    impatience with her children.

Chapter 18 A. Akathisia B. Anhedonia C. Catatonia D. Drive E.
Impulsivity F. Instinct G. Kleine--Levin syndrome H. Motivation I. Urge
J. Will 1. A 21-­year-­old male recently diagnosed with schizophrenia and
treated with risperidone complains of motor restlessness, inner
agitation and an inability to sit still. 2. A 17-­year-­old male patient
is brought to the attention of his general practitioner because he newly
recognized a problem with gambling, drinking excessively and misusing
cannabis. In addition, he is reported as prone to losing his temper and
liable to say things he later regrets. 3. A 21-­year-­old male patient
presented with a history of episodes of excessive sleeping (up to 15
hours a day), excessive eating, increased sexual libido, low mood and
transient persecutory beliefs. 4. A 28-­year-old female patient presented
for the first time with markedly slowed movements, sometimes resulting
in immobility, strange postures and muteness. On examination, she allows
her upper limbs to be put in uncomfortable postures that she holds for
long periods of time.

Self-­Assessment 1: Answers Chapter 1

Chapter 2

Descriptive psychopathology is: b) Concerned with the selection,
delimi­tation, differentiation and description of abnormal psychological
phenomena Descriptive psychopathology is distinct from psychodynamic
psychopathology and hence does not deal with ego defence mechanisms nor
analysis of dreams. It is not dependent on an understanding of abnormal
cognitions, which is a characteristic of cognitive behavioural theories.
Finally, it is not about the nature of the interactions between the
doctor and patient. Empathy in descriptive psychopathology is: a) 
Achieved by precise, insightful, persistent and knowledgeable
exploration of the patient's experience Empathy is a procedural method
in descriptive psychopathology. It is a term that focuses on the way a
clinician comes to a full understanding of the patient's abnormal
subjective experience. It is distinct from sympathy and does not rely on
transference. The term understanding in psychopathology: d) Derives from
Dilthey's conception of the distinction between the sciences and
humanities Understanding is a technical term that is drawn from
Dilthey's appreciation of the difference between the sciences and the
humanities. In science, Dilthey argues, 'we come to give explanations of
the nature of the relationships between observations, whereas in the
humanities we come to a psychological understanding of how different
states unfold.'

Specific communication skill techniques include the following EXCEPT: d)
Looped questions Communication skills are foundational to clinical
inquiries. Summary statements allow the clinician to communicate to the
patient what they have learnt from the clinical interview. The clinical
interview is dependent on attentive listening, which is signalled to the
patient by eye contact, demonstrable interest in the patient's account,
body posture, encouraging noises and comments and responses that
indicate accurate comprehension. Normalizing statements are statements
that suggest that unusual beliefs, thoughts or actions are not only
peculiar to the patient but also common enough even if not universal.
Open questions are questions that allow for answers that open up a
subject rather than close them down and are better at the beginning of
clinical interviews. There are no such questions as 'looped questions'.
Aspects of observation of appearance and behaviour include the following
EXCEPT: c) Talk Talk is an aspect of the mental state examination that
deals with speech and the content of speech. All the other items refer
to observable aspects of appearance and behaviour. Assessment of insight
involves the following domains EXCEPT: a) Fluency of talk Insight is a
term that has specific meaning in relation to the mental state
examination and is determined by recognition of change that is
understood by the patient as due to abnormality, that requires treatment
and, finally, involves acceptance of treatment.

349

350

Self-Assessment 1: Answers

Chapter 3 Automatism is characterized by the following EXCEPT: d)
Unimpaired judgement Automatism is a term that refers to states that are
usually found in epilepsy and are defined as occurring in the context of
clouding of consciousness, which occurs during or immediately after a
seizure. The individual retains control of posture and muscle tone and
performs simple and complex movements and actions without being aware of
what is happening. Occasionally, the automatism is terminated with a
grand mal convulsion. Mania à potu is a syndrome characterized by the
following EXCEPT: a) Insomnia Mania à potu, or pathological
intoxication, is a syndrome that presents as an outburst of
uncontrollable rage and excitement leading to destructive actions
against persons or property. It is regarded as behaviour that is out of
character for the individual, the duration is short and there is
subsequent amnesia for the event. Delirium is a condition characterized
by the following EXCEPT: a) Insidious onset Delirium is an abrupt change
in conscious awareness and attention accompanied by changes in
cognition, perception, psychomotor behaviour, sleep--wake cycle and
emotion. It has a rapid onset, diurnal variation and recovery within 4
weeks.

Chapter 4 Dreams: b) Are associated with paralysis Paradoxical sleep or
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep is associated with bursts of jerky, rapid
eye movements that is referred to as REM sleep. When people are awakened
during these periods, they recall detailed mental life and characterize
the experience as dreaming. REM sleep is accompanied by abolition of
muscle tone and loss of stretch reflexes, hence a sensation of
paralysis. Dreams are distinct from night terrors.

Kleine--Levin syndrome is characterized by: a) Severe hypersomnia
Kleine--Levin syndrome is a rare syndrome of periodic somnolence often
lasting for days or weeks at a time and associated with intense hunger.
Symptoms include irritability, excitement and restlessness. Somnolence
is the most conspicuous symptom. Attention: a) Is the focusing of
consciousness on any aspect of experience Attention is an aspect of
cognition. It refers to the ability to attend to specific sensory input.
It has a limited capacity, and there are three distinct attentional
abilities, namely, disengagement, shifting and engagement. Disengagement
is the ability to move attention from a specific stimulus, shifting is
the ability to move attention from one target stimulus to another and
engagement refers to the ability to lock attention to a new sensory
stimulus.

Chapter 5 The following are TRUE for confabulation EXCEPT: d) It is
typically 'fantastic' in nature Characteristic features of confabulation
include falsely retrieved memory often containing false details; the
patient is unaware that they are confabulating and unaware of the
existence of memory deficits; the patient may act on the confabulation,
and this phenomenon is more apparent in autobiographical memory. There
are two types: spontaneous and provoked. In the spontaneous type, the
content may be fantastic, but this is not typically the case. Short-­term
memory: d) Involves a visuospatial scratch pad that allows for
manipulation of visual information Short-­term memory refers to that
aspect of memory function that allows for some information to be passed
on from sensory memory before being transferred to long-­term memory. It
is a limited capacity system that can handle six to seven bits of
information. Items can be stored for up to 30 seconds.

Self-Assessment 1: Answers

Long-­term memory functions include the following EXCEPT: c) Repression
Short-­term memory refers to that aspect of memory function that allows
for some information to be passed on from sensory memory before being
transferred to long-­term memory. It is a limited capacity system that
can handle six to seven bits of information. Items can be stored for up
to 30 seconds.

Chapter 6 Formal characteristics of time include the following EXCEPT:
e) Bidirectionality Formal characteristics of time include duration,
sequence, synchronicity and rhythm. There is implicit in our notion of
experienced time an arrow of time that moves from the past through the
present to the future. Hence there is no bidirectionality. Déjà vu
experience is an example of abnormality of: b) Sense of uniqueness of
time Déjà vu is an alteration in the experience of the uniqueness of
time. This experience is such that novel events seem to be familiar as
if they have already been previously experienced. Features of seasonal
affective disorder include the following EXCEPT: b) Insomnia Seasonal
affective disorder is characterized by repeated episodes of depression
occurring at the same time of the year, usually in late winter or
spring. Features include anxiety, irritability, hypersomnia, increased
appetite and weight gain. There are also reports of lethargy and craving
for carbohydrates.

Chapter 7 Abnormalities of the elementary aspects of visual perception
include the following EXCEPT: d) Palinacousis Palinacousis is an
abnormality of elementary auditory perception in which there is
persistence of a sound beyond the actual period of the auditory
sensation.

351

The following are TRUE of synaesthesia EXCEPT: e) Emotional distress is
a common accompaniment Synaesthesia is a conscious experience that is
involuntary. There are several variants including musical notes to
colour synaesthesia. The perceptions are said to occur in peri-­personal
space. Some of the perceptions are thought of as elaborations of form
constants. Formal characteristics of images include the following
EXCEPT: b) Images have a character of objectivity Images are
characterized by several formal characteristics including occurring in
inner subjective space, lacking the character of objectivity, being
effortfully created, dissipating rapidly and not having the clarity and
vividness of normal perceptions.

Chapter 8 The following are examples of primary delusions EXCEPT: c)
Persecutory delusions Primary delusions are regarded as occurring
without any antecedent and, as such, being ultimate. The current
convention is to include autochthonous delusion, delusional percept,
delusional atmosphere and delusional memory as examples of primary
delusions. The importance of primary delusions is that they are thought
to be pathognomonic of schizophrenia in the absence of organic brain
disease. Secondary delusions are: a) Secondary to other abnormal
experiences Secondary delusions are best conceptualized as being
secondary to other abnormal experiences such as mood disturbance. They
are held with conviction and are resistant to counterargument as all
delusions are. They are not transient and are distinguished from
overvalued ideas as not being understandable in the light of the
patient's social context, personality or personal history.

352

Self-Assessment 1: Answers

Delusions are examples of: d) False beliefs Delusions are defined as
being false beliefs that are held with extraordinary conviction, are
resistant to counterargument and are not comprehensible given the
patient's social, cultural, and educational background.

Chapter 9 Schneider's first-­rank symptoms include the following EXCEPT:
a) Somatic hallucinations Schneider's first-­rank symptoms include
audible thoughts, passivity experiences (made experiences), thought
withdrawal and thought insertion. Somatic hallucinations are not part of
Schneider's first-­rank symptoms. Delusions of control of thought
include: b) Thought echo Delusions of control include abnormal
experiences in which the patient experiences a breakdown in their ego
boundaries and in which the accompanying experience of having their
agency controlled by external forces results in the experience of being
a passive recipient of undue influence. It includes such experiences as
thought insertion, thought withdrawal, and some examples of thought
broadcasting and thought blocking. The term circumstantiality refers to:
e) Impedance of flow of thinking by unnecessary detail Circumstantiality
is the inclusion of unnecessary detail in response to inquiries. It is
as if the patient is unable to separate the figure from the ground or
see the wood for the trees. It can sometimes be conflated with over­
inclusive thinking that refers to the inability to maintain conceptual
boundaries and is demonstrable on testing. Flight of ideas occur in
manic episode and loosening of association in schizophrenia. Concrete
thinking is a term that refers to a loss of the abstract attitude that
was thought to be demonstrable by the interpretation of proverbs.

Chapter 10 Recognized abnormalities of language in schizophrenia include
the following EXCEPT: e) Telegony Several authors have shown
abnormalities of language use in schizophrenia. These abnormalities
include the lack of cohesive ties, alogia (an example of poverty of
content of speech), neologisms and clang associations. Telegony is a now
discredited theory of heredity. The Cloze technique is a measure of: a)
Predictability of speech The Cloze technique is an experimental
statistical method for determining redundancy in speech. It shows how
predictable speech is when some words are omitted from speech. In
schizophrenia, the omitted words are unpredictable and difficult to
guess. Primary sensory dysphasia is: d) The loss of comprehension of the
meaning of words Primary sensory aphasia is an abnormality of
comprehension of language and not a disorder of the production of
language.

Chapter 11 Insight in schizophrenia has been shown to be positively
correlated with the following EXCEPT: a) The likelihood of
hospitalizations Insight is associated with working memory, compliance
with treatment, likelihood of developing depression and long-­ term
outcome. Superficially it may be thought of as being associated with
hospitalizations through its effects on compliance with treatment, but
this has yet to be shown. Valid measures of insight must take into
consideration the following EXCEPT: b) The relationship of insight to
affect Insight is a complex and multidimensional concept. It has
cultural aspects to it, and levels of insight vary across illness
domains and are informed by observations of behaviour outside of
clinical interview. There is a relationship between insight and positive
affect,

Self-Assessment 1: Answers

but this does not have a direct bearing on the measurement of insight.
Insight involves all of the following EXCEPT: b) Recognition of illness
in others The definition of insight does not include the recognition of
illness in others.

Chapter 12 Autoscopy can involve all of the following EXCEPT: c) Visual
hallucination of internal organs within bodily space Autoscopy refers to
a complex set of experiences involving duplication of the self. This
includes feeling of presence, negative heautoscopy (inability to
perceive the self in a mirror), internal autoscopy (perceiving internal
organs outside), autoscopic hallucination and heautoscopy proper. What
is clear is that in internal autoscopy the perception is outside of
bodily space. Ego vitality is: c) Awareness of being Ego vitality is one
of the formal characteristics of the self. It refers to the experience
of being alive that is prior to the sense derived from feedback from our
viscera. Other features of the self include agency, unity and coherence;
continuity over time and awareness of boundaries of the self. Nihilistic
delusion is an example of: d) Disorder of vitality Nihilistic delusion
is a disorder of the sense of vitality, of being alive. It occurs
despite there being no abnormality of the sensory inputs from the body,
the continuing presence of action and full conscious awareness of being
alive.

Chapter 13 Definitive features of depersonalization include the
following EXCEPT: a) The experience is pleasant Depersonalization is an
experience of strangeness and of unreality. It is described in 'as if'

353

terms. The experience is extremely unpleasant and distressing.
Depersonalization has shown to consist of a number of components
including the following EXCEPT: c) Temporal integration Components of
depersonalization include emotional numbing, changes in bodily
experience, changes in visual experience, changes in auditory
experience, changes in tactile experience, etc. There are distortions in
the experience of time, but there is no disturbance of temporal
integration. Depersonalization is known to be associated with the
following EXCEPT: e) Narcolepsy Depersonalization has been reported in
the context of use of drugs such as LSD, cannabis and mescaline and in
sensory deprivation. It has not been reported in narcolepsy.

Chapter 14 Individual determinants of hypochondriasis include the
following EXCEPT: e) Fascination with the Internet Hypochondriasis is
the subjective and undue awareness of physical symptoms that are then
interpreted as evidence of serious illness. Determinants include history
of physical illness in childhood, preoccupation with bodily functions,
fear of infection and the use of the Internet to research symptoms and
possible diagnoses. However, fascination with the Internet per se is not
a determinant of hypochondriasis. Mass psychogenic illness: d) Symptoms
spread by line-­of-­sight transmission Mass psychogenic illness commonly
occurs in young females, starting in a girl of high status in her peer
group who is unhappy and affecting those most psychologically
vulnerable. Symptoms often spread by line-­of-­sight transmission and are
influenced by social concerns and media response.

354

Self-Assessment 1: Answers

The concepts of conversion and dissociation suggest: b) That causation
is unconscious Conversion and dissociation are understandable in the
context of theories of unconscious motivation. The notion of the
unconscious is necessary in understanding the mechanism and processes
underlying the observed abnormalities. There is no evidence of
deliberate or intentional action to dissemble. Symptoms are
psychologically determined, causation is unconscious and the symptoms
carry some sort of advantage for the patient (the so-­called primary or
secondary gain).

Chapter 15 Pain asymbolia: a) Presents with absent pain response Pain
asymbolia is a condition in which situations that ought to cause pain do
not. It can occur as a congenital or acquired disorder. It is usually
associated with autonomic neuropathies, including anhidrosis. Other
features include lack of thermal sensitivity, self-­stimulation,
intellectual disability, recurrent fever secondary to anhidrosis and
failure to thrive. Pain associated with psychopathology is: d) Constant
and unremitting Psychogenic pain is said to be more diffuse and less
well localized. The pain is more persistent and constant and less likely
to be provoked by readily identifiable agents. It is also usually
associated with underlying disturbance of mood, and the quality of the
pain is less well described. Central pain (thalamic syndrome): b) Is
activated by cutaneous stimulation Central thalamic pain is experienced
as a spontaneous burning sensation that can be activated by cutaneous
stimulation or temperature changes. It can also present with tactile or
cold allodynia. It is intractable and occurs in the setting of
cerebrovascular accident, multiple sclerosis and spinal cord injury.

Chapter 16 Alexithymia refers to: d) Inability to verbalize affect and
elaborate fantasy Alexithymia is a term coined by Sifneos. It refers to
a specific disturbance characterized by difficulties in the capacity to
verbalize affect and to elaborate fantasies. Anhedonia is the inability
to experience pleasure. Incongruous affect is the term for responding to
a given situation with inappropriate emotional response. Receptive
emotional dysprosody is the term that refers to the selective deficit in
recognizing emotional tone in speech. Ekman's basic emotions include all
the following EXCEPT: d) Jealousy Ekman and colleagues showed that there
are six basic emotions that are expressed in facial displays. These
include anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness and surprise. Jealousy
is a composite emotion and is not one of the basic emotions. Mood is
defined as: b) A prolonged prevailing inner state or predisposition Mood
is a prolonged prevailing state or disposition. It is usually
distinguished from emotion that is construed as a transitory and
spontaneous experience. Affect is a broad term that covers mood,
emotion, feeling attitude, preferences and evaluations. In contemporary
psychiatry it refers to the observable expressions of emotion.

Chapter 17 The respiratory subtype of panic disorder is characterized by
all of the following EXCEPT: e) Induced by specific situations The
respiratory type of panic disorder is associated with spontaneous panic
experience rather than situationally induced panic. It is more likely to
be induced by inhalation of 35% of carbon dioxide. It is characterized
by fear of dying, chest pain, shortness of breath, etc.

Self-Assessment 1: Answers

Selye's general adaptation syndrome includes one of the following
stages: d) Flight-­or-­fight response Selye's general adaptation syndrome
conceived of stress as a nonspecific response of the body to any demand
put on it. It describes three stages, namely, alarm reaction, resistance
and, finally, exhaustion in the context of chronic stress. The alarm
reaction is experienced as fear, palpitations and readiness for action
and is best known as the flight-­or-­fight response. The constituent
elements of obsessive compulsive phenomenon include all of the following
EXCEPT: e) Increased discomfort following compulsive act Obsessive
compulsive phenomenon is characterized by repetitive and intrusive
thoughts or actions that arise from within the individual and are
recognized as being subject to their will. There is a sense of
subjective compulsion, resistance to the feeling of compulsion and
preservation of insight. Usually, the compulsive act ameliorates tension
and anxiety.

Chapter 18 Abnormal movement in catatonia includes all of the following
EXCEPT: d) Cataplexy In catatonia there is increased muscular tone at
rest. This is abolished by voluntary action and distinguishes catatonia
from extrapyramidal rigidity. Well-­ recognized features are waxy
flexibility, psychological pillow, stereotypy and mitgehen. Cataplexy is
a feature of narcolepsy. Motivation can be defined as: d) A reward
system that governs and regulates behaviour Motivation is a concept that
attempts to explain what it is that activates action and behaviour as in
'What is the motivation for travelling to Paris?' As a phenomenological
concept, it is experienced as a mood or affect that is governed by needs
and that moves to actions that

355

satisfy needs. It is distinguishable from the terms need, drive,
instinct and will. Impulsivity involves all of the following EXCEPT: c) 
Preference for delayed larger reward over small but immediate reward
Impulsivity is usually used to refer to maladaptive behaviour. Impulsive
acts are poorly conceived, prematurely expressed, unduly risky and
liable to produce undesirable consequences. They are associated with
rapid, unplanned reactions to stimuli and without due regard to
potential negative consequences. In experimental paradigms, impulsive
actions have been shown to persist despite punishment, to be more likely
to occur with preference for small but immediate rewards and to occur as
premature responses in disinhibition attentional paradigms.

Chapter 19 Abnormalities of form perception include which of the
following: a) Heightened preference for symmetry Abnormalities of form
perception include disturbances in the perception of symmetry, emotional
responses to artworks and preference for neotenic features of faces,
especially of female faces. Heightened preference for symmetry is one of
the most investigated subjects, and there is evidence of increased
preference in obsessive compulsive disorder, Tourette syndrome and
dysmorphic body disorder. Aesthetic valuation of landscape features is
affected in: c) Depression Aesthetic valuation of landscapes is a
fundamental aspect of the way that we respond to the physical
environment. Prospect and Refuge theory demonstrates the evolutionary
basis of this aspect of psychology. There is demonstrable abnormality in
depression. There are no reports of abnormality in anxiety, behavioural
variant frontotemporal dementia, obsessive compulsive disorder or
Tourette syndrome.

356

Self-Assessment 1: Answers

Development of new onset visual art production is associated with: b)
Left anterior temporal lobe lesions Abnormalities of aesthetic praxis
are only starting to be recognized. There is some evidence that there
might very well be increased artistic production schizophrenia. The most
robust findings are in association with frontotemporal dementia in which
the evidence links lesions in the left anterior temporal lobes with this
phenomenon.

Chapter 20 Paranoid personality disorder can be defined as a disorder in
which: a) An individual mistrusts others and is unduly suspicious
Paranoid personality disorder is characterized by mistrust of other
people, suspiciousness and a tendency to be quarrelsome and litigious.
There is high vigilance against any perceived threat, and there may be
undue sensitivity to slights. Inability to establish relationships is
not a key feature. There is no impairment of empathy, and uncontrollable
outbursts of anger is not a feature. In dependent personality disorder
all of the following features occur EXCEPT: b) Perfectionistic
disposition Dependent personality disorder is characterized by feelings
of inadequacy associated with undue dependency on others. There is a
lack of self-­confidence and a tendency to avoid taking responsibility.
Coping with the demands of a stressful life is compromised, and there
seems to be a need to form a relationship with a dominant person.
Perfectionism is not a feature of dependent personality disorder. The
following conditions have been shown to be frequently associated with
anankastic personality disorder EXCEPT: c) Alcohol dependence syndrome
Anankastic personality disorder is associated with perfectionism,
rigidity, indecisiveness and excessive conscientiousness. It is also
associated

with depression, obsessive compulsive disorder, eating disorder and
hypochondriasis.

Chapter 21 Illness behaviour is influenced by all of the following
EXCEPT: e) The underlying biology of the condition Illness behaviour is
influenced by the salience of the complaint, the degree the complaint
disturbs social roles, folk understanding of the seriousness and
potential consequences of the complaint and the competing claims on the
person's time and resources. The underlying biology of the complaint
does not have significant influence on illness behaviour. All of the
following individuals have made contributions to our understanding of
health and disease EXCEPT: b) Aaron Beck (well known to psychiatrists as
creator of cognitive behavioural therapy and not an authority on concept
of illness and disease) Boorse, Sedgwick, Parsons and Mechanic have all
contributed to our understanding of the nature of health and disease.
Beck is best known for his work on cognitive behavioural therapy.
Practical applications of psychopathology include all of the following
EXCEPT: d) Nosology Psychopathology has direct influence on
communication between clinicians in providing a language to classify and
categorize abnormal phenomena. This role of psychopathology is
foundational to cognitive neuroscience, especially about the
understanding of phenomena such as delusions, hallucinations and
thinking disorders. Diagnostic categories rely on accurate assessments
of abnormal phenomena, and of course treatment naturally flows out of
diagnosis. However, nosology deals with the classification of diseases
including causes, effects, symptoms and natural history. In this regard,
nosology is distinct from psychopathology.

Self-­Assessment 2: Answers Chapters 3 and 4 1. A 75-­year-­old female
patient is found wandering the streets. On examination she does not know
the date, day, time, season, where she is or her own address. D.
Disorientation Disorientation is manifest as disturbance of orientation
to time, place and person. This is assessed by determining whether the
patient is aware of the day, date, time of day, season, current place
and who it is that is conducting the interview. Disorientation is
important in determining whether a chronic organic brain disease such as
dementia or an acute organic brain disease such as delirium is present.
2. An 18-­year-­old male patient presents with a history of several
irresistible periods of drowsiness during the day. At night he reports
periods when he is fully awake but unable to move his limbs. E.
Hypersomnia Hypersomnia, also described as excessive somnolence, is
present in several disorders such as Kleine--Levin syndrome, narcolepsy
and seasonal affective disorder. 3. The partner of a 25-­year-­old male
patient accompanies him to the outpatient appointment. She reports that
he talks in his sleep, wanders aimlessly in the bedroom for a few
minutes at night and has no recollection of these incidents. H.
Parasomnia Parasomnias are disorders of arousal and sleep-­ stage
transition that consist of abnormal sleep-­ related movements,
behaviours, emotions, perceptions, dreaming and autonomic nervous system
functioning that accompany sleep. 4. A 47-­year-­old female patient with a
history of recurrent depression is admitted in a mute state.

She is immobile but fully conscious and alert. She is able to make eye
contact but does not respond to any attempt at verbal communication. I.
Stupor Stupor is a symptom complex, and the central feature is a
reduction in, or absence of, relational functions including action and
sleep. It is distinct from coma. It is characterized by mutism and
akinesis.

Chapter 5 1. A 20-­year-­old male patient was involved in a road traffic
accident. He sustained head injury. He was only able to recall events
that happened approximately 5 minutes before the collision. J.
Retrograde amnesia Retrograde amnesia is the loss of memory for events
preceding the onset of brain injury. It is demonstrable as an impairment
of retrieval but is thought to reflect impairment of retention/ storage.
2. A 20-­year-­old male patient presented in prison while on remand. When
examined, he responded to questions about the date and the capital of
France with approximate answers and disorientation for time and place.
F. Ganser state Ganser state was first described in 1898, and the
typical features include approximate answers (vorbeigehen), clouding of
consciousness with disorientation, recent history of head injury or
physical illness, hallucinations and amnesia. Sometimes there are
hysterical features including somatic conversion symptoms. 3. A
45-­year-­old male patient was involved in an accident at work where he
sustained a serious head injury and lost consciousness. On re-

357

358

Self-Assessment 2: Answers

gaining his consciousness, he could only recall events that happened
approximately 36 hours after the incident. A. Anterograde amnesia
Anterograde amnesia is a deficit in memory for events following the
onset of a clinical disorder such as a head injury. It is demonstrable
in impairment of retrieval but represents problems with
registration/encoding. 4. A 57-­year-­old male patient with an established
history of impairment of short-­term memory in the context of alcohol
abuse responded to questions about how he had spent the previous day
with objectively false accounts that included embellishments and
intrusions from previous occasions. B. Confabulation Confabulation is
characterized by falsely retrieved memory often containing false
details. Confabulation is not intentionally produced. There are two
types, namely, spontaneous and provoked. It is seen as part of
Korsakov's syndrome.

Chapter 7 1. A 45-­year-­old man presents with a complaint that he first
saw a black cat at the corner where his drive joined the main street.
After this, for the next 72 hours or so, he kept seeing the same cat at
various times and situations. What is the term for this experience? B.
Palinopsia Palinopsia is persistence of a visual stimulus beyond the
actual presentation of the visual object. 2. A 19-­year-­old man with a
recent diagnosis of schizophrenia complained that the faces of people
looking at him would suddenly look different, as if they were pulling
faces at him. Sometimes the faces would appear sinister, lopsided and
strange. What is the term for this experience? E. Paraprosopia
Paraprosopia is a disorder of visual perception in which distortion of
perceived faces takes place.

3.  A 25-­year-­old female patient with a history of complex focal
    seizures complained of scenes and objects becoming smaller before a
    seizure. What is this experience termed?

<!-- -->

D.  Micropsia Micropsia is a condition in which visual hallucinations of
    small objects are reported.

<!-- -->

4.   A 25-­ year-­ old male patient complained that objects looked far
    away. He found this surprising and distressing. What is this
    experience termed?

<!-- -->

G.  Pelopsia Pelopsia is a condition in which visual perception of
    objects is reported as further away than is expected.

Chapter 8 1. A 20-­year-­old male patient was admitted into hospital after
an attack on his father. He reported that his father had been replaced
by a robot who looked almost exactly like him but was definitely not
him. He feared that this 'robot' had malignant intentions and that his
life was in danger. What is this belief called? H. Delusional
misidentification Delusional misidentification is the general term for a
group of conditions including Capgras syndrome, Frègoli syndrome,
syndrome of subjective doubles and syndrome of intermetamorphosis. These
conditions are united by the concept of doubles. The example is one of
Capgras syndrome: the patient believes that a familiar person has been
replaced by an impostor. 2. A 40-­year-­old female patient complained that
her local priest was sending her secret messages, declaring his feelings
for her. She complained that, although he was the father of her child,
he was yet to visit them. G. Delusion of love Delusion of
love/Clérambault syndrome/Erotomania are terms for the delusional belief
of being loved by a person, usually someone unattainable. It is
associated with stalking behaviours and sometimes with hostility and
violent behaviour.

Self-Assessment 2: Answers

3.  A 21-­year-­old female patient suddenly became convinced that she was
    the rightful heir to the throne of Norway. She was not Norwegian by
    birth or ancestry. When asked the reason for this belief, she said
    that she had suddenly come to this realization. She denied any other
    unusual experience.

<!-- -->

B.  Delusional intuition Delusional intuition is another term for
    autochthonous delusion. It is an example of primary delusion. It
    describes a delusion that arises suddenly, de novo, and that is
    grasped in one stage as opposed to the two-­staged delusional
    percept. It is probably best understood as the emergence of new
    meaning or belief.

<!-- -->

4.  A 54-­year-­old male patient with a long-­standing history of
    schizophrenia reported persistent and stressful auditory verbal
    hallucinations of derogatory and threatening content. The voices
    would often tell him that he deserved to be killed and that new
    immigrants into his local area from Romania were going to murder
    him. He then held a firm belief that he was at risk from immigrants,
    particularly Romanians. This belief was held with conviction and was
    impervious to counterargument.

<!-- -->

E.  Secondary delusion Secondary delusion is best understood as arising
    in the context of other abnormal phenomena such as hallucinations or
    abnormality of mood.

Chapter 9 1. A 21-­year-­old male university student described spending a
lot of time thinking about the future, about the possibility of becoming
a famous musician, becoming rich and able to live in a mansion in
Florida. A. Fantasy thinking Fantasy thinking is an example of normal
thinking involving the creation of new images or ideas that are not
dependent on external events. 2. A 25-­year-­old female patient, newly
admitted into hospital, complained that her thoughts

359

were being interfered with. She was particularly distressed by the
experience of having thoughts manipulated and taken from her. I. Thought
withdrawal Thought withdrawal is a disorder of the control of thinking.
It can also be construed as an example of passivity experiences. It
involves the belief or experience of having thoughts withdrawn from the
patient's mind. It relies on the underlying assumption that thoughts are
akin to physical objects that can be removed and that the boundaries of
the self are permeable, thus making it possible for others to manipulate
contents of the mind. 3. In a test, a 19-­year-­old patient with a
diagnosis of schizophrenia responded to a question as follows: 'Which of
the following are essential parts of a room: walls, chairs, floor,
window?' 'Chairs'. G. Over-inclusive thinking Over-inclusive thinking is
a term developed by Cameron to describe a phenomenon that was shown on
testing patients with schizophrenia in which conceptual boundaries
seemed to be impaired. 4. A 57-­year-­old female patient said, 'I was
starting to feel high, so I tied dumb-­bell weights round my ankle'. F.
Concrete thinking This phenomenon was thought to reflect the loss of the
abstract attitude in patients with schizophrenia. It was said to be
demonstrable in the response of patients to interpretation of proverbs.

Chapter 10 1. A 65-­year-­old, right-­handed male patient who was
recovering from a left-­sided stroke was unable to follow the verbal
command, 'Take the paper with your left hand, fold it in two and put it
on the floor'. I. Receptive dysphasia This is an impairment in
comprehension of spoken speech demonstrable in the loss of the meaning
of words.

360

Self-Assessment 2: Answers

2.  A 25-­year-­old patient said, 'Phlogons have invaded my lungs, turning
    first sideways and now medways'.

<!-- -->

J.  Neologism Neologism is the term for the invention of new words or
    the unusual use of words to signify something novel. It is reported
    in schizophrenia.

<!-- -->

3.  A 64-­year-­old male patient with a long-­standing history of
    schizophrenia replied to the question, 'What have you got in your
    cup?' 'A fluid that whilst being colourless turns dark on brewing'.

<!-- -->

G.  Metonym Metonymy refers to the use of the name of one thing to
    represent something related to it such as referring to
    businesspeople as a bunch of suits. In psychiatry it is often used
    to describe responses to inquiries that demonstrate an understanding
    of the question but that are descriptions of the expected answer.

<!-- -->

4.  A 72-­year-­old male patient with a diagnosis of Parkinson's disease
    said, 'I'm star ..., star ..., starting to think of mo ..., mo ...,
    mo ..., moving house'.

<!-- -->

B.  Logoclonia Logoclonia is a term referring to the spastic repetition
    of syllables that occurs in parkinsonism.

Chapter 14 1. A 23-­year-­old male patient presented with the belief that
his muscles were too small and a preoccupation with physical build,
excessive exercising and disturbed eating. H. Muscle dysmorphia Muscle
dysmorphia is a term to describe the belief that one's muscles are
poorly developed with the consequent excessive exercising, disturbed
eating and sometimes abuse of steroids. 2. A 56-­year-­old female patient
complained of hating her left hand. Although it looked normal, she said
that she hated it and had always wished that it were different in size,
shape and feel. A. Misoplegia Misoplegia is a term to describe hatred of
a body part that is not founded on an objective change in the size,
shape or physical feel of the body part.

3.   A 27-­ year-­ old male patient presented with a long-­standing belief
    that his face was ugly, in particular his nose that he thought was
    far too large and crooked. Objectively, his nose was not excessively
    large or crooked.

<!-- -->

B.  Dysmorphophobia Dysmorphophobia/dysmorphic body disorder are terms
    for the abnormal belief of personal ugliness. The belief can relate
    to the face or to the nose or teeth or chin. Other body parts
    including breasts and buttocks can also be the object of dislike.

<!-- -->

4.  A 40-­year-­old female patient presented with the complaint that she
    could continue to feel her toothbrush in her hands for up to 15
    minutes after she used it.

<!-- -->

C.  Palinaptia Palinaptia is the experience of persistence of tactile
    sensation beyond the duration of the actual stimulus.

Chapter 16 1. An 8-­year-­old male patient presented with a history of
heightened startle reflex characterized by eye blinking, head flexion,
abduction of the upper arms, movement of the trunk and bending of the
knees in response to a loud noise. C. Hyperekplexia Hyperekplexia is
heightened startle reflex characterized by eye blinking, head flexion,
abduction of the upper arms, movement of the trunk and bending of the
knees in response to a loud noise. It occurs as a feature of hereditary
neurological condition involving glycine receptors or in epilepsy in
which the startle reflex provokes a seizure. 2. A 40-­year-­old female
patient with a history of recurrent depression and current depression
gave a history of inability to experience pleasure in her usual hobbies
and interests, as well as a general inability to experience any feeling.
A. Anhedonia Anhedonia is a term that refers to the inability to
experience pleasure. It can extend to the inability to experience any
feeling. It is typically present in severe depression.

Self-Assessment 2: Answers

3.  A 36-­year-­old male patient presented to the local dental hospital
    with an aching pain in both sides of the lower jaw radiating to the
    temporomandibular joints and to the neck. In response to the
    question, 'How are you feeling in your spirits?', he seemed puzzled
    and asked for the question to be repeated. He then said, 'My body is
    heavy and I am aching all over'.

<!-- -->

J.  Alexithymia Alexithymia is a term that refers to a specific
    difficulty in the capacity to verbalize affect and to elaborate
    fantasies.

<!-- -->

4.  A 75-­year-­old male patient with a diagnosis of Parkinson's disease
    spoke with a monotonous voice. In addition, he seemed not to
    recognize the emotional meaning of variations in tone of voice.

<!-- -->

F.  Receptive emotional dysprosody Receptive emotional dysprosody refers
    to the selective deficit in recognizing emotional tone in speech.

Chapter 17 1. A 32-­year-­old female patient presented with discrete
episodes of intense and extreme fear. F. Panic Panic attacks occur as
discrete episodes of somatic or autonomic anxiety associated with marked
psychic anxiety as an extreme sense of fear. 2. A 23-­year-­old female
patient presented with excessive fear, self-­consciousness and avoidance
of social situations due to the possibility of embarrassment or
humiliation. J. Social phobia Social phobia can be conceived as an
extreme form of shyness. It is manifest as excessive fear, self-­
consciousness and avoidance of social situations and fear of
embarrassment or humiliation. 3.  A 27-­ year-­ old male accountancy
trainee presented with a history of repetitive and intrusive thoughts
about cleanliness and hygiene, which were associated with increasing
tension and worry and which he recognized as his own

361

thoughts. He tried to resist these thoughts but found that they became
even more urgent and intrusive. H. Obsession Obsessions are repetitive
and recurrent thoughts, ruminations or images that are recognized by the
patient as deriving from their own mind. The obsessions are usually
resisted but usually with increasing tension and anxiety. 4. A
32-­year-­old female patient, who had recently given birth presented with
a 6-­week history of temper outbursts, feelings of hostility towards her
husband, an unpleasant feeling of distress and impatience with her
children. E. Irritability Irritability is considered as a mood in its
own right. It is characterized by reduced control over temper. This
results in verbal or behavioural outbursts. It may be brief or chronic
in duration. It is usually unpleasant for the patient and can be
disruptive to relationships.

Chapter 18 1.  A 21-­ year-­ old male recently diagnosed with
schizophrenia and treated with risperidone complains of motor
restlessness, inner agitation and an inability to sit still. A.
Akathisia Akathisia is manifest as a subjective experience of motor
unease with the accompanying feeling of being unable to sit still. There
is a feeling of wanting to stretch the legs, stand up, tap the feet or
rock the body. There is a distressing inner feeling of restless. 2. A
17-­year-­old male patient is brought to the attention of his general
practitioner because he newly recognized a problem with gambling,
drinking excessively and misusing cannabis. In addition, he is reported
as prone to losing his temper and liable to say things he later regrets.
E. Impulsivity Impulsivity is a maladaptive behaviour involving poorly
conceived actions that are prematurely expressed, unduly risky and
without due regard to consequences.

362

Self-Assessment 2: Answers

3.  A 21-­year-­old male patient presented with a history of episodes of
    excessive sleeping (up 15 hours a day), excessive eating, increased
    sexual libido, low mood and transient persecutory beliefs.

<!-- -->

G.  Kleine--Levin syndrome Kleine--Levin syndrome is characterized by
    episodes of hypersomnolence. In addition, there is excessive eating,
    irritability, cognitive impairment, apathy, derealization and
    hypersexual behaviour. Other psychiatric symptoms such as
    depression, anxiety, delusions and hallucinations may occur.

<!-- -->

4.  A 28-­year-­old female patient presented for the first time with
    markedly slowed movements, sometimes resulting in immobility,
    strange postures and muteness. On examination, she allows her upper
    limbs to be put in uncomfortable postures that she holds for long
    periods of time.

<!-- -->

C.  Catatonia Catatonia is a state of increased muscle tone at rest that
    is abolished by voluntary action. It includes features such as waxy
    flexibility, psychological pillow, mitgehen, negativism, automatic
    obedience and mutism.

Index Page numbers followed by 'f ' indicate figures, 't' indicate
tables, and 'b' indicate boxes.

A Aberrant memory functions, 95 Abnormal imagery, 106 Abnormality, 9--10
statistical, 10 typological, 10 Abnormal perception, 89--94 Abnormal
personality, 23--24 Absorption, 55 Acceleration, of thinking, 142
Achromatopsia, 90 Activity, in personality assessment, 23 Adult
Psychiatric Morbidity survey, 98 Aesthetic perceptions, 304--310
abnormal aesthetic praxis, 308--310 aesthetic adaptations, 306--308
faces, 306 human bodily form, 307--308 increased artistic production,
308--309 landscape features, 306--307 shape of objects, 305--306
symmetry, 304--305 visual art production, 309--310 Age disorientation,
75 Aggernaes, A. consciousness, disturbed state of, 33 subjectivity and
objectivity, 15 Agitation, 289 Agoraphobia, 98 Agrammatism, 165
Akinesis, 290 Akinetic mutism, 41 Akinetopsia, 90 Alcoholic withdrawal
syndrome, 101 Alcoholism, pathological intoxication and, 39 Alertness,
44 Alexia with agraphia, 161--162 Alloaesthesia, 90, 92 Alteration
aspects of, 45t attention, 44 degree of attention, 44--46 Alternative
meanings tests, 98 Alzheimer's disease, 59--60, 99 Ambiguity, tolerance
of, 98 Analytical psychopathology, 5 Anankastic personality disorder,
322--323 Anosognosia, 48--49, 172 Anterograde amnesia, 59 Anxiety, 81,
266--271 in depression, 271 free-­floating, 267 general, 268--269

Anxiety (Continued) in other disorders, 271 pathological, 267 provoking
thoughts, 63 related disorders, 60 self-­description of, 269 situational,
268--269 states, 267 stress and, 266--267 symptoms, 267b symptoms of,
267b three-­dimensional model of, 268f Anxious (avoidant) personality
disorder, 323--324 Aphonia, 159 Appearance of patient, observation of,
26 Asyndesis, 147 Attention, 44--49, 89 psychosis, disorder of, 46--48
Audible thoughts, 98 Auditory hallucinations, 14, 85--86, 88--89,
96--100 in mental state examination, 25--26 premenstrual syndrome,
80--81 Auditory perception, 14 elementary aspects, 91 intensity of, 91
and visual, 92 Auditory transmission, 98--99 Auditory verbal
hallucinations, 97 Aura, epileptic, 40 Autobiographical memories, 62
Autochthonous delusions, 116 Autochthonous idea, 114 Automatic cognitive
processes, 44 Automatic obedience, 291 Automatism, 40 epileptic, 40
speech, 40 Autoscopic hallucination, 104--105 Autoscopy, 104--105
Avoidant personality disorder, 325 Awareness, 44--49 level variations,
45f loss of, 104 A World of My Own, 53

B Beck Cognitive Insight Scale, 173 Behaviours during automatism, 40
characteristic, personality revealed by, 23

Behaviours (Continued) in descriptive psychopathology, 4, 4f observation
of, 4, 26 Beliefs, assessment of, 27 Bias, informant and, 22 Biological
disadvantage, 9 Biological rhythms, 75, 79--81 circadian rhythms, 79--80
depression, 80 life epochs, 81 monthly cycles, 80--81 seasonal
variation, 81 Bipolar disorders, 176 Blunting, 251--252 Body, emotional
value, 216 Brain trauma, 39 Buddhist priest, 91 Burning mouth syndrome,
103

C Capgras' syndrome, 124--125 Cartesian dualism, 16 Cataplexy, 52
Catatonic schizophrenia, 290 Cathexis, 183 Central executive, short-­term
memory, 58 Charles Bonnet's syndrome, 98--101 Childhood sexual abuse, 63
Chomsky's theory, of language, 159 Chronic schizophrenia, 98 Circadian
misalignment, 79--80 Circadian rhythms, 79--80 endogenous, 79--80
influences of, 73 Circumstantial thinking, 143 Cloze procedure, 166
Cognitive methods, 98 Cognitive state, assessment of, 27 Coid, J., mania
à potu, components of, 40 Colour perception, 90 Coma, 36 Common fate,
92--93 Communication phenomenology involving, 10 for understanding of
patient's symptoms, 10 Compulsions, assessment of, 27 Concentration,
44--49 Concrete thinking, 147 Confabulation, 59, 63--65 characteristics
of, 64b embarrassment, 64

363

364

Index

Confabulation (Continued) fantastic, 65 fantastic type, 64--65 memory
impairment, 64 momentary, 64 momentary/fantastic, 64 social, 64--65
suggestibility, 64 Conflict of interest, 20--21 Confusion, 39
Consciousness, 29--42, 106 changes of, qualitative, 37--39 clouding of,
36 definition of, 33 dimensions of, 33--37 disturbed, 29--42 fluctuation
of, 38--39 intentional, 32--33 limit to number of items in, 35 of self,
36--37 Constellation, 140--141 Content, 13--14 of experience, 13--14
hypochondriacal, 14 Continuity view, 5--6 Cortical blindness, 99
Cotard's syndrome, 127 Counterfactual thinking, 145 Cryptomnesia, 62
Cutting, John, 47 Cyberchondriasis, 212--213

D Daydreams, in personality assessment, 24 Defence mechanisms, ego, 5
Déjà vu experience, 60, 78 Delirium, 37--38 definition of, 37
occupational, 41 Delirium tremens, 101 alcoholic withdrawal syndrome,
101 experience of, 101f Delusional atmosphere, 117--118, 120 Delusional
awareness, 119 Delusional memory, 118--119 Delusional misidentification
syndrome, 124--125 Delusional mood, 117 Delusional percept, 116--118
Delusional percepts, 14 Delusional psychosis, 119 Delusional
significance, 119 Delusions assessment of, 27 atmosphere, 117--118
attribution, 121--122 autochthonous, 116 beliefs and, 112--114 cognition
and reasoning, 121--122 communicated insanity, 129--130 content,
122--130 of control, 27, 130

Delusions (Continued) definition, 112--114 erroneous ideation, 131--132
germination of, 119b grandiose, 125--126 of guilt, 126--127
hypochondriacal, 127--129 ideas and, 115 of infestation, 128--129 of
infidelity, 122--124 of love, 124 meaning, 112--114 meaning in life, 122
memory, 118--119 misidentification, 124--125 nihilistic, 127 origins,
119--122 overvalued idea, 131--132 paranoid ideas and syndromes, 132
patient's view of, 27 percept, 116--117 persecution, 122 poverty, 127
primary, 115--119 reality of, 130--131 religious, 126 secondary, 115
sexual content, 123 ultimately un-­understandable, 114--115 Dependent
personality disorder, 324 Depersonalization, 60, 79 alteration of
consciousness, 202--203 anxiety and, 198 aspects of self-­perception in,
198--199 assessment of, 27 components of, 198b definitions and
descriptions of, 198 depression and, 198 derealization with, 198
dissociation associated with, 202 distortion of time sense in, 201
dizziness and, 204 drugs causing, 203 fatigue in, 199 further
considerations for, 203--204 onset of, 202 organic and psychological
theories of, 202--203 personality in, 201 as preformed functional
response, 202 psychoanalytic theory, 204 self-­induced episodes of, 202
social and situational aspects of, 201 as symptom, 200--201 vague
feelings, 60 Depression, 98 clinical assessment for, 13 self-­reported
memory problems, 66 Depressive states, 105 Derealisation, 90--91
Descriptive psychopathology behaviour description in, 4, 4f continuity
and discontinuity views in, 5--6

Descriptive psychopathology (Continued) empathy in, 4--6 fundamental
concepts of, 3 organic and neural substrates and, 16 phenomenology and,
6--8 unconscious experience and, 16 Determining tendency, 46 Diagnosis
categories, 332--334 psychiatric, 23 Direct retrieval, 59 Discontinuity
view, 5--6 Disease, 8--9 Disordered thinking, 140--146 acceleration of
thinking, 142 associations based on Jaspers, 140--142 changes in the
flow of thinking, 145--146 circumstantial, 143 interruption to the flow
of thought, 143--145 retardation, 142--143 thought blocking, 145
Disorder, of control thinking, 149--154 delusions of the control of
thought, 149--154 Disorder of identity, 190--192 Disorders of awareness
of the body classification, 209 psychopathology, body in, 208--209
Disorders of beliefs about the body, 209 hypochondriacal patient,
213--214 hypochondriasis, 210--214 Disorders of bodily function,
214--216 Disorders of body secondary to other psychiatric disorders,
217--223 anorexia nervosa, 220--222 body integrity identity disorder,
219 bulimia nervosa, 222--223 disturbance of shape experience, 217
dysmorphophobia, 218--219 muscle dysmorphia, 223 reduplication of the
body or its parts, 217 Disorders of the physical characteristics, 216
Disorders of the sensory awareness of the body, 223--226 diminished or
absent body image, 224--225 distortion of the body image, 225--226
pathologic accentuation of body image, 224 phantom limb, 225--226
Disorientation age, 75 degrees of, 49--50 delusion, 49--50 and
dissociation, 50 objective time, 75 Disorientation, degrees of, 49
Dissocial personality disorder, 320--321 Dissociation, 55 Dissociative
identity disorder, 189--190

Index Distance senses, 101 Distractibility, 46 Double book-­keeping, 171
Dream-­like (oneiroid) state, 40--41 Dreams, 24, 53--54 Drive, 145,
280--281 instinctual, 280 Drowsiness, 36, 52 in clouding of
consciousness, 36 increasing phase, 105 DSM-­5 (Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition) delirium, 37
Duality, mind-­brain, 16--17 Duration of time, 75 Dynamic
psychopathology, 5 Dysarthria, 159 Dyschromatopsia, 90 Dyslexia, 99
Dysmnesic syndromes, 58 Dysphonia, 159

E Echoic memory, 58 Echolalia, 159 Ego, 182 defence mechanisms, 5
Ekbom's syndrome, 128--129 Electroconvulsive therapy, 81 Elementary
hallucinations, 96 Emotion abnormalities of appropriateness to object,
251--253 abnormalities of evaluation, 254--255 abnormalities of
expression, 251--253 basic, 243 bodily feelings associated with,
252--253 changes in, 246--253 changes in intensity, 246--251 changes in
timing, duration, and appropriateness to situation, 251 classification
of, 246 definition of, 243 disorders of, 246b exacerbation of, 248--251
expression of, shallowness, 243 free-­floating, 253 lability, 251 in
psychiatry, 244 theories of, 244--245 Emotional distress, symptoms and
signs of, eliciting, 19--20 Emotional disturbance behavioural signs of,
297 Emotionally unstable personality disorder, 321--322 borderline type,
321--322 impulsive type, 321 Empathy, 12--13 assessment of subjective
experience, 5--6 in descriptive psychopathology, 4--6 meaningful
understanding, 11

Empathy (Continued) method of, 12, 26 as therapeutic tool, 13 Epilepsy,
fluctuation of consciousness and, 39 Epileptic aura, 40 Epileptic
patient, 60 Epileptic twilight states, 99 Epiphenomena, 5 Episodic
memory, 58--60 Erotomania, 124 Erroneous ideation, 131--132 overvalued
idea, 131--132 paranoid ideas and syndromes, 132 Exosomesthesia, 91
Experience form and content in, 14 and objectivity in, 15 subjectivity
and objectivity in, 15 Explanation, 11 Explanatory psychopathologies, 4
Extracampine hallucination, 105

F Factual history, 23 False beliefs, 111--112 False memory syndrome,
60--61, 63 False perceptions, 89, 92--94 Familiarity-­based recollection,
58--59 Family history, 22 Fantastic confabulation, 65 Fantastic
interpretations, 94 Fantasy, 107 Fantasy life, study of, personality
assessment and, 24 Fantasy thinking, 138--139 Fenwick, P., automatism
definition, 40 Flashbulb memories, 60--61 Flattening, 251--252
Forgetting, 60 rates of, 60 repression/selective, 60 Form, 13--14
constants, 88 definition of, 13--14 Formal thought disorder, 138
Formication, 102 Free-­floating anxiety, 267 Frégoli's syndrome, 124--125
Frontal lobe lesions, 76 Functional hallucination, 14, 93--94, 105
Fusiform gyri, 90

G Ganser state, 39, 66--67 Ganser syndrome, 67 General paresis, 39
Gestalt psychology, 93 Gestalt theory, 92--93 Gesture, 287--295 in
schizophrenia, 291--295

365

Gilles de la Tourette Syndrome, 295 Grandiose delusions, 125--126
primary, 125--126 secondary, 126 Greene, Graham, 53 Grotesque, 100--101
Gustatory hallucinations, 103

H Hallucinations, 54, 89, 94--103 delusions of control, 102 Health and
psychopathology, 330--332 Hearing voices, 85--86, 96--97 Heautoscopy,
104--105 Hemi-­inattention, 48--49 Hemimicropsia, 90 Hemiplegia degree of
unawareness/denial, 48 Hepatic failure, 99 Heterophenomenology, method
of, 32--33 Heuristics, 140 History, taking of, 22--23 family, 22
personal, 22--23 Histrionic personality disorder, 322 Huntington's
Chorea, 295 Hurlburt's method, 141--142 Hyperactivity, 289--290
Hyperacusis, 91 Hyperkinetic disorders, in childhood, 45 Hypersomnia,
52, 81 Hypertension, 48 Hypnagogic, 105 Hypnagogic hallucinations,
51--52, 105 Hypnopompic hallucinations, 51, 105 Hypnosis, 54--56 define
hypnosis, 54 Hypnotist, 54 Hypochondriacal delusions, 127--129
Hypochondriasis, 210--214 Hysteria, 214--215 Hysterical mutism, 166

I Iconic memory, 58 Idea, assessment of, 27 Ideal, normal as, 23--24
Ideation, 15 Illness, 8--9 Illusions, 93f affect, 93 completion, 93
continuity, 92--93 nature of, 92--93 pareidolic, 93 proximity, 92--93
Imagery abnormal, 106 characteristics of, 87

366

Index

Imagery (Continued) normal perception, formal characteristics of, 87t
psychopathology, 87--88 Imaginative thinking, 139 Impulsive and
aggressive acts, 285--287 diminished aggression, 287 psychopathology,
286--287 Inner speech, 88--89 Insight assessment, 170--171 assessment
of, 28 bipolar disorders, 176 capacity, 170 in clinical practice,
170--171 cognitive impairment and, 174--177 compliance with treatment,
175 criticisms of, 176 development, 172--173 Gestalt psychology and, 171
impaired, aetiology of, 176--177 intellectual performance, 174--175 lack
of, 170 measurement of, 173--174 neurologic basis, 174--175 in
schizophrenia, 174, 176--177 social and cultural factors, 176 as sudden,
unexpected solution to a problem, 172 Insight and Treatment Attitudes
Questionnaire (ITAQ), 173 Insomnia defined, 50--51 early, 51
hypersomnia, 51--52 late, 51 primary, 51 Instinct, 281 Intellectual
impairment, in schizophrenia, 65 Intentional stance, 32--33 Interests,
in personality assessment, 24 International Classification of Diseases
10th revision (ICD-­10), 62 International Classification of Sleep
Disorders, 50 Interviews short, 21 speech and thought assessment in, 27
Intrinsic hallucinations, 102 Irritability, 81 and anxiety, 271--272
outwardly expressed, 271--272 severity of, age and, 272 Isolated speech
area, 162

J Jamais vu, 60, 78 Jargon dysphasia, 161 Jaspers, K. phenomenology, 7
unconsciousness, 33 understanding vs. explaining, 11

Judgement disturbance of, 146--149

K Kinaesthetic hallucinations, 101 Kleine-­Levin syndrome, 51--52 Koro,
128 Körper, 208 Korsakov's syndrome, 59, 75, 77

L Labelling, of disorders, 21--22 Language Chomsky's theory of, 159
disorders, schizophrenic, 162--168 impairment of, 160t organic, 160--162
organic disorders, 160--162 pragmatics of, 158--159 schizophrenic,
162--168 statistical model, 166--167 statistical model of, 166--167
Leib, 208 Lewy body dementia, 99 Life epoch, 82f Lilliputian
hallucinations, 96, 101 Listening, for understanding of patient's
symptoms, 12 Locked-­in syndrome, 41 Logoclonia, 159 Long-­term memory,
58--59 Lucidity, 36 consciousness, 35 heightened, 36

M Macropsia, 90 Mania à potu (pathological intoxication), 39 Meaningful
connections, 15 Memory abnormality, 59 affective disorder, 66--67
confabulation, 65 deficit, 65 dissociative focal retrograde amnesia, 62
dissociative fugue, 62--63 disturbance of, 57--58, 60--66 disturbances,
59, 64 episodic/semantic, 58 false memory syndrome, 63 falsification of,
60--61 ganser state, 66--67 impairment, 66 long-­term, 58--59 organic
impairment, 59--60 paramnesia, 60--61 pseudologia fantastica, 61
psychiatric. See Psychiatric disorder psychogenic disturbance, 62

Memory (Continued) recognition, impairment of, 59--60 recovered memory,
63 registration/encoding, impairment of, 59 retention, impairment of, 59
retrieval/recall, impairment of, 59 selective forgetting, 60 sensory, 58
storage, 58 temporal order, 76 time dimension, 74 Menstrual period,
80--81 Mental illness, 9 eliciting symptoms of, 19--28 Mental imagery,
106 neurodisability, 55--56 pictorial/depiction theory of, 87 Mental
states, 22 abnormal, 81 disturbance of, 90 examination, 25--26
Merleau-­Ponty perception, 89 Merleau-­Ponty's conception, 89
Merleau-­Ponty's schema, 89 Metamorphopsia, 90 Micropsia, 90 Mind-­brain
duality and, 16--17 Mind, philosophy of, 16--17 Mini-­Mental State
Examination, 27 Minkowski, Eugene, 74 Misattribution, 94--95
Monosymptomatic hypochondriacal psychosis, 127--128 Mood congruent
memory effect, 66 disorder, 47 in personality assessment, 24 subjective
and objective descriptions of, 27 Morbid jealousy, 132 Morphemes,
158--159 Motivation, 281 Motor aphasia, 161--162 Motor disorder in brain
disease, 293--295 in chronic schizophrenia, 292--293 Motor retardation,
290 Movement and behaviour, disturbance, 287--297 gesture, 287--295
Multiple personality, 189--190 Musical hallucinations, 98--99 Mutism,
162 akinetic, 41 in stupor, 41

N Narcissistic personality disorder, 325 Narcolepsy, 52 Neurologic
amnesia, 62 Neuropsychological research, 106

Index Nightmares, 53 Night terrors, 52 Nihilistic delusions, 127 Nominal
dysphasia, 161 Non-­rapid eye movement (NREM), 50 Nonverbal
communication, 184--185 assessment of, 26 Normal, definition of, 9--10,
23--24 Normalizing statements, 25 Normal personality, 23--24 Norms,
9--10 individual, 10 social, 10 statistical, 9 value, 9 NREM
parasomnias, 53

O Objective assessments, 15 Objective time, 74--76 age disorientation,
75 chronology (temporal order), 76 disorientation, 75 time duration,
75--76 Objectivity, 15--16 definition of, 15 quality of, 95 Observant,
26 Observation of appearance and behaviour, 26 for understanding of
patient's symptoms, 12 Observer, 6 Obsessions, assessment of, 27
Obsessive-­compulsive disorder, 98 Obstructive sleep apnoea, 52 Olfactory
hallucinations, 102--103 Olfactory reference syndrome, 102, 128
Opisthotonos, 55 Organic brain disease, 65 Organic disorder, of
language, 160--162 Organic psychiatry, symptomatic psychiatry vs., 16
Organic states, 96 Orientation, 44, 49--50 disorientation degrees of,
49--50 delusion, 49--50 and dissociation, 50 misorientation, 49--50
Orthodox sleep, 53 Over-­inclusive thinking, 147--148 Overvalued idea,
131--132 disorders with, 132t

P Pain attention and, 232 central (thalamic syndrome), 234 central
nervous system and, 232 craving, 234

Pain (Continued) definition of, 231 depression and, 235--236 diminished
sensation, 234 gate control theory in, 232 heightened sensation and,
233--234 loss and, 236 nonorganic, classification of, 235 organic or
psychogenic, 232--233 perception and, 234 phantom limb, 236
phenomenological aspects of, 232 with psychiatric illness, 233
recalcitrant in, 234--235 subjective experience, 232 suffering and, 238
threshold for, 232 transmission of, 232 without organic cause, 234--238
Palinacousis, 91 Palinaptia, 91 Palinopsia, 100--101 Panic attacks and
disorder, 269--270 Panic disorder, 98 Paradoxical sleep, 53
Paragrammatism, 160 Paralogia, 165 Paramnesia, 61 Paranoid personality
disorder, 132, 319 Paraprosopia, 90 Parasomnias, 52--53 Pareidolia, 93
Pareidolic/affective illusions, 93, 101 Parkinson's Disease, 293--295
Part-­whole relationship, 92--93 Passivity, 27 Perception, 14, 86--89.
See specific perception abnormalities of, 89--94 autoscopy, 104--105
out-­of-­body experience, 104--105 assessment of, 27 auditory, 14
disorders of, 85--86 feature-­matching model, 86--87 imagery, 87--88
template-­matching model, 86--87 top-­down processes, 86 false, 92--94
new, 92 splitting of, 92 Perceptual deprivation, 106--107 Perceptual
misinterpretation, 93 Peri-­personal space, 88 Perseveration, 26
Persistent mood disorders, 324 Personal history, 22--23 Personality
abnormal, 23--24 assessment of, 23 definition of, 23--24 normal
vs. abnormal, 23--24 premorbid, previous or usual, 23--24

367

Personality disorder anankastic, 322--323 anxious (avoidant), 323--324
avoidant, 325 dependent, 324 dissocial, 320--321 histrionic, 322
narcissistic, 325 paranoid, 319 schizoid, 319--320 Personality disorders
differentiation of, 24--26 Personality type, 24 Personal time, 75
Phenomena primary and secondary, 14--16 Phenomenology communication
facilitation, 10 confusion over, 6--7 definition of, 6--8 method of,
6--7 psychopathology and, 6--8 purpose of, 13 Phenomenology of
Perception, 89 Phobic neurosis, 270b Phobic states, 270--271 Phonemes,
96, 158--159 Phonological loop, 58 short-­term memory, 58 verbal
information, memory traces of, 58 Pick's disease, 99 Pickwickian
syndrome, 52 Pickwick Papers, The, 52 Pinta, 10 Positive and Negative
Syndrome Scale (PANSS), 173--174 Post-­concussional state, 99 Postscript,
334--336 need for research, 335--336 psychopathology, 334--335
Post-­traumatic stress disorder, diagnostic feature of, 54 Posture, 26
alteration of, 98 pharaonic, 26 Preconscious processes, 35 Premenstrual
syndrome, frequency of, 80 Premenstruum period, 80--81 Primary motor
dysphasia, 161 Primary sensory dysphasia, 161 Pristine inner experience,
141--142 Private speech, 88--89 Prosody, 158--159 Pryse-­Phillips, 102
Pseudohallucinations, 89, 92, 100, 103--104 Pseudologia fantastica, 61
Psychiatric disorder confabulation, 63--65 memory impairment, in
schizophrenia, 65--66 perseveration, 65

368

Index

Psychiatric disturbance, 82f Psychiatric history, 22--23 Psychiatric
nurses, 97 Psychiatry definition of, 3--4 relationship, 79--81 scope of,
3--4 Psychogenic pain, 232--233 Psychological symptoms, 80 Psychomimetic
drugs, 100 Psychopathology, 4--6, 4f, 80--81 definition of, 4
descriptive. See Descriptive psychopathology explanatory, 4 mind-­brain
duality and, 16--17 objectivity in, 16 organic and neural substrates
and, 16 phenomenology and, 6--8 subjectivity in, 15 unconscious
experience and, 16 Psychopathology, body in, 208--209 Psychoses, 98
Psychosis, disorder of attention, 46--48 Psychosis of association, 129
Publicness, 95--96 Pure agraphia, 161 Pure word blindness, 161 deafness,
160--161 dumbness, 161

Q Questions empathic, 12 leading, 12 in mental state examination closed,
25 open, 25

R Rapid eye movement (REM), 50 dreaming, 53 non-­rapid eye movement
(NREM), 50 Rapport, 15, 27 emotional quality, 15 evaluation of, 27
Rational/conceptual thinking, 139--140 Reduplication of time, 78--79
Referral, psychiatric nature and type of, 22 Reflex hallucination,
105--106 Religious delusions, 126 'Remember' response, 59--60
Responsiveness, 44 Retardation, 290 Retarded depression, 290 Retrograde
amnesia, 59 Retrospective delusions, 118

S Sachs, Oliver, 86 Sane automatism, 52--53 Schizoid personality
disorder, 319--320 Schizophrenia, 46--48, 59--60, 66, 77--79, 95, 97,
100--101 abnormality of working memory, 148--149 behavioural disorders
of, 295--296 boundaries of self in, 193 characteristic of, 96 clouding
of consciousness in, 36 confabulation, 66 diagnosis of, 81 first-­rank
symptoms, 149t, 150--151 intellectual impairment, 65 oneiroid states,
100 over-­inclusive thinking, 147--148 psychological theories of
thinking, 147--149 symptoms of, 7 verbal hallucinations, 98
Schizophrenic language disorder, 162--168 linguistic approaches,
167--168 propositional analysis, 167--168 psychogenic abnormalities, 166
statistical model of language, 166--167 syntactical analysis, 167
thought disorder, 162--166 Schizophrenic patient, 105 Seasonal affective
disorder, 81 Seasonal Pattern Assessment Questionnaire, 81 Self
boundaries of, 192--193 concept and body image, 183--184 consciousness
of, 36--37 continuity of, loss of, 191 disorder, 186--193 ego and, 182
embodiment and, 182--183 image and nonverbal communication, 184--185
possession state, 191--192 in schizophrenia, 190 Sensation, 86--89
Sensorium, 36 Sensory deprivation, 88, 106--107 Sensory distortions,
89--92 Sensory dysphasia, 160--161 Sensory memory, 58 Sensory processes,
73 Sensory stimulus, 92 Serial sevens, 44 Sexsomnia, 53 Sexual abuse,
childhood, 63 Short-­term memory, 58 Singlenes, disorders, 187b
Situational anxiety, 268--269 Sleep deprivation, 80 Sleep disorders,
50--53 categories, 50 electroencephalogram/electromyogram, 50

Sleep disorders (Continued) insomnia, 50--51 objective assessment, 50
rapid eye movement (REM), 50 Sleep drunkenness, 51 Sleep paralysis,
52--53 Sleep-­wake cycle, phase advance of, 80 Sleepwalking, 52 Social
behaviour, 64 Social confabulation, 64--65 Social phobia, 98 Sotto voce,
97 Speech assessment of, 26--27 automatism, 40 disturbances, 159--160
egocentric, 88--89 hemisphere, 160 hesitant, 161 indistinct, 161
intonation, 159 isolated speech area, 162 in mania, 160 manic, 165
poverty of content of, 163--164 private/inner, 88--89 schizophrenic,
166--167 spontaneous speech-­fluent, 160t unintelligible, 159--160 volume
of, changes in, 159 Splitting of perception, 92 Stammering, 159
State-­dependent memory, 66 Strategic retrieval, 59 Stupor, 41
psychogenic vs. neurological causes, 41 Stuttering, 159 Subjective
analysis, 15 Subjective experience heightened lucidity and, 36 study of,
8 Subjective (personal) time, 74--79 direction of time, 78 flow of time,
76--78 quality of time, 79 uniqueness of time, 78--79 Zeitraffer
phenomenon, 77 Subjectivity, 15--16 definition of, 15 in
psychopathology, 15--16 Suggestibility, 55, 64 Suggestion, 55 Summary
statements, in mental state examination, 25 Suprachiasmatic nuclei, 79
Sustained attention, 44 Sympathy, 6 Symptomatic psychiatry, organic
psychiatry vs., 16 Symptoms eliciting, 19--28 present, 22

Index Symptoms (Continued) primary vs. secondary, 14--15 understanding,
10 Synaesthesia, 88, 105--106 Syndrome of intermetamorphosis, 124 of
subjective doubles, 124 Systematic enquiry, 26--28

T Tactile hallucinations, 101 Tactile perception, elementary aspects of,
91--92 Technical term, diagnostic implications of, 26 Telegramese, 165
Teleopsia, 90 Template-­matching model, 86--87 Temporal lobe epilepsy,
60, 99--100 twilight state and, 39--40 Thinking acceleration, 142
changes in the flow, 145--146 circumstantial, 143 concrete, 147
confusion of, 39 disordered, 140--146 disorder of control, 149--154
fantasy, 138--139 heuristics and decision-­making, 140 imaginative, 139
over-­inclusive, 147--148 psychological theories, 147--149 rational or
conceptual, 139--140 types, 138--140 Thoughts assessment of, 26--27
coherent, 39 disorder, 26--27 Tics, 295 Time, disorder of, 73 biological
rhythms, 75, 79--81 circadian rhythms, 79--80 depression, 80

Time, disorder of (Continued) life epochs, 81 monthly cycles, 80--81
seasonal variation, 81 classification of, 75b life epoch, 82f objective
time, 75--76 age disorientation, 75 chronology (temporal order), 76
disorientation, 75 time duration, 75--76 psychiatric disturbance, 82f
psychiatry relation, 79--81 sensory processes, 73 subjective (personal)
time, 76--79 direction of time, 78 flow of time, 76--78 quality of time,
79 uniqueness of time, 78--79 Zeitraffer phenomenon, 77 Time duration
disorder of, 75--76 estimation of, 75--76 Time Watch, 74 Toxic
confusional states, acute, 44 True delusions, 115--116 Twilight state,
39

U Unconsciousness, 34--35 definition of, 34 experience phenomenology
and, 16 levels/stages of, 34f state, 31 Understanding in descriptive
psychopathology, 10--12 of patient's symptoms, 10 Unintelligible speech,
159--160 Un-­understandable experience, 6

V Verbal hallucinations, schizophrenia, 98 Verbal transformation effect,
97

369

Vigilance, 36 Vigilance-­drowsiness axis, 35 Violent behaviours
(violence) during automatism, 40 twilight state and, 39 Virgil, 86
Visceral hallucinations, 101--102 Visual, auditory, 103 Visual
hallucinations, 14, 77, 99--101 horizontal/vertical lines, distortions
of, 77 organic states, 99 Visual hyperaesthesia, 90 Visual illusions,
100 Visual imagery, 87, 104--105 Visual modality, 100 Visual perception,
elementary aspects of, 90--91 Visual perseverations, 100--101
Visuospatial scratch pad, 58 phonological loop, 58 short-­term memory, 58
Voices commenting, 98 Voices Within, The, 94--95 Volition affective
illnesses of, 284 loss of, 282 in mood disorders, 284--285 in
schizophrenia, 283--284 Voluntary attention, 44 Vygotsky's claim, 89

W Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale, 67 Wisconsin Card Sorting Test
(WCST), 174--175 Words choice, in mental state examination, 26 World
Trade Centre, 60--61

Z Zeitraffer phenomenon, 77

This page intentionally left blank

     


