![](Images/cover00046.jpeg)

[]{#part0000.xhtml}

:::::::::: {#part0000.xhtml_aid-1}
[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[THE EGO ]{style=" font-size:2.3rem"}

[AND THE ID]{style=" font-size:2.3rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[SIGMUND FREUD]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[1927/ Digital Edition 2013]{style=" font-size:0.92rem"}

::: {style="page-break-after:always"}
:::

\
</p>

[]{#part0000.xhtml_toc}[CONTENTS]{style=" font-size:1.5rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.5rem"}

[[INTRODUCTION]{style=" font-size:0.83rem; text-decoration:underline; color:#0000ff"}](#part0000.xhtml_intro)

[[I. CONSCIOUSNESS AND THE
UNCONSCIOUS]{style=" font-size:0.83rem; text-decoration:underline; color:#0000ff"}](#part0000.xhtml_one)

[[II. THE EGO AND THE
ID]{style=" font-size:0.83rem; text-decoration:underline; color:#0000ff"}](#part0000.xhtml_two)

[[III. THE EGO AND THE SUPER-EGO
(EGO-IDEAL)]{style=" font-size:0.83rem; text-decoration:underline; color:#0000ff"}](#part0000.xhtml_three)

[[IV. THE TWO CLASSES OF
INSTINCTS]{style=" font-size:0.83rem; text-decoration:underline; color:#0000ff"}](#part0000.xhtml_four)

[[V. THE SUBORDINATE RELATIONSHIPS OF THE
EGO]{style=" font-size:0.83rem; text-decoration:underline; color:#0000ff"}](#part0000.xhtml_five)

::: {style="page-break-after:always"}
:::

\
</p>

[]{#part0000.xhtml_intro}[INTRODUCTION]{#part0000.xhtml_aid-1D
style=" font-size:1.5rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[In my essay, Beyond the Pleasure Principle, published in 1920, I began
the discussion of a train of thought, my personal attitude towards
which, as I mentioned there, might be described as a sort of benevolent
curiosity; in the following pages this train of thought is developed
further. I have taken up those ideas and brought them into connection
with various facts observed in psycho-analysis and have endeavoured to
draw fresh conclusions from the combination; in the present work,
however, no further contributions are levied from biology, and it
consequently stands in a closer relation to psycho-analysis than does
Beyond the Pleasure Principle. The thoughts contained in it are
synthetic rather than speculative in character and their aim appears to
be an ambitious one. I am aware, however, that they do not go beyond the
baldest outlines and I am perfectly content to recognize their
limitations in this respect.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[At the same time, the train of thought touches upon things not hitherto
dealt with in the work psycho-analysis has done, and it cannot avoid
concerning itself with a number of theories propounded by non-analysts
or by former analysts on their retreat from analysis. I am as a rule
always ready to acknowledge my debts to other workers, but on this
occasion I feel myself under no such obligation. If there are certain
things to which hitherto psycho-analysis has not given adequate
consideration, that is not because it has overlooked their effects or
wished to deny their significance, but because it pursues a particular
path which had not yet carried it so far. And, moreover, now that these
things have at last been overtaken, they appear to psycho-analysis in a
different shape from that in which they appear to the other
people.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[-]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}[Sigm. Freud]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

::: {style="page-break-after:always"}
:::

\
</p>

[]{#part0000.xhtml_one}[I]{#part0000.xhtml_aid-1R
style=" font-size:1.5rem"}

[CONSCIOUSNESS AND THE UNCONSCIOUS]{style=" font-size:1.5rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[IN this preliminary chapter there is nothing new to be said and it will
not be possible to avoid repeating what has often been said
before.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The division of mental life into what is conscious and what is
unconscious is the fundamental premise on which psycho-analysis is
based; and this division alone makes it possible for it to understand
pathological mental processes, which are as common as they are
important, and to co-ordinate them scientifically. Stated once more in a
different way: psycho-analysis cannot accept the view that consciousness
is the essence of mental life, but is obliged to regard consciousness as
one property of mental life, which may co-exist along with its other
properties or may be absent.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[If I were to allow myself to suppose that every one interested in
psychology would read this book, I should still be prepared to find that
some of them would stop short even at this point and go no further; for
here we have the first shibboleth of psycho-analysis. To most people who
have had a philosophical education the idea of anything mental which is
not also conscious is so inconceivable that it seems to them absurd and
refutable simply by logic. I believe this is only because they have
never studied the mental phenomena of hypnosis and dreams, which \--
quite apart from pathological manifestations \-- necessitate this
conclusion. Thus their psychology of consciousness is incapable of
solving the problems of dreams and hypnosis.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The term \'conscious\' is, to start with, a purely descriptive one,
resting on a perception of the most direct and certain character.
Experience shows, next, that a mental element (for instance, an idea) is
not as a rule permanently conscious. On the contrary, a state of
consciousness is characteristically very transitory; an idea that is
conscious now is no longer so a moment later, although it can become so
again under certain conditions that are easily brought about. What the
idea was in the interval we do not know. We can say that it was latent,
and by this we mean that it was capable of becoming conscious at any
time. Or, if we say that it was unconscious, we are giving an equally
correct description. Thus \'unconscious\' in this sense of the word
coincides with \'latent and capable of becoming conscious\'. The
philosophers would no doubt object: \'No, the term unconscious does not
apply here; so long as the idea was in a state of latency it was not a
mental element at all\'. To contradict them at this point would lead to
nothing more profitable than a war of words.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[But we have arrived at the term or concept of \'unconscious\' along
another path, by taking account of certain experiences in which mental
dynamics play a part. We have found, that is, we have been obliged to
assume, that very powerful mental processes or ideas exist \-- here a
quantitative or economic factor comes into question for the first time
\-- which can produce in the mind all the effects that ordinary ideas do
(including effects that can in their turn become conscious as ideas)
without themselves becoming conscious. It is unnecessary here to repeat
in detail what has been explained so often before. We need only say that
this is the point at which ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}[psycho-analytic
theory steps in \-- with the assertion that such ideas cannot become
conscious because a certain force is opposed to them, that otherwise
they could become conscious, and that then one would see how little they
differ from other elements which are admittedly mental. The fact that in
the technique of psychoanalysis a means has been found by which the
opposing force can be removed and the ideas in question made conscious
renders this theory irrefutable. The state in which the ideas existed
before being made conscious is called by us repression, and we assert
that the force which instituted the repression and maintains it is
perceived as resistance during the work of
analysis.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[We obtain our concept of the unconscious, therefore, from the theory of
repression. The repressed serves us as a prototype of the unconscious.
We see, however, that we have two kinds of unconscious-that which is
latent but capable of becoming conscious, and that which is repressed
and not capable of becoming conscious in the ordinary way. This piece of
insight into mental dynamics cannot fail to affect terminology and
description. That which is latent, and only unconscious in the
descriptive and not in the dynamic sense, we call preconscious; the term
unconscious we reserve for the dynamically unconscious repressed, so
that we now have three terms, conscious (Cs), preconscious (Pcs), and
unconscious (Ucs), which are no longer purely descriptive in sense. The
Pcs is presumably a great deal closer to the Cs than is the Ucs, and
since we have called the Ucs mental we shall with even less hesitation
call the latent Pcs mental. But why do we not choose, instead of this,
to remain in agreement with the philosophers and, in a consistent way,
to distinguish the Pcs as well as the Ucs from what is conscious in the
mind? The philosophers would propose that both the Pcs and the Ucs
should be described as two varieties or levels of \'psychoid\', and
harmony would be established. But endless difficulties in exposition
would follow; and the one important fact, that the two kinds of
\'psychoid\' as thus defined coincide in almost every other respect with
what is admittedly mental, would be forced into the background in the
interests of a prejudice dating from a period in which they, or the most
important part of them, were still unknown.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[We can now set to work comfortably with our three terms, Cs, Pcs, and
Ucs, so long as we do not forget that, while in the descriptive sense
there are two kinds of unconscious, in the dynamic sense there is only
one. For purposes of exposition this distinction can in many cases be
ignored, but in others it is of course indispensable. At the same time,
we have become more or less accustomed to these two meanings of the term
unconscious and have managed pretty well with them. As far as I can see,
it is impossible to avoid this ambiguity; the distinction between
conscious and unconscious is in the last resort a question of a
perception which must be either affirmed or denied, and the act of
perception itself tells us nothing of the reason why a thing is or is
not perceived. No one has a right to complain because the actual
phenomenon expresses the underlying dynamic factors ambiguously.
]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[In the further course of psycho-analytic work, however, even these
distinctions have proved to be inadequate and, for practical purposes,
insufficient. This has become clear in more ways than one; but the
decisive instance is as follows. We have formulated the idea that in
every individual there is a coherent organization of mental processes,
which we call his ego. This ego includes consciousness and it controls
the approaches to motility, i.e. to the discharge of excitations into
the external world; it is this institution in the mind which regulates
all its own constituent processes, and which goes to sleep at night,
though even then it continues to exercise a censorship upon dreams. From
this ego proceed the repressions, too, by means of which an attempt is
made to cut off certain trends in the mind not merely from consciousness
but also from their other forms of manifestation and activity. In
analysis these trends which have been shut out stand in opposition to
the ego and the analysis is faced with the task of removing the
resistances which the ego displays against concerning itself with the
repressed. Now we find that during analysis, when we put certain tasks
before the patient, he gets into difficulties; his associations fail
when they ought to be getting near to the repressed. We then tell him
that he is dominated by a resistance; but he is quite unaware of the
fact, and, even if he guesses from his feelings of discomfort that a
resistance is now at work in him, he does not know what it is nor how to
describe it. Since, however, there can be no question but that this
resistance emanates from his ego and belongs to it, we find ourselves in
an unforeseen situation. We have come upon something in the ego itself
which is also unconscious, which behaves exactly like the repressed,
that is, which produces powerful effects without itself being conscious
and which requires special work before it can be made conscious. From
the point of view of analytic practice, the consequence of this piece of
observation is that we land in endless confusion and difficulty if we
cling to our former way of expressing ourselves and try, for instance,
to derive neuroses from a conflict between the conscious and the
unconscious. We shall have to substitute for this antithesis another,
taken from our understanding of the structural conditions of the mind,
namely, the antithesis between the organized ego and what is repressed
and dissociated from it. ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[For our conception of the unconscious, however, the consequences of our
new observation are even more important. Dynamic considerations caused
us to make our first correction; our knowledge of the structure of the
mind leads to the second. We recognize that the Ucs does not coincide
with what is repressed; it is still true that all that is repressed is
Ucs, but not that the whole Ucs is repressed. A part of the ego, too \--
and Heaven knows how important a part \-- may be Ucs, undoubtedly is
Ucs. And this Ucs belonging to the ego is not latent like the Pcs; for
if it were, it could not be activated without becoming Cs, and the
process of making it conscious would not encounter such great
difficulties. When we find ourselves thus confronted by the necessity of
postulating a third Ucs which is not repressed, we must admit that the
property of being unconscious begins to lose significance for us. It
becomes a quality which can have many implications, so that we are
unable to make it, as we should have hoped to do, the basis of
far-reaching and inevitable conclusions. Nevertheless, we must beware of
ignoring this property, for in the last resort the quality of being
conscious or not is the single ray of light that penetrates the
obscurity of depth-psychology.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

::: {style="page-break-after:always"}
:::

\
</p>

[]{#part0000.xhtml_two}[II]{#part0000.xhtml_aid-36
style=" font-size:1.5rem"}

[THE EGO AND THE ID]{style=" font-size:1.5rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[PATHOLOGICAL research has centred our interest too exclusively on the
repressed. We wish to know more about the ego, now that we know that it,
too, can be unconscious in the proper sense of the word. Hitherto the
only guide we have had while pursuing our investigations has been the
distinguishing mark of being conscious or unconscious; and in the end we
have come to see that this quality itself is
ambiguous.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Now all our knowledge is invariably bound up with consciousness. Even
knowledge of the Ucs can only be obtained by making it conscious. But
stop, how is that possible? What does it mean when we say \'making it
conscious\'? How can that come about?]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[We already know the point from which we have to start in this
connection. We have said that consciousness is the superficies of the
mental apparatus; that is, we have allocated it as a function to the
system which is situated nearest to the external world. Incidentally, on
this occasion the topographical terminology does not merely serve to
describe the nature of the function, but actually corresponds to the
anatomical facts.  Our investigations too must take this surface organ
of perception as a starting-point.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[All perceptions which are received from without (sense-perceptions) and
from within \-- what we call sensations and feelings \-- are Cs from the
start. But how is it with those internal processes which we may \--
vaguely and inexactly \-- sum up under the name of thought-processes?
They represent displacements of mental energy which are effected
somewhere in the interior of the apparatus as this energy proceeds on
its way towards action. Do they advance towards the superficies, which
then allows of the development of consciousness? Or does consciousness
make its way towards them? This is clearly one of the difficulties that
spring up when one begins to take the spatial or \'topographical\'
conception of mental life seriously. Both these possibilities are
equally unimaginable; there must be a third contingency to meet the
case.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[I have already, in another place, suggested that the real difference
between a Ucs and a Pcs idea (thought) consists in this: that the former
is worked out upon some sort of material which remains unrecognized,
whereas the latter (the Pcs) has in addition been brought into
connection with verbal images. This is the first attempt to find a
distinguishing mark for the two systems, the Pcs and the Ucs, other than
their relation to consciousness. It would seem, then, that the question,
\'How does a thing become conscious?\' could be put more advantageously
thus: \'How does a thing become preconscious?\' And the answer would be:
\'By coming into connection with the verbal images that correspond to
it\'.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[These verbal images are memory-residues; they were at one time
perceptions, and like all memoryresidues they can become conscious
again. Before we concern ourselves further with their nature, it dawns
upon us like a new discovery that only something which has once been a
Cs perception can become conscious, and that anything arising from
within (apart from feelings) that seeks to become conscious must try to
transform itself into external perceptions: this can be done by way of
memory-traces.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[We conceive of memory-residues as contained in systems which are
directly adjacent to the system Pcpt-Cs, so that the cathexes pertaining
to the memory-residues can readily extend outward on to the elements of
the latter system. We are immediately reminded of hallucinations here,
and of the fact that the most vivid memory is always distinguishable
both from a hallucination and from an external perception; but it will
also occur to us that when a memory is revived the cathexis in the
memory-system will remain in force, whereas a hallucination which is not
distinguishable from a perception can arise when the cathexis does not
merely extend over from the memory-trace to the Pcpt-element, but passes
over to it entirely.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Verbal residues are derived primarily from auditory perceptions, so
that the system Pcs has, as it were, a special sensory source. The
visual components of verbal images are secondary, acquired through
reading, and may to begin with be left on one side; so may the
sensori-motor images of words, which, except with deaf-mutes, play an
auxiliary part. The essence of a word is after all the memory-trace of a
word that has been heard.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[We must not be led away, in the interests of simplification perhaps,
into forgetting the importance of optical memory-residues \-- those of
things (as opposed to words) \-- or to deny that it is possible for
thought-processes to become conscious through a reversion to visual
residues, and that in many people this seems to be a favourite method.
The study of dreams and of preconscious phantasies on the lines of J.
Varendonck\'s observations gives us an idea of the special character of
this visual thinking. We learn that what becomes conscious is as a rule
only the concrete subject-matter of the thought, and that the relations
between the various elements of this subject-matter, which is what
specially characterizes thought, cannot be given visual expression.
Thinking in pictures is, therefore, only a very incomplete form of
becoming conscious. In some way, too, it approximates more closely to
unconscious processes than does thinking in words, and it is
unquestionably older than the latter both ontogenetically and
phylogenetically.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[To return to our argument: if, therefore, this is the way in which
something that is in itself unconscious becomes preconscious, the
question how something that is repressed can be made (pre)conscious
would be answered as follows. It is done by supplying through the work
of the analysis Pcs connecting-links of the kind we have been
discussing. Consciousness remains where it is, therefore; but, on the
other hand, the Ucs does not rise up into the
Cs.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Whereas the relation between external perceptions and the ego is quite
perspicuous, that between internal perceptions and the ego requires
special investigation. It gives rise once more to a doubt whether we are
really justified in referring the whole of consciousness to the single
superficial system Pcpt-Cs.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Internal perceptions yield sensations of processes arising in the most
diverse and certainly also in the deepest strata of the mental
apparatus. Very little is known about these sensations and feelings; the
best examples we have of them are still those belonging to the
pleasure-pain series. They are more fundamental, more elementary, than
perceptions arising externally and they can come into being even when
consciousness is clouded. I have elsewhere expressed my views about
their great economic significance and its metapsychological foundation.
These sensations are multilocular, like external perceptions; they may
come from different places simultaneously and may thus have different or
even opposite qualities.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Sensations of a pleasurable nature are not characterized by any
inherently impelling quality, whereas \'painful\' ones possess this
quality in a high degree. The latter impel towards change, towards
discharge, and that is why we interpret \'pain\' as implying a
heightening and pleasure a lowering of energic cathexis. Suppose we
describe what becomes conscious in the shape of pleasure and \'Pain\' as
an undetermined quantitative and qualitative element in the mind; the
question then is whether that element can become conscious where it
actually is, or whether it must first be transmitted into the system
Pcpt.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Clinical experience decides for the latter. It shows us that this
undetermined element behaves like a repressed impulse. It can exert
driving force without the ego noticing the compulsion. Not until there
is resistance to the compulsion, and blocking of the discharge-reaction,
does the undetermined element instantly become conscious as \'pain\'. In
the same way that tensions arising from physical need can remain
unconscious, so also can physical pain \-- a thing intermediate between
external and internal perception, which acts like an internal perception
even when its source is in the external world. It remains true again,
therefore, that sensations and feelings only become conscious through
reaching the system Pcpt; if the way forward is barred, they do not come
into being as sensations, although the undetermined element
corresponding to them is the same as if they did. We then come to speak,
in a condensed and not entirely correct manner, of \'unconscious
feelings\', keeping up an analogy with unconscious ideas which is not
altogether justifiable. Actually the difference is that, whereas with
Ucs ideas connecting-links must be forged before they can be brought
into the Cs, with feelings, which are themselves transmitted directly,
there is no necessity for this. In other words: the distinction between
Cs and Pcs has no meaning where feelings are concerned; the Pcs here
falls out of account, and feelings are either conscious or unconscious.
Even when they are connected with verbal images, their becoming
conscious is not due to that circumstance, but they become so
directly.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The part played by verbal images now becomes perfectly clear. By their
interposition internal thought-processes are made into perceptions. It
is like a demonstration of the theorem that all knowledge has its origin
in external perception. It may sometimes happen that a hyper-cathexis of
the process of thinking takes place, in which case thoughts are
perceived in the literal sense of the word \-- as if they came from
without \-- and are consequently held to be
true.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[After this clarifying of the relations between external and internal
perception and the superficial system Pcpt-Cs, we can go on to work out
our conception of the ego. It clearly starts out from its nucleus, the
system Pcpt, and begins by embracing the Pcs, which is adjacent to the
memoryresidues. But the ego, as we have learnt, is also
unconscious.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Now I think we shall gain a great deal by following the suggestion of a
writer who, from personal motives, vainly insists that he has nothing to
do with the rigours of pure science. I am speaking of Georg Groddeck,
who is never tired of pointing out that the conduct through life of what
we call our ego is essentially passive, and that, as he expresses it, we
are \'lived\' by unknown and uncontrollable forces.  We have all had
impressions of the same kind, even though they may not have overwhelmed
us to the exclusion of all others, and we need feel no hesitation in
finding a place for Groddeck\'s discovery in the fabric of science. I
propose to take it into account by calling the entity which starts out
from the system Pcpt and begins by being Pcs the ego, and by following
Groddeck in giving to the other part of the mind, into which this entity
extends and which behaves as though it were Ucs, the name of Id
(Es).]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[But the repressed merges into the id as well, and is simply a part of
it. The repressed is only cut off sharply from the ego by the
resistances of repression; it can communicate with the ego through the
id. We at once realize that almost all the delimitations we have been
led into outlining by our study of pathology relate only to the
superficial levels of the mental apparatus \-- the only ones known to
us. The state of things which we have been describing can be represented
diagrammatically (Fig. 1); though it must be remarked that the form
chosen has no pretensions to any special applicability, but is merely
intended to serve for purposes of exposition. We might add, perhaps,
that the ego wears an auditory lobe \-- on one side only, as we learn
from cerebral anatomy. It wears it crooked, as one might
say.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[It is easy to see that the ego is that part of the
]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}[id which has been modified by the direct
influence of the external world acting through the Pcpt-Cs: in a sense
it is an extension of the surface-differentiation. Moreover, the ego has
the task of bringing the influence of the external world to bear upon
the id and its tendencies, and endeavours to substitute the
reality-principle for the pleasureprinciple which reigns supreme in the
id. In the ego perception plays the part which in the id devolves upon
instinct. The ego represents what we call reason and sanity, in contrast
to the id which contains the passions. All this falls into line with
popular distinctions which we are all familiar with; at the same time,
however, it is only to be regarded as holding good in an average or
\'ideal\' case.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The functional importance of the ego is manifested in the fact that
normally control over the approaches to motility devolves upon it. Thus
in its relation to the id it is like a man on horseback, who has to hold
in check the superior strength of the horse; with this difference, that
the rider seeks to do so with his own strength while the ego uses
borrowed forces. The illustration may be carried further. Often a rider,
if he is not to be parted from his horse, is obliged to guide it where
it wants to go; so in the same way the ego constantly carries into
action the wishes of the id as if they were its
own.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[It seems that another factor, besides the influence of the system
]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}[Pcpt, has been at work in bringing about
the formation of the ego and its differentiation from the id. The body
itself, and above all its surface, is a place from which both external
and internal perceptions may spring. It is seen in the same way as any
other object, but to the touch it yields two kinds of sensations, one of
which is equivalent to an internal perception. Psychophysiology has
fully discussed the manner in which the body attains its special
position among other objects in the world of perception. Pain seems also
to play a part in the process, and the way in which we gain new
knowledge of our organs during painful illnesses is perhaps a prototype
of the way by which in general we arrive at the idea of our own
body.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The ego is first and foremost a body-ego; it is not merely a surface
entity, but it is itself the projection of a surface.  If we wish to
find an anatomical analogy for it we can easily identify it with the\'
cortical homunculus\' of the anatomists, which stands on its head in the
cortex, sticks its heels into the air, faces backwards and, as we know,
has its speech-area on the left-hand side.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The relation of the ego to consciousness has been gone into repeatedly;
yet there are still some important facts in this connection which remain
to be described. Accustomed as we are to taking our social or ethical
standard of values along with us wherever we go, we feel no surprise at
hearing that the scene of the activities of the lower passions is in the
unconscious; we expect, moreover, that the higher any mental function
ranks in our scale of values the more easily it will find access to
consciousness assured to it. Here, however, psychoanalytic experience
disappoints us. On the one hand, we have evidence that even subtle and
intricate intellectual operations which ordinarily require strenuous
concentration can equally be carried out preconsciously and without
coming into consciousness. Instances of this are quite incontestable;
they may occur, for instance, during sleep, as is shown when some one
finds, immediately after waking, that he knows the solution of a
difficult mathematical or other problem with which he had been wrestling
in vain the day before. ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[There is another phenomenon, however, which is far stranger. In our
analyses we discover that there are people in whom the faculties of
self-criticism and conscience \-- mental activities, that is, that rank
as exceptionally high ones \-- are unconscious and unconsciously produce
effects of the greatest importance; the example of resistances remaining
unconscious during analysis is therefore by no means unique. But this
new discovery, which compels us, in spite of our critical faculties, to
speak of an \'unconscious sense of guilt\', bewilders us far more than
the other and sets us fresh problems, especially when we gradually come
to see that in a great number of neuroses this unconscious sense of
guilt plays a decisive economic part and puts the most powerful
obstacles in the way of recovery. If we come back once more to our scale
of values, we shall have to say that not only what is lowest but also
what is highest in the ego can be unconscious. It is as if we were thus
supplied with a proof of what we have just asserted of the conscious
ego: that it is first and foremost a
body-ego.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

::: {style="page-break-after:always"}
:::

\
</p>

[]{#part0000.xhtml_three}[III]{#part0000.xhtml_aid-6G
style=" font-size:1.5rem"}

[THE EGO AND THE SUPER-EGO (EGO-IDEAL)]{style=" font-size:1.5rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[IF the ego were merely the part of the id that is modified by the
influence of the perceptual system, the representative in the mind of
the real external world, we should have a simple state of things to deal
with. But there is a further complication.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The considerations that led us to assume the existence of a
differentiating grade within the ego, which may be called the
]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}[ego-ideal or super-ego, have been set forth
elsewhere. They still hold good. The new proposition which must now be
gone into is that this part of the ego is less closely connected with
consciousness than the rest.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[At this point we must widen our range a little. We succeeded in
explaining the painful disorder of melancholia by supposing that, in
those suffering from it, an object which was lost has been reinstated
within the ego; that is, that an object cathexis has been replaced by an
identification. When this explanation was first proposed, however, we
did not appreciate the full significance of the process and did not know
how common and how typical it is. Since then we have come to understand
that this kind of substitution has a great share in determining the form
taken on by the ego and that it contributes materially towards building
up what is called its \'character\'.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[At the very beginning, in the primitive oral phase of the individual\'s
existence, object-cathexis and identification are hardly to be
distinguished from each other. We can only suppose that later on
object-cathexes proceed from the id, in which erotic trends are felt as
needs. The ego, which at its inception is still far from robust, becomes
aware of the object-cathexes, and either acquiesces in them or tries to
defend itself against them by the process of repression.
]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[When it happens that a person has to give up a sexual object, there
quite often ensues a modification in his ego which can only be described
as a reinstatement of the object within the ego, as it occurs in
melancholia; the exact nature of this substitution is as yet unknown to
us. It may be that, by undertaking this introjection, which is a kind of
regression to the mechanism of the oral phase, the ego makes it easier
for an object to be given up or renders that process possible. It may
even be that this identification is the sole condition under which the
id can give up its objects. At any rate the process, especially in the
early phases of development, is a very frequent one, and it points to
the conclusion that the character of the ego is a precipitate of
abandoned object-cathexes and that it contains a record of past
object-choices. It must, of course, be admitted from the outset that
there are varying degrees of capacity for resistance, as shown by the
extent to which the character of any particular person accepts or
resists the influences of the erotic object-choices through which he has
lived. In women who have had many love-affairs there seems to be no
difficulty in finding vestiges of their object-cathexes in the traits of
their character. We must also take into consideration the case of
simultaneous objectcathexis and identification, i.e. in which the
alteration in character occurs before the object has been given up. In
such a case the alteration in character would be able to survive the
objectrelation and in a certain sense to conserve
it.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[From another point of view it may be said that this transformation of
an erotic object-choice into a modification of the ego is also a method
by which the ego can obtain control over the id and deepen its relations
with it \-- at the cost, it is true, of acquiescing to a large extent in
the id\'s experiences. When the ego assumes the features of the object,
it forces itself, so to speak, upon the id as a love-object and tries to
make good the loss of that object by saying, \'Look, I am so like the
object, you can as well love me\'.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The transformation of object-libido into narcissistic libido which thus
takes place obviously implies an abandonment of sexual aims, a process
of desexualization; it is consequently a kind of sublimation. Indeed,
the question arises, and deserves careful consideration, whether this is
not always the path taken in sublimation, whether all sublimation does
not take place through the agency of the ego, which begins by changing
sexual objectlibido into narcissistic libido and then, perhaps, goes on
to give it another aim. We shall later on have to consider whether other
instinctual vicissitudes may not also result from this transformation,
whether, for instance, it may not bring about a defusion of the
instincts that are fused together.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Although it is a digression from our theme, we cannot avoid giving our
attention for a moment longer to the ego\'s object-identifications. If
they obtain the upper hand and become too numerous, unduly intense and
incompatible with one another, a pathological outcome will not be far
off. It may come to a disruption of the ego in consequence of the
individual identifications becoming cut off from one another by
resistances; perhaps the secret of the cases of so-called multiple
personality is that the various identifications seize possession of
consciousness in turn. Even when things do not go so far as this, there
remains the question of conflicts between the different identifications
into which the ego is split up, conflicts which cannot after all be
described as purely pathological.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[But, whatever the character\'s capacity for resisting the influences of
abandoned object-cathexes may turn out to be in after years, the effects
of the first identifications in earliest childhood will be profound and
lasting. This leads us back to the origin of the ego-ideal; for behind
the latter there lies hidden the first and most important identification
of all, the identification with the father, which takes place in the
prehistory of every person. This is apparently not in the first instance
the consequence or outcome of an object-cathexis; it is a direct and
immediate identification and takes place earlier than any
object-cathexis. But the object-choices belonging to the earliest sexual
period and relating to the father and mother seem normally to find their
outcome in an identification of the kind discussed, which would thus
reinforce the primary one.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The whole subject, however, is so complicated that it will be necessary
to go into it more minutely. The intricacy of the problem is due to two
factors: the triangular character of the Oedipus situation and the
constitutional bisexuality of each
individual.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[In its simplified form the case of the male child may be described as
follows. At a very early age the little boy develops an object-cathexis
of his mother, which originally related to the mother\'s breast and is
the earliest instance of an object choice on the anaclitic model; his
father the boy deals with by identifying himself with him. For a time
these two relationships exist side by side, until the sexual wishes in
regard to the mother become more intense and the father is perceived as
an obstacle to them; this gives rise to the Oedipus complex. The
identification with the father then takes on a hostile colouring and
changes into a wish to get rid of the father in order to take his place
with the mother. Henceforward the relation to the father is ambivalent;
it seems as if the ambivalence inherent in the identification from the
beginning had become manifest. An ambivalent attitude to the father and
an object relation of a purely affectionate kind to the mother make up
the content of the simple positive Oedipus complex in the
boy.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Along with the dissolution of the Oedipus complex the object-cathexis
of the mother must be given up. Its place may be filled by one of two
things: either an identification with the mother or an intensified
identification with the father. We are accustomed to regard the latter
outcome as the more normal; it permits the affectionate relation to the
mother to be in a measure retained. In this way the passing of the
Oedipus complex would consolidate the masculinity in the boy\'s
character. In a precisely analogous way, the outcome of the Oedipus
attitude in the little girl may be an intensification of the
identification with her mother (or such an identification may thus be
set up for the first time) \-- a result which will stamp the child\'s
character in the feminine mould.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[These identifications are not what our previous statements would have
led us to expect, since they do not involve the absorption of the
abandoned object into the ego: but this alternative outcome may also
occur; it is more readily observed in girls than in boys. Analysis very
often shows that a little girl, after she has had to relinquish her
father as a love-object, will bring her masculinity into prominence and
identify herself with her father, that is, with the object which has
been lost, instead of with her mother. This will clearly depend on
whether the masculinity in her disposition \-- whatever that may consist
of \-- is strong enough.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[It would appear, therefore, that in both sexes the relative strength of
the masculine and feminine sexual dispositions is what determines
whether the outcome of the Oedipus situation shall be an identification
with the father or with the mother. This is one of the ways in which
bisexuality takes a hand in the subsequent vicissitudes of the Oedipus
complex. The other way is even more important. For one gets the
impression that the simple Oedipus complex is by no means its commonest
form, but rather represents a simplification or schematization which, to
be sure, is often enough adequate for practical purposes. Closer study
usually discloses the more complete Oedipus complex, which is twofold,
positive and negative, and is due to the bisexuality originally present
in children: that is to say, a boy has not merely an ambivalent attitude
towards his father and an affectionate object-relation towards his
mother, but at the same time he also behaves like a girl and displays an
affectionate feminine attitude to his father and a corresponding
hostility and jealousy towards his mother. It is this complicating
element introduced by bisexuality that makes it so difficult to obtain a
clear view of the facts in connection with the earliest object-choices
and identifications, and still more difficult to describe them
intelligibly. It may even be that the ambivalence displayed in the
relations to the parents should be attributed entirely to bisexuality
and that it is not, as I stated just now, developed out of an
identification in consequence of rivalry.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[In my opinion it is advisable in general, and quite especially where
neurotics are concerned, to assume the existence of the complete Oedipus
complex. Analytic experience then shows that in a number of cases one or
the other of its constituents disappears, except for barely
distinguishable traces, so that a series can be formed with the normal
positive Oedipus complex at one end and the inverted negative one at the
other, while its intermediate members will exhibit the complete type
with one or other of its two constituents preponderating. As the Oedipus
complex dissolves, the four trends of which it consists will group
themselves in such a way as to produce a father identification and a
mother-identification. The father-identification will preserve the
object-relation to the mother which belonged to the positive complex and
will at the same time take the place of the object-relation to the
father which belonged to the inverted complex: and the same will be
true, mutatis mutandis, of the mother-identification. The relative
intensity of the two identifications in any individual will reflect the
preponderance in him of one or other of the two sexual
dispositions.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The broad general outcome of the sexual Phase governed by the Oedipus
complex may, therefore, be taken to be the forming of a precipitate in
the ego, consisting of these two identifications in some way combined
together. This modification of the ego retains its special position; it
stands in contrast to the other constituents of the ego in the form of
an ego-ideal or super-ego.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The super-ego is, however, not merely a deposit left by the earliest
object-choices of the id; it also represents an energetic
reaction-formation against those choices. Its relation to the ego is not
exhausted by the precept: \'You ought to be such and such (like your
father)\'; it also comprises the prohibition: \'You must not be such and
such (like your father); that is, you may not do all that he does; many
things are his prerogative\'. This double aspect of the ego-ideal
derives from the fact that the ego-ideal had the task of effecting the
repression of the Oedipus complex, indeed, it is to that revolutionary
event that it owes its existence. Clearly the repression of the Oedipus
complex was no easy task. The parents, and especially the father, were
perceived as the obstacle to realization of the Oedipus wishes; so the
child\'s ego brought in a reinforcement to help in carrying out the
repression by erecting this same obstacle within itself. The strength to
do this was, so to speak, borrowed from the father, and this loan was an
extraordinarily momentous act. The superego retains the character of the
father, while the more intense the Oedipus complex was and the more
rapidly it succumbed to repression (under the influence of discipline,
religious teaching, schooling and reading) the more exacting later on is
the domination of the super-ego over the ego \-- in the form of
conscience or perhaps of an unconscious sense of guilt. I shall later on
bring forward a suggestion about the source of the power it employs to
dominate in this way, the source, that is, of its compulsive character
which manifests itself in the form of a categorical
imperative.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[If we consider once more the origin of the super-ego as we have
described it, we shall perceive it to be the outcome of two highly
important factors, one of them biological and the other historical:
namely, the lengthy duration in man of the helplessness and dependence
belonging to childhood, and the fact of his Oedipus complex, the
repression of which we have shown to be connected with the interruption
of libidinal development by the latency period and so with the twofold
onset of activity characteristic of man\'s sexual life. According to the
view of one psychoanalyst, the last-mentioned phenomenon, which seems to
be peculiar to man, is a heritage of the cultural development
necessitated by the glacial epoch. We see, then, that the
differentiation of the super-ego from the ego is no matter of chance; it
stands as the representative of the most important events in the
development both of the individual and of the race; indeed, by giving
permanent expression to the influence of the parents it perpetuates the
existence of the factors to which it owes its
origin.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Psycho-analysis has been reproached time after time with ignoring the
higher, moral, spiritual side of human nature. The reproach is doubly
unjust, both historically and methodologically. For, in the first place,
we have from the very beginning attributed the function of instigating
repression to the moral and aesthetic tendencies in the ego, and
secondly, there has been a general refusal to recognize that
psycho-analytic research could not produce a complete and finished body
of doctrine, like a philosophical system, ready-made, but had to find
its way step by step along the path towards understanding the
intricacies of the mind by making an analytic dissection of both normal
and abnormal phenomena. So long as the study of the repressed part of
the mind was our task, there was no need for us to feel any agitated
apprehensions about the existence of the higher side of mental life. But
now that we have embarked upon the analysis of the ego we can give an
answer to all those whose moral sense has been shocked and who have
complained that there must surely be a higher nature in man: \'Very
true,\' we can say, \'and here we have that higher nature, in this
egoideal or super-ego, the representative of our relation to our
parents. When we were little children we knew these higher natures, we
admired them and feared them; and later we took them into
ourselves.\']{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The ego-ideal, therefore, is the heir of the Oedipus complex and thus
it is also the expression of the most powerful impulses and most
important vicissitudes experienced by the libido in the id. By setting
up this ego-ideal the ego masters its Oedipus complex and at the same
time places itself in subjection to the id. Whereas the ego is
essentially the representative of the external world, of reality, the
super-ego stands in contrast to it as the representative of the internal
world, of the id. Conflicts between the ego and the ideal will, as we
are now prepared to find, ultimately reflect the contrast between what
is real and what is mental, between the external world and the internal
world.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Through the forming of the ideal, all the traces left behind in the id
by biological developments and by the vicissitudes gone through by the
human race are taken over by the ego and lived through again by it in
each individual. Owing to the way in which it is formed, the ego-ideal
has a great many points of contact with the phylogenetic endowment of
each individual \-- his archaic heritage. And thus it is that what
belongs to the lowest depths in the minds of each one of us is changed,
through this formation of the ideal, into what we value as the highest
in the human soul. It would be vain, however, to attempt to localize the
ego-ideal, even in the sense in which we have localized the ego, or to
work it into any of those analogies with the help of which we have tried
to picture the relation between the ego and the
id.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[It is easy to show that the ego-ideal answers in every way to what is
expected of the higher nature of man. In so far as it is a substitute
for the longing for a father, it contains the germ from which all
religions have evolved. The self-judgement which declares that the ego
falls short of its ideal produces the sense of worthlessness with which
the religious believer attests his longing. As a child grows up, the
office of father is carried on by masters and by others in authority;
the power of their injunctions and prohibitions remains vested in the
ego-ideal and continues, in the form of conscience, to exercise the
censorship of morals. The tension between the demands of conscience and
the actual attainments of the ego is experienced as a sense of guilt.
Social feelings rest on the foundation of identifications with others,
on the basis of an ego-ideal in common with
them.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Religion, morality, and a social sense \-- the chief elements of what
is highest in man \-- were originally one and the same thing. According
to the hypothesis which I have put forward in Totem und Tabu they were
acquired phylogenetically out of the father-complex: religion and moral
restraint by the actual process of mastering the Oedipus complex itself,
and social feeling from the necessity for overcoming the rivalry that
then remained between the members of the younger generation. It seems
that the male sex has taken the lead in developing all of these moral
acquisitions; and that they have then been transmitted to women by
cross- inheritance. Even to-day the social feelings arise in the
individual as a superstructure founded upon impulses of jealousy and
rivalry against his brothers and sisters. Since the enmity cannot be
gratified there develops an identification with the former rival. The
study of mild cases of homosexuality confirms the suspicion that in this
instance, too, the identification is a substitute for an affectionate
object-choice which has succeeded the hostile, aggressive attitude.
]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[With the mention of phylogenesis, however, fresh problems arise, from
which one is tempted to shrink back dismayed. But there is no help for
it, the attempt must be made; in spite of a fear that it will lay bare
the inadequacy of the whole structure that we have so arduously built
up. The question is: which was it, the ego of primitive man or his id,
that acquired religion and morality in those early days out of the
father-complex? If it was his ego, why do we not speak simply of these
things being inherited by the ego? If it was the id, how does that agree
with the character of the id? Or are we wrong in carrying the
differentiation between ego, super-ego, and id back into such early
times? Or should we not honestly confess that our whole conception of
the processes within the ego is of no help in understanding phylogenesis
and cannot be applied to it?]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Let us answer first what is easiest to answer. The differentiation
between ego and id must be attributed not only to primitive man but even
to much simpler forms of life, for it is the inevitable expression of
the influence of the external world. The super-ego, according to our
hypothesis, actually originated from the experiences that led to
totemism. The question whether it was the ego or the id that experienced
and acquired these things soon ceases to have any meaning. Reflection at
once shows us that no external vicissitudes can be experienced or
undergone by the id, except by way of the ego, which is the
representative of the outer world to the id. Nevertheless it is not
possible to speak of direct inheritance by the
ego.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[It is here that the gulf between the actual individual and the
conception of the species becomes evident. Moreover, one must not take
the difference between ego and id in too hard-and-fast a sense, nor
forget that the ego is a part of the id which has been specially
modified. The experiences undergone by the ego seem at first to be lost
to posterity; but, when they have been repeated often enough and with
sufficient intensity in the successive individuals of many generations,
they transform themselves, so to say, into experiences of the id, the
impress of which is preserved by inheritance. Thus in the id, which is
capable of being inherited, are stored up vestiges of the existences led
by countless former egos; and, when the ego forms its super-ego out of
the id, it may perhaps only be reviving images of egos that have passed
away and be securing them a resurrection.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The way in which the super-ego came into being explains how it is that
the earlier conflicts of the ego with the object-cathexes of the id can
be carried on and continued in conflicts with their successor, the
super-ego. If the ego has not succeeded in mastering the Oedipus complex
satisfactorily, the energic cathexis of the latter, springing from the
id, will find an outlet in the reaction-formations of the ego-ideal. The
very free communication possible between the ideal and these Ucs
instinctual trends explains how it is that the ideal itself can be to a
great extent unconscious and inaccessible to the ego. The struggle which
once raged in the deepest strata of the mind, and was not brought to an
end by rapid sublimation and identification, is now carried on in a
higher region, like the Battle of the Huns which in Kaulbach\'s painting
is being fought out in the sky.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

::: {style="page-break-after:always"}
:::

\
</p>

[]{#part0000.xhtml_four}[IV]{#part0000.xhtml_aid-A3
style=" font-size:1.5rem"}

[THE TWO CLASSES OF INSTINCTS]{style=" font-size:1.5rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[WE have already said that, if the differentiation we have made of the
mind into an id, an ego, and a superego represents any advance in our
knowledge, it ought to enable us to understand more thoroughly the
dynamic relations within the mind and to describe them more clearly. We
have also already reached the conclusion that the ego is especially
affected by perception, and that, speaking broadly, perceptions may be
said to have the same significance for the ego as instincts have for the
id. At the same time the ego is subject to the influence of the
instincts, too, like the id, of which it is in fact only a specially
modified part.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[I have lately developed a view of the instincts 20 which I shall here
hold to and take as the basis of further discussions. According to this
view we have to distinguish two classes of instincts, one of which, Eros
or the sexual instincts, is by far the more conspicuous and accessible
to study. It comprises not merely the uninhibited sexual instinct proper
and the impulses of a sublimated or aim-inhibited nature derived from
it, but also the self-preservative instinct, which must be assigned to
the ego and which at the beginning of our analytic work we had good
reason for setting in opposition to the sexual object-instincts. The
second class of instincts was not so easy to define; in the end we came
to recognize sadism as its representative. As a result of theoretical
considerations, supported by biology, we assumed the existence of a
death-instinct, the task of which is to lead organic matter back into
the inorganic state; on the other hand, we supposed that Eros aims at
complicating life by bringing about a more and more far-reaching
coalescence of the particles into which living matter has been
dispersed, thus, of course, aiming at the maintenance of life. Acting in
this way, both the instincts would be conservative in the strictest
sense of the word, since both would be endeavouring to re-establish a
state of things that was disturbed by the emergence of life. The
appearance of life would thus be regarded as the cause of the
continuance of life and also as the cause of the striving towards death;
and life itself would be a conflict and compromise between these two
trends. The problem of the origin of life would remain a cosmological
one; and the problem of the purpose and goal of life would be answered
dualistically.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[On this view a special physiological process (of anabolism or
katabolism) would be associated with each of the two classes of
instincts; both instincts would be active in every particle of living
substance, although in unequal proportions, so that some one substance
might be the principal representative of
Eros.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[This hypothesis throws no light whatever upon the manner in which the
two classes of instincts are fused, blended, and mingled with each
other; but that this takes place regularly and very extensively is an
assumption indispensable to our conception. It appears that, as a result
of the combination of unicellular organisms into multicellular forms of
life, the death-instinct of the single cell can successfully be
neutralized and the destructive impulses be diverted towards the
external world through the instrumentality of a special organ. This
special organ would seem to be the musculature; and the death-instinct
would thus seem to express itself \-- though probably only in part \--
as an instinct of destruction directed against the external world and
other living organisms.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Once we have admitted the conception of a fusion of the two classes of
instincts with each other, the possibility of a \-- more or less
complete \-- \'defusion\' of them forces itself upon us. The sadistic
component of the sexual instinct would be a classical example of
instinctual fusion serving a useful purpose; and the perversion in which
sadism has made itself independent would be typical of defusion, though
not of absolutely complete defusion. From this point we obtain a new
view of a great array of facts which have not before been considered in
this light. We perceive that for purposes of discharge the instinct of
destruction is habitually enlisted in the service of Eros; we suspect
that the epileptic fit is a product and sign of instinctual defusion;
and we come to understand that defusion and the marked emergence of the
death-instinct are among the most noteworthy effects of many severe
neuroses, e.g. the obsessional neuroses. Making a swift generalization,
we might conjecture that the essence of a regression of libido, e.g.
from the genital to the sadistic-anal level, would lie in a defusion of
instincts, just as, conversely, the advance from an earlier to the
definitive genital phase would be conditioned by an accession of erotic
components. The question also arises whether ordinary ambivalence, which
is so often unusually strong in the constitutional disposition to
neurosis, should not be regarded as the product of a defusion;
ambivalence, however, is such a fundamental phenomenon that it more
probably represents a state of incomplete
fusion.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[It is natural that we should now turn with interest to inquire whether
there may not be instructive connections to be traced between the
formations we have assumed to exist in the mind \-- the ego, the
super-ego, and the id \-- and the two classes of instincts; and,
further, whether the pleasure-principle which dominates mental processes
can be shown to have any constant relation both to the two classes of
instincts and to these differentiations which we have drawn within the
mind. But before we discuss this, we must clear away a doubt which
arises concerning the terms of the problem itself. There can be no doubt
about the pleasure-principle, and the differentiations within the ego
have good clinical justification, but the distinction between the two
classes of instincts does not seem sufficiently assured and it is
possible that facts of clinical analysis may be found to conflict with
it.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[One such fact appears to exist. Instead of the opposition between the
two classes of instincts let us consider the Polarity of love and hate.
(There is no difficulty in finding a representative of Eros; but we must
be grateful that we can find a representative of the elusive
death-instinct in the instinct of destruction, for which hate points the
way.) Now, clinical observation shows not only that love is with
unexpected regularity accompanied by hate (ambivalence), and not only
that in human relationships hate is frequently a forerunner of love, but
also that in many circumstances hate changes into love and love into
hate. If this change is anything more than a mere succession in time,
then clearly the ground is cut away from under a distinction so
fundamental as that between erotic instincts and death-instincts, one
which presupposes the existence of physiological processes running
counter to each other.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Now the case in which someone first loves and then hates the same
person (or the reverse), because that person has given him cause for
doing so, has obviously nothing to do with our problem. Nor has the
other case in which feelings of love that have not yet become manifest
express themselves to begin with by enmity and aggressive tendencies;
for it may be that here the destructive components in the
object-cathexis have outstripped the erotic and are only later on joined
by the latter. But we know of several instances in the psychology of the
neuroses in which there are better grounds for assuming that a
transformation does take place. In persecutory paranoia the sufferer
takes a particular way of defending himself against an unduly strong
homosexual attachment to a given person, with the result that the person
he once loved most is changed into a persecutor and then becomes the
object of aggressive and often dangerous impulses on the part of the
patient. Here we have grounds for interposing an intermediate phase in
which the love is transformed into hate. Analytic investigation has only
lately revealed that the sources of homosexuality and of desexualized
social feelings include very intense feelings of rivalry giving rise to
aggressive desires, which, after they have been surmounted, are
succeeded by love for the object that was formerly hated or by an
identification with it. The question arises whether in these instances
we are to assume a direct transformation of hate into love. It is clear
that here the changes are purely internal and an alteration in the
behaviour of the object plays no part in
them.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[There is another possible mechanism, however, which we have come to
know of by analytic investigation of the processes concerned in the
change in paranoia. An ambivalent attitude is present from the outset
and the transformation is effected by means of a reactive shifting of
cathexis, by which energy is withdrawn from the erotic impulses and used
to supplement the hostile energy.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Not quite the same thing but something like it happens when a hostile
attitude of rivalry is overcome and leads to homosexuality. The hostile
attitude has no prospect of gratification; consequently \-- i.e. as an
economic measure \-- it is replaced by a loving attitude for which there
is more hope of satisfaction, that is, possibility of discharge. So we
see that we are not obliged in either of these cases to assume a direct
transformation of hate into love which would be incompatible with a
qualitative distinction between the two classes of
instincts.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[It appears, however, that by including in our calculations this other
mechanism by means of which love can be changed into hate, we have
tacitly made another assumption which deserves to be formulated
explicitly. We have reckoned as though there existed in the mind \--
whether in the ego or in the id \-- a displaceable energy, which is in
itself neutral, but is able to join forces either with an erotic or with
a destructive impulse, differing qualitatively as they do, and augment
its total cathexis. Without assuming the existence of a displaceable
energy of this kind we can make no headway. The only question is where
it comes from, what it belongs to, and what it
signifies.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The problem of the quality of instinctual impulses and of its
persistence throughout their vicissitudes is still very obscure and has
hardly been attacked up to the present. In the sexual
component-instincts, which are especially accessible to observation, it
is possible to perceive the working of processes which are in the same
category as what we are discussing; e.g. we see that some degree of
communication exists between the component instincts, that an instinct
deriving from one particular erotogenic source can make over its
intensity to reinforce another component-instinct originating in another
source, that gratification of one instinct can take the place of
gratification of another, and many more facts of the same nature \-- all
of which must encourage us to venture upon certain
assumptions.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[In the present discussion, moreover, I am putting forward nothing but a
supposition; I have no proof to offer. It seems a plausible view that
this neutral displaceable energy, which is probably active alike in the
ego and in the id, proceeds from the narcissistic reservoir of libido,
i.e. that it is desexualized Eros. (The erotic instincts appear to be
altogether more plastic, more readily diverted and displaced than the
destructive instincts.) From this we can easily go on to assume that
this displaceable libido is employed in the service of the
pleasure-principle to obviate accumulations and to facilitate discharge.
It is clear, incidentally, that there is a certain indifference about
the path along which the discharge takes place, so long as it takes
place somehow. We know this trait; it is characteristic of the cathectic
processes in the id. It is found in erotic cathexes, where a peculiar
indifference in regard to the object displays itself; and it is
especially evident in the transferences arising in analysis, which
develop inevitably no matter who the analyst may be. Rank has recently
published some good examples of the way in which neurotic acts of
revenge can be directed against the wrong people. Such behaviour on the
part of the unconscious reminds one of the comic story of the three
village tailors, one of whom had to be hanged because the only village
blacksmith had committed a capital offence. The penalty must be exacted
even if it does not fall upon the guilty.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[It was in studying dream-work that we first came upon this kind of
looseness in the displacements brought about by the primary process. In
that case it was the objects that were thus relegated to a position of
no more than secondary importance, just as in the case we are now
discussing it is the paths of discharge. It would seem to be
characteristic of the ego to be more particular both about the choice of
an object and about the path of discharge.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[If this displaceable energy is desexualized libido, it might also be
described as sublimated energy; for it would still retain the main
purpose of Eros \-- that of uniting and binding \-- in so far as it
helped towards establishing that unity, or tendency to unity, which is
particularly characteristic of the ego. If the intellectual processes in
the wider sense are to be classed among these displacements, then the
energy for the work of thought itself must be supplied from sublimated
erotic sources.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Here we arrive again at the possibility which has already been
discussed that sublimation may take place regularly through the
mediation of the ego. The other case will be recollected, in which the
ego deals with the first object-cathexes of the id (and certainly with
later ones too) by taking over the libido from them into itself and
binding it to the ego-modification produced by means of identification.
The transformation of erotic libido into ego-libido of course involves
an abandonment of sexual aims, a desexualization. In any case this
throws light upon an important function of the ego in its relation to
Eros. By thus obtaining possession of the libido from the
object-cathexes, setting itself up as sole love-object, and
desexualizing or sublimating the libido of the id, the ego is working in
opposition to the purposes of Eros and placing itself at the service of
the opposing instinctual trends. It has to acquiesce in some of the
other object-cathexes of the id; it has to go hand in hand with them, so
to speak. We shall come back later to another possible consequence of
this activity of the ego.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[This would seem to imply an important amplification of the theory of
narcissism. At the very beginning all the libido is accumulated in the
id, while the ego is still in process of formation or far from robust.
Part of this libido is sent out by the id into erotic object-cathexes,
whereupon the ego, now growing stronger, attempts to obtain possession
of this object-libido and to force itself upon the id as a love-object.
The narcissism of the ego is thus seen to be secondary, acquired by the
withdrawal of the libido from objects.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Over and over again we find on tracing instinctual impulses back that
they disclose themselves as derivatives of Eros. If it were not for the
considerations put forward in Beyond the Pleasure Principle, and
ultimately for the sadistic constituents which have attached themselves
to Eros, we should have difficulty in holding to our fundamental
dualistic point of view. But since we cannot escape that view, we are
driven to conclude that the death-instincts are by their nature mute and
that the clamour of life proceeds for the most part from Eros.
]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[And from the struggle against Eros! It can hardly be doubted that the
pleasure-principle serves the id as a compass in its struggle against
the libido \-- the force that introduces such disturbances into the
process of life. If it is true that life is governed by Fechner\'s
principle of constant equilibrium, it consists of a continuous descent
towards death; but the falling of the level is delayed and fresh
tensions are introduced by the claims of Eros, of the sexual instincts,
as expressed in instinctual needs. The id, guided by the
pleasure-principle, that is, by the perception of \'pain\', guards
itself against these tensions in various ways. It does so in the first
place by complying as swiftly as possible with the demands of the
non-desexualized libido, i.e. by striving for the gratification of the
directly sexual trends. But it does so further, and in a far more
comprehensive fashion, in relation to one particular form of
gratification which subsumes all component claims \-- that is, by
discharge of the sexual substances, which are saturated conductors, so
to speak, of the erotic tensions. The ejection of sexual substances in
the sexual act corresponds in a certain degree with the separation of
soma and germ-plasm. This accounts for the likeness between dying and
the condition that follows complete sexual satisfaction, and for the
fact that death coincides with the act of copulation in some of the
lower animals. These creatures die in the act of reproduction because,
after Eros has been eliminated through the process of gratification, the
death-instinct has a free hand for accomplishing its purposes. Finally,
as we have seen, the ego, by sublimating some of the libido for itself
and its purposes, assists the id in its work of mastering the
tensions.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

::: {style="page-break-after:always"}
:::

\
</p>

[]{#part0000.xhtml_five}[V]{#part0000.xhtml_aid-CN
style=" font-size:1.5rem"}

[THE SUBORDINATE RELATIONSHIPS OF THE EGO]{style=" font-size:1.5rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[THE complexity of our ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}[subject-matter must
be an excuse for the fact that none of the chapter-headings of this book
correspond entirely to their contents, and that in turning to new
aspects of the problem we constantly hark back to matters that have
already been dealt with.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[As has been said repeatedly, the ego is formed to a great extent out of
identifications taking the place of cathexes on the part of the id which
have been abandoned; the earliest of these identifications always fulfil
a special office in the ego and stand apart from the rest of the ego in
the form of a super-ego, while later on, as it grows stronger, the ego
may become more able to withstand the effects of identifications. The
super-ego owes its special position in the ego, or in regard to the ego,
to a factor which must be considered from two sides: to the fact that on
the one hand it was the first identification and one which took place
while the ego was still feeble, and that on the other hand it was the
heir to the Oedipus complex and thus incorporated into the ego objects
of far greater significance than any others. The super-ego\'s relation
to the subsequent modifications effected in the ego is roughly that of
the primary sexual period in childhood to full-grown sexual activity
after puberty. Although it is amenable to every later influence, it
preserves throughout life the character given to it by its derivation
from the father-complex, namely, the capacity to stand apart from the
ego and to rule it. It is a memorial of the former weakness and
dependence of the ego and the mature ego remains subject to its
domination. As the child was once compelled to obey its parents, so the
ego submits to the categorical imperative pronounced by its
super-ego.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The descent of the super-ego from the first object-cathexes of the id,
from the Oedipus complex, however, signifies even more for it. This
descent, as we have already described, connects it with the phylogenetic
acquisitions of the id and makes it a reincarnation of former
ego-structures which have left their precipitates behind in the id. Thus
the super-ego is always in close touch with the id and can act as its
representative in relation to the ego. It reaches deep down into the id
and is for that reason farther from consciousness than the ego.
]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[We can best appreciate these relations by turning our attention to
certain clinical facts, which have long since lost their novelty but
which still await theoretical discussion.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[There are certain people who behave in a quite peculiar fashion during
the work of analysis. When one speaks hopefully to them or expresses
satisfaction with the progress of the treatment, they show signs of
discontent and their condition invariably becomes worse. One begins by
regarding this as defiance and as an attempt to prove their superiority
to the physician, but later one comes to take a deeper and truer view.
One becomes convinced, not only that such people cannot endure any
praise or appreciation, but that they react inversely to the progress of
the treatment. Every partial solution that ought to result, and in other
people does result, in an improvement or a temporary suspension of
symptoms produces in them for the time being an exacerbation of their
illness; they get worse during the treatment instead of getting better.
They exhibit the socalled negative therapeutic
reaction.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[There is no doubt that there is something in these people that sets
itself against their recovery and dreads its approach as though it were
a danger. We are accustomed to say that the need for illness has got the
upper hand in them over the desire for health. If we analyse this
resistance in the usual way \-- then, even after we have subtracted from
it the defiant attitude towards the physician and the fixation on the
various kinds of advantage which the patient derives from the illness,
the greater part of it is still left over; and this reveals itself as
the most powerful of all obstacles to recovery, more powerful even than
such familiar ones as narcissistic inaccessibility, the assumption of a
negative attitude towards the physician or a clinging to the advantages
of the illness.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[In the end we come to see that we are dealing with what may be called a
\'moral\' factor, a sense of guilt, which is finding atonement in the
illness and is refusing to give up the penalty of suffering. We are
justified in regarding this rather disheartening explanation as
conclusive. But as far as the patient is concerned this sense of guilt
is dumb; it does not tell him he is guilty; he does not feel guilty, he
simply feels ill. This sense of guilt expresses itself only as a
resistance to recovery which it is extremely difficult to overcome. It
is also particularly difficult to convince the patient that this motive
lies behind his continuing to be ill; he holds fast to the more obvious
explanation that treatment by analysis is not the right remedy for his
case. ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The description we have given applies to the most extreme instances of
this state of affairs, but in a lesser measure this factor has to be
reckoned with in very many cases, perhaps in all severe cases of
neurosis. In fact it may be precisely this element in the situation, the
attitude of the egoideal, that determines the severity of a neurotic
illness. We shall not hesitate, therefore, to discuss rather more fully
the way in which the sense of guilt expresses itself under different
conditions.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[An explanation of the normal conscious sense of guilt (conscience)
presents no difficulties; it is due to tension between the ego and the
ego-ideal and is the expression of a condemnation of the ego pronounced
by its criticizing function. The feelings of inferiority so well known
in neurotics are presumably closely related to it. In two very familiar
maladies the sense of guilt is over-strongly conscious; in them the
ego-ideal displays particular severity and often rages against the ego
with the utmost cruelty. The attitude of the ego-ideal in these two
diseases, the obsessional neurosis and melancholia, presents, alongside
of this similarity, differences that are no less
significant.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[In certain forms of the obsessional neurosis the sense of guilt
expresses itself loudly but cannot justify itself to the ego.
Consequently the patient\'s ego rebels against this imputation of guilt
and seeks the physician\'s support in repudiating it. It would be folly
to acquiesce in this, for to do so would have no effect. Analysis shows
that the super-ego is being influenced by processes that have remained
hidden from the ego. It is possible to discover the repressed impulses
which really occasion the sense of guilt. The super-ego is thus proved
to have known more than the ego about the unconscious
id.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[In melancholia the impression that the superego has obtained a hold
upon consciousness is even stronger. But in this case the ego ventures
no objection; it admits the guilt and submits to the punishment. The
explanation of this difference is plain. In the obsessional neurosis the
reprehensible impulses which are being criticized by the super-ego have
never formed part of the ego, while in melancholia the object of the
super-ego\'s wrath has become part of the ego through
identification.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[It is certainly not clear why the sense of guilt reaches such an
extraordinary intensity in these two neurotic disorders; and indeed, the
main problem presented in this state of affairs lies in another
direction. We shall postpone discussion of it until we have dealt with
the other cases \-- in which the sense of guilt remains
unconscious.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[It is essentially in hysteria and in states of a hysterical type that
this condition is found. The mechanism by which the sense of guilt is
kept unconscious is easy to discover. The hysterical type of ego defends
itself from the painful perception which the criticisms of its super-ego
threaten to produce in it by the same means that it uses to defend
itself from an unendurable object-cathexis \-- by an act of repression.
It is the ego, therefore, that is responsible for the sense of guilt
remaining unconscious. We know that as a rule the ego carries out
repressions in the service and at the behest of its super-ego; but this
is a case in which it has turned the same weapon against its harsh
taskmaster. In the obsessional neurosis, as we know, the phenomena of
reaction-formation predominate; but here the ego contents itself with
keeping at a distance the material to which the sense of guilt
refers.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[One may go further and venture the hypothesis that a great part of the
sense of guilt must normally remain unconscious, because the origin of
conscience is closely connected with the Oedipus complex which belongs
to the unconscious. If any one were inclined to put forward the
paradoxical proposition that the normal man is not only far more immoral
than he believes but also far more moral than he has any idea of,
psycho-analysis, which is responsible for the first half of the
assertion, would have no objection to raise against the second half.
]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[It was a surprise to find that exacerbation of this Ucs sense of guilt
could turn people into criminals. But it is undoubtedly a fact. In many
criminals, especially youthful ones, it is possible to detect a very
powerful sense of guilt which existed before the crime, and is not
therefore the result of it but its motive. It is as if it had been a
relief to be able to fasten this unconscious sense of guilt on to
something real and immediate.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[In all these situations the super-ego displays its independence of the
conscious ego and the closeness of its relations with the unconscious
id. And now, having regard to the importance we ascribed to preconscious
verbal residues in the ego, the question arises whether the super-ego,
if it is in part unconscious, can consist in such verbal images, or, if
not, in what it does consist. Our answer, though it does not carry us
very far, will be that it cannot possibly be disputed that the
super-ego, no less than the ego, is derived from auditory impressions;
it is part of the ego and remains to a great extent accessible to
consciousness by way of these verbal images (concepts, abstractions),
but the cathectic energy of these elements of the superego does not
originate from the auditory perceptions, instruction, reading, etc., but
from sources in the id.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The question which we postponed answering runs thus: How is it that the
super-ego manifests itself essentially as a sense of guilt (or rather,
as criticism \-- for the sense of guilt is the perception in the ego
which corresponds to the criticism) and at the same time develops such
extraordinary harshness and severity towards the ego? If we turn to
melancholia first, we find that the excessively strong super-ego which
has obtained a hold upon consciousness rages against the ego with
merciless fury, as if it had taken possession of the whole of the sadism
available in the person concerned. Following our view of sadism, we
should say that the destructive component had entrenched itself in the
super-ego and turned against the ego. What is now holding sway in the
super-ego is, as it were, a pure culture of the death-instinct, and in
fact it often enough succeeds in driving the ego into death, if the
latter does not protect itself from the tyrant in time by a revulsion
into mania.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The reproaches of conscience in certain forms of obsessional neurosis
are just as painful and tormenting, but here the situation is less
perspicuous. It is remarkable that the obsessional neurotic, in contrast
to the melancholiac, never takes the step of self-destruction; he is as
if immune against the danger of suicide, and is far better protected
from it than the hysteric. We can see that what guarantees the safety of
the ego is the fact that the object has been retained. In the
obsessional neurosis it has become possible, through a regression to the
pre-genital organization, for the love-impulses to transform themselves
into impulses of aggression against the object. Here again the instinct
of destruction has been set free and it aims at destroying the object,
or at least it appears to have this aim. These tendencies have not been
adopted by the ego; it struggles against them with reaction-formations
and precautionary measures, and they remain in the id. The super-ego,
however, behaves as if the ego were responsible for them and shows by
its zeal in chastising these destructive intentions that they are no
mere semblance evoked by regression but an actual substitution of hate
for love. Helpless in either direction, the ego defends itself vainly,
alike against the instigations of the murderous id and against the
reproaches of the punishing conscience. It succeeds in holding in check
at least the most brutal actions of both sides; the first outcome is
interminable self-torment, and eventually there follows a systematic
torturing of the object, in so far as it is within
reach.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The activity of the dangerous death-instincts within the individual
organism is dealt with in various ways; in part they are rendered
harmless by being fused with erotic components, in part they are
diverted towards the external world in the form of aggression, while for
the most part they undoubtedly continue their inner work unhindered. How
is it then that in melancholia the super-ego can become a kind of
gathering-place for the death-instincts?]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[From the point of view of morality, the control and restriction of
instinct, it may be said of the id that it is totally non-moral, of the
ego that it strives to be moral, and of the super-ego that it can be
hyper-moral and then becomes as ruthless as only the id can be. It is
remarkable that the more a man checks his aggressive tendencies towards
others the more tyrannical, that is aggressive, he becomes in his
ego-ideal. The ordinary view sees the situation the other way round: the
standard set up by the ego-ideal seems to be the motive for the
suppression of aggressiveness. The fact remains, however, as we have
stated it: the more a man controls his aggressiveness, the more intense
become the aggressive tendencies of his ego-ideal against his ego. It is
like a displacement, a turning round upon the self. But even ordinary
normal morality has a harshly restraining, cruelly prohibiting quality.
It is from this, indeed, that the conception arises of an inexorable
higher being who metes out punishment.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[I cannot go further in my consideration of these questions without
introducing a fresh assumption. The super-ego arises, as we know, from
an identification with the father regarded as a model. Every such
identification is in the nature of a desexualization or even of a
sublimation. It now seems as though when a transformation of this kind
takes place there occurs at the same time an instinctual defusion. After
sublimation the erotic component no longer has the power to bind the
whole of the destructive elements that were previously combined with it,
and these are released in the form of inclinations to aggression and
destruction. This defusion would be the source of the general character
of harshness and cruelty exhibited by the ideal \-- its dictatorial
\'Thou shalt\'.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Let us again consider the obsessional neurosis for a moment. The state
of affairs is different here. The defusion of love into aggressiveness
has not been effected by the agency of the ego, but is the result of a
regression which has come about in the id. But this process has extended
beyond the id to the super-ego, which now increases its tyranny over the
innocent ego. It would seem, however, that in this case no less than in
that of melancholia, the ego, having gained possession of the libido by
means of identification, is punished for doing so by the super-ego
through the instrumentality of the aggressiveness which had before been
mixed with the libido.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Our ideas about the ego are beginning to clear, and its various
relationships are gaining distinctness. We now see the ego in its
strength and in its weaknesses. It is entrusted with important
functions. By virtue of its relation to the perceptual system it
arranges the processes of the mind in a temporal order and tests their
correspondence with reality. By interposing the process of thinking it
secures a postponement of motor discharges and controls the avenues to
motility. This last office is, to be sure, a question more of form than
of fact; in the matter of action the ego\'s position is like that of a
constitutional monarch, without whose sanction no law can be passed but
who hesitates long before imposing a veto on any measure put forward by
Parliament.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[All the experiences of life that originate from without enrich the ego;
the id, however, is another outer world to it, which it strives to bring
into subjection to itself. It withdraws libido from the id and
transforms the object-cathexes of the id into ego-constructions. With
the aid of the super-ego, though in a manner that is still obscure to
us, it draws upon the experiences of past ages stored in the
id.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[There are two paths by which the contents of the id can penetrate into
the ego. The one is direct, the other leads by way of the ego-ideal;
which of these two paths they take may, for many mental activities, be
of decisive importance. The ego develops from perceiving instincts to
controlling them, from obeying instincts to curbing them. In this
achievement a large share is taken by the ego-ideal, which indeed is
partly a reaction formation against the instinctual processes in the id.
Psycho-analysis is an instrument to enable the ego to push its conquest
of the id further still.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[From the other point of view, however, we see this same ego as a poor
creature owing service to three masters and consequently menaced by
three several dangers: from the external world, from the libido of the
id, and from the severity of the super-ego. Three kinds of anxiety
correspond to these three dangers, since anxiety is the expression of a
recoil from danger. Like the dweller in a borderland that it is, the ego
tries to mediate between the world and the id, to make the id comply
with the world\'s demands and, by means of muscular activity, to
accommodate the world to the id\'s desires. In point of fact it behaves
like the physician during treatment by analysis; it offers itself to the
id as a libidinal object in view of its power of adaptation to the real
world, and aims at attaching the id\'s libido to itself. It is not only
the ally of the id; it is also a submissive slave who courts the love of
his master. Whenever possible, it tries to remain on good terms with the
id; it draws the veil of its Pcs rationalizations over the id\'s Ucs
demands; it pretends that the id is showing obedience to the mandates of
reality, even when in fact it is remaining obdurate and immovable; it
throws a disguise over the id\'s conflicts with reality and, if
possible, over its conflicts with the super-ego too. Its position midway
between the id and reality tempts it only too often to become
sycophantic, opportunist and false, like a politician who sees the truth
but wants to keep his place in popular
favour.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Towards the two classes of instincts the ego\'s attitude is not
impartial. Its work of identification and sublimation gives the
death-instincts in the id assistance in mastering the libido, but in so
doing it incurs the risk of itself becoming the object of the
death-instincts and of perishing. In order to be able to help in this
way it has to become flooded with libido itself; it thus becomes the
representative of Eros and thenceforward desires to live and to be
loved.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[But since the ego\'s work of sublimation results in a defusion of the
instincts and a liberation of the aggressive instincts in the super-ego,
its struggle against the libido exposes it to the danger of maltreatment
and death. In suffering under the attacks of the super-ego or perhaps
even succumbing to them, the ego is meeting with a fate like that of the
protozoa which are destroyed by the products of disintegration that they
themselves have created. From the economic point of view the morality
that functions in the super-ego seems to be a similar product of
disintegration.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[Among the subordinate relationships in which the ego stands, that to
the super-ego is perhaps the most interesting. The ego is the true abode
of anxiety.  Threatened by dangers from three directions, it develops
the flight-reflex by withdrawing its own cathexis from the menacing
perception or from the equally dreaded process in the id, and
discharging it as anxiety. This primitive reaction is later replaced by
the introduction of protective cathexes (the mechanism of the phobias).
What it is that the ego fears either from an external or from a
libidinal danger cannot be specified; we know that it is in the nature
of an overthrow or of extinction, but it is not determined by analysis.
The ego is simply obeying the warning of the pleasure-principle. On the
other hand, we can tell what lies hidden behind the ego\'s dread of the
super-ego, its fear of conscience. The higher being which later became
the ego-ideal once threatened the ego with castration, and this dread of
castration is probably the kernel round which the subsequent fear of
conscience has gathered; it is this dread that persists as the fear of
conscience.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The high-sounding phrase, \'Every fear is ultimately the fear of
death\', has hardly any meaning; at any rate it cannot be justified. It
seems to me, on the contrary, perfectly correct to distinguish the fear
of death from dread of an external object (objective anxiety) and from
neurotic libidinal anxiety. It presents a difficult problem to
psychoanalysis, for death is an abstract concept with a negative content
for which no unconscious correlative can be found. It would seem that
the mechanism of the fear of death can only be that the ego relinquishes
its narcissistic libidinal cathexis in a very large measure, that is,
that it gives up itself, just as it gives up some external object in
other cases in which it feels anxiety. I believe that the fear of death
concerns an interplay between the ego and the
super-ego.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[We know that the fear of death makes its appearance under two
conditions (which, moreover, are entirely analogous to the other
situations in which anxiety develops), namely, as a reaction to an
external danger and as an internal process, as for instance in
melancholia. Once again a neurotic manifestation may help us to
understand a normal one.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The fear of death in melancholia only admits of one explanation: that
the ego gives itself up because it feels itself hated and persecuted by
the super-ego, instead of loved. To the ego, therefore, living means the
same as being loved \-- being loved by the super-ego, which here again
appears as the representative of the id. The super-ego fulfils the same
function of protecting and saving that was fulfilled in earlier days by
the father and later by Providence or destiny. But, when the ego finds
itself in overwhelming danger of a real order which it believes itself
unable to overcome by its own strength, it is bound to draw the same
conclusion. It sees itself deserted by all the forces of protection and
lets itself die. Here, moreover, is once again the same situation as
that which underlay the first great anxiety-state of birth and the
infantile anxiety of longing for an absent person \-- the anxiety of
separation from the protecting mother.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[These considerations enable us to conceive of the fear of death, like
the fear of conscience, as a development of the fear of castration. The
great significance which the sense of guilt has in the neuroses makes it
conceivable that ordinary neurotic anxiety is reinforced in severe cases
by a development of anxiety between the ego and the super-ego (fear of
castration, of conscience, of death).]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[The id, to which we finally come back, has no means of showing the ego
either love or hate. It cannot say what it wants; it has achieved no
unity of will. Eros and the death-instinct struggle within it; we have
seen with what weapons the one group of instincts defends itself against
the other. It would be possible to picture the id as under the
domination of the mute but powerful death-instincts, which desire to be
at peace and (as the pleasure-principle demands) to put Eros, the
intruder, to rest; but that would be to run the risk of valuing too
cheaply the part played by Eros.]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}

[ ]{style=" font-size:1.0rem"}
::::::::::
