OceanofPDF.com

A NORTON PROFESSIONAL BOOK

OceanofPDF.com

The Body Remembers

The Psychophysiology of Trauma and Trauma Treatmen

BABETTE ROTHSCHILD

OceanofPDF.com

For Margie OceanofPDF.com

Contents

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS INTRODUCTION On Building Bridges Working with the Body
Does Not Require Touch The False Memory Controversy Organization of This
Book A Disclaimer PART I: THEORY 1. Overview of Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD): The Impact of Trauma on Body and Mind Charlie and the
Dog, Part I The Symptomatology of PTSD Distinguishing Stress, Traumatic
Stress, PTS, and PTSD Survival and the Nervous System Defensive Response
to Remembered Threat Dissociation, Freezing, and PTSD Consequences of
Trauma and PTSD 2. Development, Memory, and the Brain The Developing
Brain

What is Memory? 3. The Body Remembers: Understanding Somatic Memory The
Sensory Roots of Memory Charlie and the Dog, Part II The Autonomic
Nervous System: Hyperarousal and the Reflexes of Fight, Flight, and
Freeze The Somatic Nervous System: Muscles, Movement, and Kinesthetic
Memory Emotions and the Body 4. Expressions of Trauma Not Yet
Remembered: Dissociation and Flashbacks Dissociation and the Body
Flashbacks PART II: PRACTICE 5. First, Do No Harm On Braking and
Accelerating Evaluation and Assessment The Role of the Therapeutic
Relationship in Trauma Therapy Safety Developing and Reacquainting
Resources Oases, Anchors, and the Safe Place The Importance of Theory
Respecting Individual Differences Ten Foundations for Safe Trauma
Therapy 6. The Body as Resource Body Awareness Making Friends with
Sensations The Body as Anchor The Body as Gauge

The Body as Brake The Body as Diary: Making Sense of Sensations Somatic
Memory as Resource Facilitating Trauma Therapy Using the Body as
Resource 7. Additional Somatic Techniques for Safer Trauma Therapy Dual
Awareness Muscle Toning: Tension vs. Relaxation Physical Boundaries The
Question of Client-Therapist Touch Mitigating Session Closure 8. Somatic
Memory Becomes Personal History Beware the Wrong Road Separating Past
from Present Working with the Aftermath of the Trauma First Bridging the
Implicit and the Explicit Charlie and the Dog, the Final Episode
REFERENCES INDEX

OceanofPDF.com

Acknowledgments

It is not possible to tackle the arduous project of writing a
professional book without being taught, helped, influenced, inspired,
and advised by others. Those who have crossed my path in the 28 years
since my entry into the psychotherapy field are too numerous to mention
individually, though all have contributed in some way. Collectively, I
would like to thank each of the teachers, therapists, supervisors, and
researchers who have helped me to shape my opinions into a serviceable
form. Those who have most influenced my thinking with regard to trauma
theory and treatment are acknowledged by reference within the pages of
this text. Nonetheless, I would like to particularly recognize Lisbeth
Marcher and her colleagues at Denmark's Bodynamic Institute, Peter
Levine, and Bessel van der Kolk. They have had a profound influence on
the evolution of the ideas expressed in these pages. I would also like
to express my grateful thanks to the many trainees, supervisees,
students and clients who have all, in ways both small and large,
contributed to the content of this book. Like many, I have learned
---and continue to learn---the most from those I have had the privilege
to teach and treat. I would like to express gratitude specifically to
Karen Berman, Danny Brom, Alison Freeman, Michael Gavin, David Grill,
John May, Yvonne Parkins, Gina Ross, and Sima Juliar Stanley for their
brutally critical comments on this manuscript. In addition, I want to
thank life sciences writer, Karin Rhines, for being such a great "coach"
throughout this project.

Her knowledge of the business of writing, as well as her uncanny ability
to know just when to cheer and when to chide, has been invaluable. I
consider myself to be a very fortunate author to have Norton
Professional Books as my publisher. Having previously read many grateful
acknowledgments to my editor, Susan Munro, I now know what everybody was
talking about. In addition to being a skilled, patient, and good-humored
editor, her knowledge of my subject matter as well as her command of the
professional literature has been an invaluable bonus. In fact, I have
been heartened by my contacts with all of the staff I have encountered
at W.W. Norton---on both sides of the Atlantic. They have each and all
contributed to making the writing of this book a pleasure.

OceanofPDF.com

Introduction

The Body Remembers is intended as a complement to existing books on the
theory and treatment of trauma and posttraumatic stress disorder and to
the existing methods of trauma therapy. It is hoped that it will add the
dimension of understanding and treating the traumatized body to the
already well-established knowledge of and interventions for treating the
traumatized mind. Psychotherapists working with traumatized clients will
in all likelihood find that the theory, principles, and techniques
presented within these pages are consistent with and applicable to the
therapy model(s) in which they are already trained. In addition, they
should find that the information presented here can be used and adapted
without conflict with, or abandonment of, their preferred principles or
techniques.

ON BUILDING BRIDGES The Body Remembers is meant to be a bridge-building
book. It is my hope to traverse at least two of the deep chasms within
the field of traumatology. The first bridge spans the gap between the
theory developed by scientists, particularly in the area of
neurobiology, and the clinical practice of therapists working directly
with traumatized individuals and groups. The second bridge aims to
connect the traditional verbal psychotherapies and those of
body-oriented psychotherapy (body-psychotherapy).

The gaps between mind and body, traditional psychotherapy and
bodypsychotherapy, and between theory and practice have long been of
concern to me. Increasingly I have found that posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) is forcing a bridging of these gaps. Even the most
conservative of therapists and researchers acknowledges that PTSD is not
just a psychological condition, but also a disorder with important
somatic components. Moreover, all professionals who deal with PTSD find
that they must stretch their theories and practice. Both
psychotherapists and bodypsychotherapists are pressed to pay greater
attention to neurobiologic theory and to account for and treat somatic
symptoms, the body-psychotherapist must also find ways to work without
touch and to increase verbal integration, and the researcher is being
challenged to make more pertinent connections between theory and
practice. It is my hope that The Body Remembers will facilitate
meaningful links in bridging these gaps.

Science vs. Practice "A Widening Gulf Splits Lab and Couch" read the
headline of the New York Times' Women's Health section on June 21, 1998
(Tavris, 1998). Most psychotherapists knew it, but many of my colleagues
were surprised to see such criticism in print. Not a few were offended.
The author of that article, Carol Tavris, claimed that "'psychological
science' is an oxymoron." She criticized practitioners for paying too
little attention to science, often being more focused on technique than
theory. Most of the professionals I have spoken with agree with Carol
Tavris that scientific theory and practice are usually too divergent to
be relevant when they are sitting with a client. I, however, believe
that this gap between scientist and practitioner is one of semantics
rather than principles. The language of the scientific literature is
often difficult to read and comprehend, though much that is being
offered is extremely relevant, if difficult to translate into the
language of practice. I have endeavored in The Body Remembers to present
theory in an easily accessible form that is relevant to direct practice.
By so doing, I hope to narrow the chasm between the neuroscientist and
behavioral researcher studying the phenomenon of trauma and the
psychotherapist working directly with the traumatized client.

Theory is the most valuable tool of the trauma therapist, because
understanding the mechanisms of trauma as proposed by psychological,
neurobiological, and psychobiological theory greatly aids treatment. The
greater a therapist's theory base, the less dependence there will be on
techniques learned by rote. Thorough understanding of the neurological
and physiological underpinnings of the trauma response and the
development of PTSD will enable on-the-spot creation and/or adaptation
of interventions that are appropriate and helpful to a particular
client, with his\* particular trauma. A theoretical foundation also aids
therapists in applying techniques learned from various disciplines,
choosing and enhancing those that have the best chance of success in
each unique situation. The therapist well versed in theory is able to
adapt the therapy to the client, rather than assuming the client will
fit into the therapy.

Psychotherapy vs. Body-psychotherapy It is my additional hope that this
book will build a bridge between the practitioners of traditional verbal
psychotherapies and the practitioners of body-oriented psychotherapies.
I believe that these two professional groups have much to offer each
other in the treatment of trauma and PTSD. The first encouragement I
came upon for traversing this chasm was Bessel van der Kolk's seminal
article, "The Body Keeps the Score," in the Harvard Review of Psychiatry
(van der Kolk, 1994). It was in this article that I first found the
body-mind connection legitimized in mainstream psychiatry. In addition,
Antonio Damasio's Descartes' Error (1994) has been a great inspiration.
This groundbreaking book presents a neurological, theoretical basis for
the mind-body connection. Both of these works have laid the foundation
for my understanding of the psychophysical, neurobiological relationship
between the mind and the body. Further, the recent work of Perry,
Pollard, Blakley, Baker, and Vigilante (1995), Schore (1994, 1996),
Siegel (1996, 1999), van der Kolk (1998), and others on infant
attachment, brain development, and memory systems has tremendous
implications for our understanding of how trauma could so adversely
disrupt the nervous system that an individual would develop PTSD.

Bridging the gap between the verbal psychotherapies and the
bodypsychotherapies means taking the best resources from both, rather
than choosing one over the other. Integrated trauma therapy must
consider, consist of, and utilize tools for identifying, understanding,
and treating traumas effects on both mind and body. Language is
necessary for both. The somatic disturbances of trauma require language
to make sense of them, comprehend their meaning, extract their message,
and resolve their impact. When healing trauma, it is crucial to give
attention to both body and mind; you can't have one without the other.
\* I have attempted to alternate the use of the pronouns he, she, him,
her, his, and hers throughout the text. I hope I have been equitable.

WORKING WITH THE BODY DOES NOT REQUIRE TOUCH Touching the body and
working with the body are not, and need not be, synonymous when it comes
to psychotherapy or, for that matter, bodypsychotherapy. There are many
ways to work with the body, integrating important aspects of muscular,
behavioral, and sensory input, without intruding on bodily integrity.
There are many reasons not to use touch as a part of psychotherapeutic
or body-psychotherapeutic treatment. Aside from the obvious concerns
about the possible effect on the transference, there is the question of
respect for client boundaries, particularly with clients who have been
physically or sexually abused. Equally worthy of consideration is the
personal preference of the client and the personal preference of the
therapist. In addition, many malpractice insurance policies will not
cover treatment methods that use touch and the licensing boards of most
U.S. states forbid it. Do not get me wrong. I am not an extremist. In
some cases I think judicious touch can be useful when client and
therapist agree, but in this book I focus on body techniques that do not
involve touch, since those are, in my opinion, the most appropriate for
use with traumatized clients.

THE FALSE MEMORY CONTROVERSY This is not a book about false memories,
and I make no claims about, nor have any ambition to resolve, the
current controversy. However, as this book involves the subjects of
memory and trauma, I cannot avoid giving voice to my opinion on this
explosive and difficult issue. My opinion is inclusive: I believe early
memories of trauma can sometimes be recovered with relative accuracy,
and I am also equally convinced that sometimes false memories can be
inadvertently created or encouraged---by the therapist as well as the
client. I have been witness to examples of both with clients and
trainees, friends and family, and even myself. Somatic memory, a primary
concern of this book, is, in my opinion, neither more nor less reliable
than any other form of memory---as will be discussed later in this book.
Somatic memory can be continuous, and it can also be "forgotten," just
like cognitive memory. It can also be distorted, as it is the mind that
interprets and misinterprets the body's message. The mind, of course, is
subject to a wealth of influences that can alter the accuracy of a
memory over time. Though I offer no solutions to the controversy, I hope
that The Body Remembers will provide assistance in two areas: helping
the therapist to be more alert to and cautious of the risk of false
memories, and offering tools for identifying, understanding, and
integrating what the body actually does remember. The International
Society for Traumatic Stress Studies has struggled with this controversy
for several years. In 1998 it published a monograph on the issue,
Childhood Trauma Remembered (ISTSS, 1998). That concise publication
gives a balanced view of this controversy, and I highly recommend it.

ORGANIZATION OF THIS BOOK This book is organized into two major
sections. Part I, Theory, presents and discusses a theory for
understanding how the human mind and body

process, record, and remember traumatic events and what can impede as
well as facilitate these faculties. The current and most convincing
evidence from neuroscience and psychobiology is included, as well as
theories that have survived the test of time. In Part II, Practice,
strategies for helping the traumatized body, as well as the traumatized
mind, are presented. Nontouch tools for helping survivors of trauma to
make sense of, as well as ease, their somatic symptoms are offered. The
proffered tools are consistent with and applicable to any model of
therapy geared to working with traumatized individuals.

A DISCLAIMER The scientific study of the mechanisms of trauma, PTSD, and
memory is accelerating at such a fast pace that it is impossible to keep
up. There are sometimes strong disagreements between scientific groups.
What causes and what heals PTSD and how memory systems function are
subject to broad debate. The research-supported theories of one group
are disputed by another and vice versa. For better or worse, at least on
the topics of trauma and memory, science seems to be a matter of
opinion. Therefore, what you have here are my considered opinions based
on sometimes divergent theories. No clear-cut truths are to be found
among these pages because they do not, yet, exist. I hope, however,
there will be a great deal that is thought-provoking and useful. I trust
each reader will formulate his or her own considered opinions.
Neurologist Antonio Damasio eloquently states similar sentiments in his
introduction to Descartes' Error. I believe his words are worthy of
repetition: "I am skeptical of sciences presumption of objectivity and
definitiveness. I have a difficult time seeing scientific results,
especially in neurobiology, as anything but provisional approximations,
to be enjoyed for a while and discarded as soon as better accounts
become available" (1994, p. xviii). This is a minimalist
book---short-winded---as I want anyone who is interested to have the
time to tackle it. Among these pages you will find comprehensible
theories and applicable techniques that will be useful with

many, though not all, of your clients---all told, what I believe to be
the best of the (as Damasio would say) current approximations.

OceanofPDF.com

PART ONE

Theory OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER ONE

Overview of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) The Impact of Trauma on
Body and Mind

If it is true that at the core of our traumatized and neglected
patients' disorganization is the problem that they cannot analyze what
is going on when they re-experience the physical sensations of past
trauma, but that these sensations just produce intense emotions without
being able to modulate them, then our therapy needs to consist of
helping people to stay in their bodies and to understand these bodily
sensations. And that is certainly not something that any of the
traditional psychotherapies, which we have all been taught, help people
to do very well. ---Bessel van der Kolk (1998)

That the body remembers traumatic experiences is aptly illustrated by
the following case of "Charlie and the Dog."\* This case is presented in
several parts, beginning with this first part that introduces Charlie's
traumatic event and his resulting somatic and psychological symptoms. In
subsequent chapters, the interventions that helped Charlie to resolve
the impact of the traumatic incident will be detailed. In addition,
illustrative references to

Charlie will be woven throughout the text, providing a common thread
connecting the theory and practice elements of this book. \* For the
sake of protecting privacy and confidentiality all identifying
information has been altered in every case example and session vignette
throughout this book. For the same reason, many of the cases presented
are actually composites of several cases. In each instance the basic
principles and thrust of the therapy being presented have been
maintained.

CHARLIE AND THE DOG, PART I A few years ago, out for a leisurely Sunday
afternoon bicycle ride on a country lane, Charlie's pedaling reverie was
suddenly broken as a large dog began to chase him, barking furiously.
Charlie's heart rate soared, his mouth went dry, and his legs suddenly
had more power and strength than he had ever known. He pedaled faster
and faster, but the dog matched and then exceeded his pace. Eventually
the dog caught up and bit Charlie on his right thigh. As Charlie and his
bike tumbled, the dog continued his barking attack. Charlie lost
consciousness. Luckily, he had landed in a public area where several
people rushed to his aid, chasing off the dog and calling an ambulance.
Charlie's leg healed quickly, unlike his mind and nervous system. He
continued to be plagued each time he saw a dog. Just the sight of one,
even when locked in a house, behind a door, a window, and a fence, would
cause Charlie to break into a cold sweat, go dry in his mouth, and feel
faint. Since that incident he had kept his distance from all dogs, even
pets of friends, avoiding contact whenever possible. He would habitually
cross the street to evade a dog on his side of the street, whether on
the sidewalk or behind a fence. He would never encourage contact, never
talk to or stroke a dog. As time passed, Charlie's life became more and
more restricted as he attempted to avoid any and all contact with dogs.
Then, once, during a training session at a retreat center, Charlie was
unexpectedly confronted with his worst fear. He sat comfortably on a
cushion listening to a lecture, focused on the lecturer (who stood to
his left) and not on his surroundings. Unbeknownst to Charlie, the
center's canine mascot, Ruff, had joined the group. Ruff quietly
approached uninvited from

Charlie's right (outside of his field of vision) laid down, and gently
placed her head on Charlie's right leg, hoping for a pat. Charlie,
feeling the weight on his right leg, looked down and caught a glimpse of
Ruff out of the corner of his right eye. He then immediately, and
literally, froze in panic. Charlie's mouth went dry, his heart rate
soared, and his limbs stiffened to the extent that he was totally unable
to move. He was barely able to speak. Charlie's reaction to Ruff was not
just in his mind. Rationally, Charlie remembered the dog attack and knew
that he was scared of dogs. He also knew that Ruff was not attacking
him. But all of his rational thoughts appeared to have no effect on his
nervous system. Charlie's body reacted as if he was being, or about to
be, attacked again. He became paralyzed. What is it that occurred in
Charlie's brain and body that caused such an extreme reaction in the
absence of an actual threat? Why was Charlie unable to move or push the
dog away? Why did he continue to go dry in the mouth and break into a
cold sweat at the mere sight of a dog at a protected distance? What
could be done to help Charlie cease these extreme reactions in the
presence of dogs? Answering these questions provides the underpinning of
The Body Remembers.

A Basic Premise Trauma is a psychophysical experience, even when the
traumatic event causes no direct bodily harm. That traumatic events
exact a toll on the body as well as the mind is a well-documented and
agreed-upon conclusion of the psychiatric community, as attested in the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition, of
the American Psychiatric Association (DSM-IV). A major category in the
symptom list of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is "persistent
symptoms of increased arousal" in the autonomic nervous system (ANS)
(APA, 1994). Yet, despite a plethora of study and writing on the
neurobiology and psychobiology of stress, trauma, and PTSD, the
psychotherapist has until now had few tools for healing the traumatized
body as well as the traumatized mind. Attention directed at the body has
tended to focus on the distressing symptoms of

PTSD, the resulting problems of adaptation, and possible pharmacological
intervention. Using the body itself as a possible resource in the
treatment of trauma has rarely been explored. Somatic memory has been
named as a phenomenon (van der Kolk, 1994), but few scientifically
supported theories and strategies for identifying it, containing it, and
making use of it in the therapeutic process have emerged. Understanding
how the brain and body process, remember, and perpetuate traumatic
events holds many keys to the treatment of the traumatized body and
mind. In some instances, direct somatic interventions, when used as
adjuncts to existing trauma therapies, can be powerful in combating the
effects of trauma. In addition, various somatic techniques can be used
to make any therapy process easier to pace and less volatile. Attention
to the somatic side of trauma need not require the practitioner to
change his direction or focus. The tools offered here can be used or
adapted within existing models of trauma therapy, expanding and
enhancing what is already being done.

THE SYMPTOMATOLOGY OF PTSD PTSD disrupts the functioning of those
afflicted by it, interfering with their abilities to meet daily needs
and perform the most basic tasks. In PTSD a traumatic event is not
remembered and relegated to one's past in the same way as other life
events. Trauma continues to intrude with visual, auditory, and/or other
somatic reality on the lives of its victims. Again and again they relive
the life-threatening experiences they have suffered, reacting in mind
and body as though such events were still occurring. PTSD is a complex
psychobiological condition. It can emerge in the wake of
life-threatening experiences when psychological and somatic stress
responses persist long after the traumatic event has passed. There is a
mistaken assumption that anyone experiencing a traumatic event will
develop PTSD. This is far from true. Results of studies vary but in
general confirm that only a fraction of those facing such incidents---
around 20%---will develop PTSD (Breslau, Davis, Andreski, & Peterson,
1991; Elliott, 1997; Kulka et al., 1990). What distinguishes those who
do

not is still a controversial topic, but there are many clues.
Nonclinical factors that mediate traumatic stress appear to include:
preparation for expected stress (when possible), successful fight or
flight responses, developmental history, belief system, prior
experience, internal resources, and support (from family, community, and
social networks). In the history of psychology, PTSD is a relatively new
diagnostic category. It first appeared in 1980 in the internationally
accepted authority on psychology and psychodiagnosis, Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd Edition (DSM-III; APA,
1980). DSM-III's definition of what could cause PTSD was limited. It was
seen as developing from an experience that anyone would find traumatic.
There were at least two problems with this definition: It left no room
for individual perception or experience of an event, and it mistakenly
assumed that everyone would develop PTSD from such an event. The
currently accepted definition, as revised in DSM-IV (APA, 1994), is much
broader. This definition takes into account that PTSD can develop in an
individual in response to three types of events: (1) incidents that are,
or are perceived as, threatening to one's own life or bodily integrity;
(2) being a witness to acts of violence to others; or (3) hearing of
violence to or the unexpected or violent death of close associates.
Events that could qualify as traumatic for both adults and children,
according to DSM-IV, include combat, sexual and physical assault, being
held hostage or imprisoned, terrorism, torture, natural and man-made
disasters, accidents, and receiving a diagnosis of a life-threatening
illness. In addition, DSM-IV notes that PTSD can develop in children who
have experienced sexual molestation, even if this is not
life-threatening. It adds, "The disorder may be especially severe or
long lasting when the stressor is of human design (e.g., torture, rape)"
(APA, 1994, p. 424). Symptoms associated with PTSD include (1)
reexperiencing the event in varying sensory forms (flashbacks), (2)
avoiding reminders of the trauma, and (3) chronic hyperarousal in the
autonomic nervous system (ANS). DSM-IV recognizes that such symptoms are
normal in the immediate aftermath of a traumatic event. PTSD is first
diagnosed when these symptoms last more than one month and are combined
with loss of function in areas such as one's job or social
relationships. Somatic disturbance is at the core of PTSD. People who
suffer from it are plagued with many of the same frightening body
symptoms that are

characteristic of ANS hyperarousal experienced during a traumatic
incident (as was Charlie): accelerated heart rate, cold sweating, rapid
breathing, heart palpitations, hypervigilance, and hyperstartle response
(jumpiness). When chronic, these symptoms can lead to sleep
disturbances, loss of appetite, sexual dysfunction, and difficulties in
concentrating, which are further hallmarks of PTSD. DSM-IV acknowledges
that symptoms of PTSD can be incited by external as well as internal
reminders of a traumatic event, cautioning us that somatic symptoms,
alone, can trigger a PTSD reaction. PTSD can be a very vicious circle.

DISTINGUISHING STRESS, TRAUMATIC STRESS, PTS, AND PTSD Hans Selye
defined stress as, "the nonspecific response of the body to any demand"
(1984, p. 74). Generally regarded as a response to negative experiences,
stress can also result from desired, positive experiences, such as
marriage, moving, a job change, and leaving home for college. The most
extreme form of stress is, of course, stress that results from a
traumatic incident---traumatic stress. Posttraumatic stress (PTS) is
traumatic stress that persists following (post) a traumatic incident
(Rothschild, 1995a). It is only when posttraumatic stress accumulates to
the degree that it produces the symptoms outlined in DSM-IV that the
term posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) can be applied. PTSD implies a
high level of daily dysfunction. Though there are no statistics, one can
guess that there are a significant number of trauma survivors with PTS,
those who fall between the cracks---not recovered from their traumas,
but without the debilitation of PTSD. These individuals can also benefit
from trauma therapy. (Charlie's level of disturbance is typical of PTS.
It caused him restriction in one area of his life---avoidance of
dogs---but he functioned normally in the rest of his life.)

SURVIVAL AND THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

Arousal, and therefore traumatic hyperarousal, is mediated by the limbic
system, which is located in the center of the brain between the brain
stem and the cerebral cortex. This part of the brain regulates survival
behaviors and emotional expression. It is primarily concerned with tasks
of survival, such as eating, sexual reproduction, and the instinctive
defenses of fight and flight. It also influences memory processing. The
limbic system has an intimate relationship with the autonomic nervous
system (ANS). It evaluates a situation, signaling the ANS either to have
the body rest or to prepare it for effort. The ANS plays a role in
regulating smooth muscles and other viscera: heart and circulatory
system, kidneys, lungs, intestines, bladder, bowel, pupils. Its two
branches, the sympathetic branch (SNS) and the parasympathetic branch
(PNS), usually function in balance with each other: When one is
activated, the other is suppressed. The SNS is primarily aroused in
states of effort and stress, both positive and negative. The PNS is
primarily aroused in states of rest and relaxation. The limbic system
responds to the extreme of traumatic threat, by releasing hormones that
tell the body to prepare for defensive action (see Figure 1.1, p. 10).
Following the perception of threat, the amygdala signals an alarm to the
hypothalamus (both structures in the limbic system) that turns on two
systems: (1) activation of the SNS, and (2) the release of
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH). Those actions continue, each with
a separate, but related, task. First, the activation of the SNS will, in
turn, activate the adrenal glands to release epinephrine and
norepinephrine to mobilize the body for fight or flight. This is
accomplished by increasing respiration and heart rate to provide more
oxygen, sending blood away from the skin and into the muscles for quick
movement. (In Charlie's case, the increased respiration and blood flow
to his legs made it possible for him to pedal faster and farther than
usual.) At the same time, in the other system, the CRH is activating the
pituitary gland to release adrenocortio-tropic hormone (ACTH), which
will also activate the adrenal glands, this time to release a
hydrocortizone, cortisol. Once the traumatic incident is over and/or the
fight or flight has been successful, the cortisol will halt the alarm
reaction and the production of epinephrine/norepinephrine, helping to
restore the body to homeostasis.

This system is called the HPA axis. The reason it is important to trauma
work is that in PTSD something goes wrong with it. Rachel Yehuda (Yehuda
et al., 1990) pioneered the discovery that in those with PTSD the
adrenal glands do not release enough cortisol to halt the alarm reaction
(see Figure 1.2). Several studies have shown that individuals with PTSD
have lower cortisol levels than controls, even those with other
psychological problems like depression (Bauer, Priebe, & Graf, 1994;
Yehuda et al., 1990, 1995; Yehuda, Teicher, Levengood, Trestman, &
Siever, 1996). One conclusion that can be drawn from this evidence is
that on a chemical level the continued alarm reaction typical of PTSD is
due to a deficiency of cortisol production. However, whether it is a
purely biological process or is influenced by perception in the limbic
system is not known. While the low cortisol levels are documented in
PTSD, their cause is still a question. One area of interest with regard
to the HPA axis and cortisol is the freezing response to traumatic
threat. When death may be imminent, escape is impossible, or the
traumatic threat is prolonged, the limbic system can simultaneously
activate the PNS, causing a state of freezing called tonic
immobility---like a mouse going dead when caught by a cat, or stiff,
like a deer caught in headlights (Gallup & Maser, 1977). The chemical
picture that causes the freeze must be linked to the HPA axis, but this
has not been studied as yet. These nervous system responses---fight,
flight, and freeze (or tonic immobility)---are automatic survival
actions. They are similar to reflexes in that they are instantaneous,
but the mechanisms underlying these responses are much more complex than
simple reflexes. If the perception in the limbic system is that there is
adequate strength, time, and space for flight, then the body breaks into
a run. If the limbic perception is that there is not time to flee but
there is adequate strength to defend, then the body will fight. If the
limbic system perceives that there is neither time nor strength for
fight or flight and death could be imminent, then the body will freeze.
In this state the victim of trauma enters an altered reality. Time slows
down and there is no fear or pain. In this state, if harm or death do
occur, the pain is not felt as intensely. People who have fallen from
great heights, or been mauled by animals and survived, report just such
a reaction. The freeze response might also increase chances of survival.
If the cause is an attack by man or beast, the attacker may lose
interest once the prey has gone dead, as a cat will lose

interest in a lifeless mouse. (Charlie lost consciousness during the dog
attack, and when later confronted by contact with a dog he became
paralyzed. Both are forms of freezing responses.) Figure 1.1.
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis.

Figure 1.2. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis

It is important to understand that these limbic system/ANS responses are
instantaneous, instinctive responses to perceived threat. They are not
chosen by thoughtful consideration. Many who have suffered trauma feel
much guilt and shame for freezing or "going dead" and not doing more to
protect themselves or others by fighting back or running away. In those
instances, understanding that freezing is automatic often facilitates
the difficult process of self-forgiveness.

DEFENSIVE RESPONSE TO REMEMBERED THREAT When the limbic system activates
the ANS to meet the threat of a traumatic event, it is a normal,
healthy, adaptive survival response. When the ANS continues to be
chronically aroused even though the threat has passed and has been
survived, that is PTSD. The traumatic event seems to continue to float
free in time, rather than occupying its locus in one's past, often
coming unbidden into the present perception as if it were, indeed,
occurring now. (Charlie was never again attacked by a dog. However, each
time he encountered one he continued to respond in his mind and body as
if he were being, or about to be, attacked again.) Within the limbic
system are two related areas that are central to memory storage: the
hippocampus and the amygdala. The last few years have produced a growing
body of research that indicates these two parts of the brain are
centrally involved in recording, filing, and remembering traumatic
events (Nadel & Jacobs, 1996; van der Kolk, 1994, among others). The
amygdala is known to aid in the processing of highly charged emotional
memories, such as terror and horror, becoming highly active both during
and while remembering a traumatic incident. The hippocampus, on the
other hand, gives time and space context to an event, putting our
memories into their proper perspective and place in our life's time
line. Hippocampal processing gives events a beginning, a middle, and an
end. This is very important with regard to PTSD, as one of its features
is a sense that the trauma has not yet ended. It has been shown that the
activity of the hippocampus often becomes suppressed during traumatic
threat; its usual assistance in processing and storing an event is not
available (Nadel & Jacobs, 1996; van der Kolk, 1994, among others). When
this occurs, the traumatic event is prevented from occupying its proper
position in the individual's history and continues to invade the
present. The perception of the event as being over and the victim as
having survived is missing. This is the likely mechanism at the core of
the quintessential PTSD symptom of "flashback"---episodes of reliving
the trauma in mind and or body.

DISSOCIATION, FREEZING, AND PTSD

Surprisingly, dissociation, a splitting in awareness, is not mentioned
by either the DSM-III or DSM-IV as a symptom of PTSD, though it is
acknowledged as a symptom of acute stress disorder (APA, 1994). There is
a growing debate as to whether PTSD is actually a dissociative disorder,
rather than an anxiety disorder as it is currently classified (Brett,
1996). At the International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies a panel
debated this issue (Wahlberg, van der Kolk, Brett, & Marmar, 1996). No
one really knows what dissociation is or how it occurs, though there is
much speculation. It appears to be a set of related forms of split
awareness. The wide range of splitting covers events as simple as
forgetting why you were going into the kitchen and as extreme as
dissociative identity disorder (previously called multiple personality
disorder). The kind of dissociation described by those with PTSD during
their traumatic event(s)---altered sense of time, reduced sensations of
pain, absence of terror or horror--- resembles the characteristics of
those who report having responded by freezing to a traumatic threat.
There will need to be more research before it can be known if the
freezing response is a form of dissociation. Understanding this
mechanism is important because it appears that the most severe
consequences of PTSD result from dissociation. While dissociation
appears to be an instinctive response to save the self from
suffering---and it does this very well---it exacts a high price in
return. There are several areas of research into the phenomenon of
dissociation. Many indicate the likelihood that dissociation during a
traumatic event (peritraumatic dissociation) predicts the eventual
development of PTSD (Bremner et al., 1992; Classen, Koopman, & Spiegel,
1993; Marmar et al., 1996).

CONSEQUENCES OF TRAUMA AND PTSD The consequences of trauma and PTSD vary
greatly depending on the age of the victim, the nature of the trauma,
the response to the trauma, and the support to the victim in the
aftermath. In general, those afflicted with PTSD suffer reduced quality
of life due to intrusive symptoms, which restrict their ability to
function. They may alternate periods of overactivity with periods

of exhaustion as their bodies suffer the effects of traumatic
hyperarousal of the ANS. Reminders of the trauma they suffered may
appear suddenly, causing instant panic. They become fearful, not only of
the trauma itself, but also of their own reactions to the trauma. Body
signals that once provided essential information become dangerous. For
example, heart rate acceleration that might indicate overexertion or
excitement can become a danger signal in itself because it is a reminder
of the accelerated heart rate of the trauma response, and is therefore
associated with trauma. The ability to orient to safety and danger
becomes decreased when many things, or sometimes everything, in the
environment are perceived as dangerous. When daily reminders of trauma
become extreme, freezing or dissociation can be activated as if the
trauma were occurring in the present. It can become a vicious cycle.
Eventually, a victim of PTSD can become extremely restricted, fearing to
be with others or to go out of her home. (As mentioned before, Charlie
had PTS not PTSD; the degree of his restriction never reached this
extreme. However, he was becoming increasingly restricted with each
fearful canine encounter, and the potential for developing PTSD
lingered.) How is it possible for the mind to become so overwhelmed that
it is no longer able to process a traumatic event to completion and file
it away in the past? The next chapters move toward possible answers to
that question.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER TWO

Development, Memory, and the Brain

In many instances, people who experience traumatic events are able to
process and resolve those episodes free of long-term effects. They are
able to recall and narrate the events that befell them, make sense of
what happened, have emotions appropriate to their memories, and feel
confident that the incident lies in their past. In people still plagued
by their traumas, those with PTS and PTSD, memory of traumatic events is
different. It usually falls into one of two divergent categories. Some
traumatized people will remember the traumatizing events in precise
detail, able to describe what happened as if they were watching a video
replay. In these cases PTS or PTSD persists because these individuals
are not able to make sense of the events, or some aspect of them. They
may still be disturbed by intense emotions and/or bodily sensations
seemingly unconnected to the traumas they suffered. (Charlie's memory of
the dog attack is an example. He remembered the details up to the point
where he lost consciousness, but continued to feel in danger each time
he was in the vicinity of a dog, no matter how benign that dog was.) Or
they might feel numb in body and/or emotions and complain of a sense of
deadness in their lives. Others remember little if any of the actual
traumatic events but are plagued by physical sensations and emotional
reactions that make no sense in the current context. Whether the

trauma is remembered or not, for those with PTS and PTSD the realization
that it lies in the past and that the danger is over is attained only
with difficulty. A look into how the brain develops may reveal clues to
help us understand these types of memory distortion.

THE DEVELOPING BRAIN The newborn's brain is by no means a fait accompli,
not even close. At birth the brain is among the most immature of the
body's organs. In fact it is much like a new computer, equipped with a
basic operating system that incorporates all that will be needed for
future development and programing, memory file storage and expansion,
but as yet unable to do much beyond the basic system requirements. The
human brain is, for the most part, malleable---programmable and
reprogrammable---in its organization. It is highly responsive to
external influences. In fact, the higher and more complex the brain
structure, the greater its malleability (Perry, Pollard, Blakley, Baker,
& Vigilante, 1995). The cerebral cortex is the most complex, as well as
the most flexible and easily influenced, structure. The brain stem is
the least complex and least malleable structure in the brain. The brains
susceptibility to influence and change is necessary to growth and
development. Without the ability of our brains to adapt and change, it
would be impossible to learn anything. Growth, development, and change
are necessary to health and to survival. Though it remains flexible
throughout the lifespan, the brains capacity for alteration does
decrease with age. And, of course, the first days, months, and years of
life are crucial for establishing the foundations of later capacities
and talents, as well as deficits. How a brain first organizes is
dependent on the infant's interactions with its environment. How a brain
continues to grow, develop, and reorganize is dependent on the
subsequent experiences encountered throughout a child's life. As no two
life experiences are the same, even for identical twins, it is the
brain's malleability that makes each of us unique. Recognizing that the
brains organization is flexible and subject to influence is crucial to

understanding both how dysfunctional emotional patterns, such as PTSD,
can develop and how they can be changed.

From the Beginning The infant brain has the instincts and reflexes that
are needed for existence (heartbeat, respiration reflex), the ability to
take in and make use of nourishment (search, suck, and swallow reflexes;
digestion and elimination) and to benefit from contact (sensory
pathways, grasp reflexes), etc. This basic brain system, though, is not
enough to ensure the infant's survival. The baby needs a more mature
human (the primary caretaker---usually, but not always, its mother) to
care for and protect it. Moreover, many believe it is the interaction
between baby and caretaker that determines normal brain and nervous
system development. None of this is new. Babies depend on their
caregivers for every aspect of their survival. Caregivers who are able
to provide for infants' emotional as well as physical needs nurture them
into toddlers, children, teens, and adults with a wide scope of
resources. Increasingly they are able to take over caring for their own
needs in adaptive and beneficial ways. Wellcared-for babies become
adults with resilience who are able to swing with the punches dished out
by life. Their brains are able to process and integrate both positive
and negative experiences, adding adaptive learning to their repertoire
of behaviors and attitudes. On the other hand, babies raised by
caregivers unable to meet significant portions of their needs are at
risk of growing into adults who lack resilience and have trouble
adapting to life's ebbs and flows. Their brains may be less able to
process life's experiences. They appear to have more difficulty making
sense of life's events, particularly those that are stressful, and to be
more vulnerable to psychological disturbances and disorders, including
drug addiction, depression, and PTSD (Schore, 1994). There is a growing
body of research that describes how healthy bonding and attachment are
crucial to healthy development from the first days of life (Schore,
1994; Siegel, 1999; van der Kolk, 1998). The attachment relationship
stimulates brain development which, in turn, expands and enables an
individual's ability to cope emotionally throughout life. Science

is finally catching up with parents and psychotherapists, who have
always known that this was true but didn't know why or how. It is now
believed that the nurturing interaction between caregiver and infant
goes a long way in promoting healthy emotional development, because that
relationship, in itself, stimulates normal maturation of the brain and
nervous system.

A Few Basics What follows is a very brief overview of how the brain
develops. Later chapters will expand on these basics. The material
included here will be limited to what is necessary for the purpose of
understanding how brain development eventually affects the processing of
traumatic incidents. The brain is the control center of the nervous
system. It regulates body temperature, tells us when to seek
nourishment, and directs all the functions involved in eating,
digestion, and elimination. It tells our heart to beat and causes us to
inhale and exhale. Without the brain, procreation would be impossible
and the human species would die out. In addition, the brain, like a
computer, processes information. It receives information through all of
the body's sensory pathways: sight (which includes written words),
hearing (which includes spoken words), taste, touch, smell,
proprioception (which informs on the body's spatial and internal
states), and the vestibular sense (which indicates which way is up).
Nervous System Communication The term synapse (see Figure 2.1) refers to
a junction of two nerve cells (neurons). It is at this site that the
signal or information from one nerve transfers to the next, as if a
spark jumps the gap. The communication from the one cell to the next can
be accomplished with either an electrical impulse or via a chemical
neurotransmitter that passes from one cell to the other. Epinephrine and
norepinephrine are examples of neurotransmitters. These hormones are
secreted in response to traumatic stress (see "Survival and the Nervous
System" in Chapter 1), epinephrine by the sympathetic nerves in the
adrenal glands, norepinephrine by the sympathetic nerves in

the rest of the body (Sapolsky, 1994). When enough norepinephrine
secretes from the sympathetic nerve endings along the path from synapse
to synapse, the body is readied to fight or flee. Strings of synapses
link neurons in configurations that produce the complex activities that
are carried out by the brain and the body. Each string of synapses
produces a single result: the contraction of a muscle, the recall of an
image, the blink of an eye, the stomach sensation of butterflies, one
heartbeat, the gasp of surprise. Combinations of synapse strings produce
more complicated results: walking, talking, solving a math problem,
understanding a written paragraph, remembering the details of a movie,
realizing one is cold and turning up the heat. All of the information
coming into the body and brain through the senses is realized and
registered through discrete sets of synapses, and each reflex, behavior,
emotion, or thought is produced through discrete sets of synapses. All
experiences are encoded, recorded, and recalled through synapses. The
brain regulates all body processes and behaviors through synapses that
connect efferent nerves (brain → body). Likewise, the body reports back
to the brain on its internal state and position in space through
synapses connecting afferent nerves (body → brain). It is also through
sets of synapses that individual thoughts become linked as concepts or
tied to specific events. Cognitive memory involves the linking of the
nerves via synapses within the brain. Somatic memory requires that
sensory nerves be linked via synapses to the brain and then recorded
within the brain. Figure 2.1. Synapse.

Reprinted with permission from the Press Office of the Charles A. Dana
Foundation.

There is nothing fixed about the sequence of synapses, however. They are
subject to influence and can be changed. New learning is achieved
through the creation of new synapse strings, or adaptation of existing
ones. Forgetting (e.g., how to do something) is the result of disuse of
synapse strings---as the saying goes, "use it or lose it." It is also,
for better or worse, through the alteration of synapses that memory can
become distorted. Divisions of the Brain It is easy to conceptualize
what the brain looks like (see Figure 2.2). Make your right hand into a
fist, holding it upright. Your right wrist represents the brain stem,
your fist the midbrain and limbic system. Now take your left

hand and cover your right fist. That is the cerebral cortex, the outer
layer of the brain. The brain stem, sometimes referred to as the
reptilian brain, regulates basic bodily functions such as heart rate and
respiration. This region of the brain must be mature at birth for an
infant to survive. The limbic system is the seat of survival instincts
and reflexes. It includes the hypothalamus, which is responsible for
maintaining body temperature, essential nutrition and hydration, rest
and balance. The limbic system also regulates the autonomic nervous
system, mediating smooth muscle and visceral responses to stress and
relaxation, including sexual arousal and orgasm, and the traumatic
stress reactions of fight, flight, and freeze. Two other limbic system
regions, the hippocampus and the amygdala, are especially pertinent to
understanding traumatic memory. Both the hippocampus and the amygdala
consist of two lobes, one on each side of the brain. Both structures are
integral to processing information transmitted from the body on the way
to the cerebral cortex. The amygdala processes and then facilitates the
storage of emotions and reactions to emotionally charged events. The
hippocampus processes the data necessary to make sense of those
experiences within the time line of personal history (i.e., "When during
my life did this happen?") and the sequence of the experience itself
(i.e., "What happened first? What happened next?" etc.). Nadel and
Zola-Morgan (1984) have found that the amygdala is mature at birth, and
that the hippocampus matures later, between the second and third year of
life. Understanding the difference in the maturational schedules, as
well as the functions of these two structures, provides one explanation
for the phenomenon of infantile amnesia---the fact that we usually don't
consciously remember our infancy. Infantile experiences are processed
through the amygdala on the way to storage in the cortex. The amygdala
facilitates storage of the emotional and sensory content of these
experiences. Hippocampal function is not yet available, so the resulting
memory of an infantile experience includes emotion and physical
sensations without context or sequence. This is the probable explanation
for why, in later life, infantile experiences cannot be accessed as what
we usually call "memories" (Nadel & Zola-Morgan, 1984). Figure 2.2.
Divisions of the brain.

Reprinted with permission from the Press Office of the Charles A. Dana
Foundation.

Mature and adequate function of both amygdala and hippocampus is
necessary for sufficient processing of life's events, especially the
stressful ones, though during a traumatic event this may not always be
possible. As the stress level increases, hormones may be released that
suppress hippocampal activity, while the amygdala remains unaffected. It
is possible that prolonged cortisol secretion, as may be found with
trauma, affects the hippocampus in this way (Gunnar & Barr, 1998). This
might account for some of the memory distortion associated with PTSD.
Some individuals with PTSD recall their traumatic experiences as highly
disturbing emotional and sensory states, lacking the time and space
context that is facilitated by hippocampal function. Hippocampal size
has been the subject of recent PTSD research. Several studies conclude
that survivors of PTSD have smaller hippocampi than the general
population (among others: Bremner et

al., 1997; Rauch, Shin, Wahlen, & Pitman, 1998; Schuff et al., 1997).
These fascinating findings have not determined, however, whether the
hippocampi of those with PTSD have shrunk due to suppression of
hippocampal activity by stress hormones or whether these individuals had
smaller hippocampi to begin with. At any rate, it appears that smaller
hippocampus size might interfere with the brains processing of stressful
life events. The thalamus is also part of the midbrain; its two parts
flank the limbic system. It is the relay center for sensory information
coming from all points in the body on the way to the cortex. Overlaying
the more primitive structures of the brain is the cerebral cortex, which
is responsible for all higher mental functions, including speech,
thought, and semantic and procedural memory. Currently there is great
interest in the various information-processing functions of the right
and left cortices and their relationship to the limbic system. The right
cortex appears to play a greater role in the storage of sensory input.
It appears that the amygdala is the limbic structure through which
sensory information travels on its way to the right cortex. The left
cortex, on the other hand, seems to have a more intimate relationship
with the hippocampus. Moreover, it appears to depend on language for
processing information. Bessel van der Kolk (van der Kolk, McFarlane, &
Weisaeth, 1996) has found that activity in Broca's area, which is a left
cortical structure responsible for speech production, is also suppressed
(as is the hippocampus) during a traumatic incident. He describes what
he calls the "speechless terror" of trauma. We have all experienced
being at a loss for words or forgetting what we were about to say. Under
stress this difficulty increases, sometimes to extreme degrees. (In
Charlie's case, he could still speak in his panicked state, but the
speech apparatus was so constricted that he could barely squeak his
words out.)

Mutual Connection and the Developing Brain Allan Schore (1994) and Bruce
Perry (Perry et al., 1995) have both proposed neurological models for
understanding the importance of infant attachment in the mediation of
stressful experiences throughout life. According to both models, the
primary caretaker, in addition to providing

for an infant's basic needs, plays a crucial role in helping the infant
to regulate sometimes very high levels of stimulation. A healthy
attachment between infant and caretaker enables the infant to eventually
develop the capacity to self-regulate both positive and negative
stimuli. Perry and his colleagues (1995) further propose that positive
early experiences are crucial to optimal organization and development of
specific brain regions. The newborn infant is a bundle of raw sensory
receptors. For nine months the fetus is swathed and insulated in its
mother's amniotic fluid. Though there are sensory stimuli in utero, they
are dampened. The newborn is ill-prepared for the sudden inundation of
stimuli at birth. Suddenly it is literally propelled into an environment
full of new and intense sensations of touch, sound, taste, sight, smell,
cold, heat, and pain. The infant screams in response to this first flood
of stimuli. But when placed on its mother's belly, hearing her familiar
(if previously muffled) voice, and feeling her loving touch, perhaps
even smelling her familiar scent, the newborn is quickly soothed. This
is the infant's first experience of stimulus regulation mediated by its
primary caretaker. The baby's mother has (usually), in an instant, been
able to intercede and quell the overwhelming inundation of multiple new
stimuli, calming the child. And so it goes, ideally, throughout infancy.
The baby is upset, and the caretaker's presence soothes. At first the
caretaker helps the child regulate its responses to stimuli, including
being uncomfortable from hunger, thirst, wetness, cold, pain, etc.
Gradually, the caretaker also assists the child in regulating her
emotional responses: frustration, anger, loneliness, fear, and
excitement. In the beginning, much of the regulation process takes place
through touch and sound. However, as Schore (1996) describes, quite soon
after birth the caretaker and infant develop an interactional pattern
that is central to the process of affect regulation. They learn to
stimulate each other through face-to-face contact, which enables the
infant gradually to acclimate to greater and greater degrees of
stimulation and arousal. These interactions between the caretaker and
infant---bonding and attachment, upset and regulation, stimulus and
attunement---are, Schore believes, all right-brain mediated. During
infancy the right cortex is developing more quickly than the left---and,
as previously stated, the leftbrain associated hippocampus is still
immature (Schore, 1996).

Toward the end of the first year, the relationship between primary
caretaker and baby changes drastically The baby makes its first
movements into toddlerhood---creeping, crawling, and eventually standing
and walking ---and develops greater independence and possibilities for
interaction with the environment. Simultaneously, the caretakers role
changes from being nearly 100% nurturing, approving, and soothing into a
regulator of socialization who sets limits, says "no," and sometimes
disapproves and/or causes pain. How caretaker and child resolve this
change in roles depends on at least three factors: the solidity of the
attachment bond, the capacity of the caretaker for continued love
despite becoming angry at the child's misbehaviors, and the ability of
the caretaker to set and maintain balanced and consistent limits. It is
also around this time that the left cortex begins an accelerated growth
period that continues as language, a left cortical function, develops.
Meanwhile, in the limbic system, the hippocampus matures, enhancing the
child's capacity to make sense of his environment. With a sound
beginning, founded in a secure attachment, and later rational,
consistent limit-setting, the child will begin to use his growing
language to describe events and make sense of his emotional and sensory
experiences.

The Developing Brain and Trauma Why are some individuals more easily
disturbed by traumatic events than others? Schore (1996), van der Kolk
(1987, 1998), Siegel (1999), De Bellis and colleagues (1999), Perry and
colleagues (1995), and others assert that predisposition to
psychological disturbance, including PTSD, can be found in stressful
events during early development: neglect, physical and sexual abuse,
failure of the attachment bond, and individual traumatic incidents
(hospitalization, death of a parent, car accident, etc.). There is
speculation that individuals who suffered early trauma and/or did not
have the benefit of a healthy attachment may have limited capacity for
regulating stress and making sense of traumatic experiences later in
their lives. In some, it is possible that reduced hippocampal activity,
either because it was never fully developed (attachment deficit) or
because it became suppressed (traumatic events), limits their ability to
mediate stress (Gunnar & Barr, 1998). Under those circumstances, later
traumatic experiences might be remembered by

some only as highly charged emotions and body sensations. In others, it
may be that survival mechanisms such as dissociation or freezing have
become so habituated that more adaptive strategies either never develop
or are eliminated from the survival repertoire.

The Mature Brain and Trauma Even when infancy and childhood have gone
well, even ideally, an adolescent or adult may confront a traumatic
event so overwhelming that PTS or PTSD results. Some of the most
convincing evidence for this comes from studies of Holocaust survivors
who were settled in post World War II Norway. Like the other
Scandinavian countries, Norway played an important role in the recovery
and resettlement of thousands of survivors of the German concentration
camps. In addition to meeting their basic needs for medical attention,
nutrition, and clean and safe living quarters, the Norwegians provided
psychiatric support. Until WWII, Norwegian psychiatry, similar to its
European and American counterparts, regarded mental illness as
developing from childhood deficits. As symptoms of mental illness were
prevalent among the concentration camp survivors, the Norwegian
psychiatrists expected to hear childhood histories riddled with
dysfunction. They were astonished to find that most of the survivors
reported happy childhoods in cohesive, supportive families. What could
account for such a disparity? The psychiatrists were eventually
compelled to conclude that the evidence "convincingly demonstrated that
chronic mental illnesses could develop in persons who had a harmonious
childhood but who had been subjected to extreme physical and
psychological stress" (Malt & Weisaeth, 1989, p. 7). Thus, the aftermath
of the Holocaust marked a drastic change in how psychiatry viewed the
effects of extreme stress on adults. (Charlie also illustrates this
theory, as his trauma occurred when he was an adult. He developed PTS
following the dog attack---and was well on his way to PTSD as his life
became more restricted. Charlie's reaction was not due to earlier trauma
or to developmental deficits.)

Hopeful Implications for Psychotherapy

Infancy is not the only chance an individual has for a healthy
attachment. A traumatized infant is not necessarily condemned to
dysfunction. For example, many children who were deprived of a good
infantile relationship do, to a large extent, make up for that lack
later in life---with a best friend, special teacher, or comforting
neighbor. And many adolescents and adults find a healing bond within a
mature love relationship. For many, such relationships go a long way to
compensate for what they missed or suffered as infants. Still others
find the needed bond in the psychotherapeutic relationship. (The role of
dynamic psychotherapy and body-psychotherapy in the compensation of
early deficits and healing of early and massive trauma will be addressed
in Chapter 5.) Brain maturation provides the foundation for acquiring
necessary skills and resources, including recognizing and applying the
lessons of life's events. How the brain processes and remembers
traumatic incidents will determine who does and who does not develop
PTSD. The quality of the infant-caregiver attachment is an important,
though not the only, variable involved in predicting healthy brain
maturation. In the following section, categories of memory and their
relationship to the brain and to the development of PTSD will be
discussed.

WHAT IS MEMORY? We met at nine. We met at eight. I was on time. No, you
were late. ... Ah, yes, I remember it well... ---GIGI Research into
memory---the function of memory and memory systems---is a rapidly
expanding field of study. It has been accelerating since the 1960s and
reached a furious, sustained pace in the early 1990s. Among the reasons
for this increased interest is the controversy over traumatic memory
recall.

The Basics of Memory In general, memory has to do with the recording,
storage, and recall of information perceived from the internal and
external environments. All of the senses are integral to how the world
is perceived. The brain processes perceptions and stores them as
thoughts, emotions, images, sensations, and behavioral impulses. When
these stored items are recalled, that is memory. For a piece of
information to become a memory it must traverse at least three major
steps: encoding is the process of recording or etching information onto
the brain; memory storage is how and for how long that information is
kept; and memory retrieval accesses the stored information, bringing it
back into conscious awareness. Actually, the process of brain memory is
quite similar to computer memory. Writing words on a screen encodes
information onto the computer. But that is only a temporary measure
unless it is saved in a file, which is akin to memory storage. Once
saved in a file, that information lies dormant until retrieved by
reopening the file (recall). As with brain memory, a saved computer file
can sometimes be difficult to relocate. Some types of information are
more likely to be stored than others. The greater the significance, and
the higher the emotional charge---both positive and negative---the more
likely a piece of information (or an event made up of multiple pieces of
information) will be stored (Schacter, 1996).

The Long and the Short of It As recently as 40 years ago, memory was
thought to be only one thing: either we remembered or we didn't. What we
now call long-term memory was the only category recognized. When memory
failed it was called forgetting or, in the extreme, amnesia. It was
thought that our experiences were etched on the brain's cortex as on a
videotape. Memory was the video playback. This theory was supported by
the brain-stimulation studies conducted by Wilder Penfield. These
well-known experiments are fascinating, but possibly misleading. While
operating on epileptic patients, Penfield randomly stimulated areas of
the brain's temporal lobe and recorded the "memories" reported by his
patients (Penfield & Perot, 1963).

Some reported astoundingly detailed sensory-laden images. Penfield has,
however, been criticized for exaggerating his discovery. It appears that
fewer than 10% of his patients actually reported "memories" during
direct brain stimulation and none of those were validated: There was no
way to distinguish genuine memory from induced hallucination (Squire,
1987). Around 1960, scientists began to speculate about two different
systems of memory: long-term memory and a new category called short-term
memory. At that time there was no theory for where in the brain those
types of memory resided or what brain systems were responsible for them.
However, it was clear that short-term memory depended on a different
brain system than long-term memory. This was the birth of the idea of
multiple memory systems in the brain, which is now the norm (Nadel,
1994, Schacter, 1996). It is short-term memory that is used to remember
a phone number from the time it is seen or heard until it is dialed,
test answers after "cramming" the night before an exam, and a waiter's
face. Such items usually slip quickly from one's grasp, just as words
written onto the computer screen are quickly lost if they are not saved
in a file. And that appears to be a good thing, preventing the brain
from becoming cluttered with an abundance of unnecessary
information---10 years of nightly dinners, every advertising jingle,
etc. It is short-term memory that often frustratingly begins to weaken
with age, "What was that I was just about to do?" "It was on the tip of
my tongue ..." Long-term memory is just what the name implies. It
involves items of information that are permanently stored---whether or
not they are ever recalled into consciousness. However, there is much
more to memory than the length of time an item of information is stored.
Understanding which items are stored, where they are stored, and how the
brain accomplishes storage are all necessary to further comprehend
memory.

The Implicit and the Explicit In the late 1980s and early 1990s the idea
of multiple memory systems became widely accepted. An important
discovery during this time was two

new types of memory: explicit and implicit. These two disparate memory
systems distinguish what types of information are stored and how they
are retrieved. Table 2.1 contrasts the explicit and implicit memory
systems. Explicit Memory Explicit memory is what we usually mean when we
use the term "memory." Sometimes called declarative memory, it is
comprised of facts, concepts, and ideas. When a person thinks
consciously about something and describes it with words---either aloud
or in her head---she is using explicit memory. Explicit memory depends
on oral or written language, that is, words; language is necessary to
both the storage and the retrieval of explicit memories. An opinion, an
idea, a story, facts of a case, narration of Sunday dinner at
Grandma's---all are examples of items of information that would be
stored in explicit memory. Explicit memory is not just facts, however;
it also involves remembering operations that require thought and
step-by-step narration, as in solving a mathematical equation or baking
a cake. It is explicit memory that enables the telling of the story of
one's life, narrating events, putting experiences into words,
constructing a chronology, extracting a meaning. Table 2.1. Categories
of memory. EXPLICIT = DECLARATIVE IMPLICIT = NONDECLARATIVE Process
conscious unconscious

Information types cognitive

emotional facts conditioning mind body verbal/semantic sensory
description of operations automatic skills description of procedures
automatic procedures

Mediating limbic structure hippocampus

amygdala

Maturity around 3 years

from birth

Activity during traumatic event and/or flashback suppressed

activated

Language

constructs narrative

speechless This table is similar to one in Hovdestad and Kristiansen,
1996, p. 133.

Explicit memory of a traumatic event (or any event, for that matter)
involves being able to recall and recount the event in a cohesive
narrative. Another aspect of explicit storage involves historical
placement of an event in the proper slot of one's lifetime. Currently,
there is speculation that some incidences of PTSD may be caused, in
part, when memory of a traumatic event is somehow excluded from explicit
storage. Implicit Memory Where explicit memory depends on language,
implicit memory bypasses it. Explicit memory involves facts,
descriptions, and operations that are based on thought; implicit memory
involves procedures and internal states that are automatic. It operates
unconsciously, unless made conscious though a bridging to explicit
memory that narrates or makes sense of the remembered operation,
emotion, sensation, etc. Implicit memory, first called procedural or
nondeclarative memory, has to do with the storage and recall of learned
procedures and behaviors. Without implicit procedural memory,
accomplishing some tasks would be at best laborious, at worst
impossible. Bicycle riding provides a good example. Implicit memory
makes it possible to ride a bike without thinking about it. While there
may be an explicit memory of the time when riding a bike was
learned---often with Mom or Dad holding the back of the seat and running
alongside---one does not usually utilize explicit narrative memory while
riding a bicycle. Relying only on explicit memory to ride a bike, it
would be necessary to construct a narrative, following each step as you
might a recipe:

I stand to the right of the bike, facing it. I take hold of the
handlebars with my hands. Then, keeping my right foot on the ground, I
lift my left leg over the top, landing awkwardly with my left buttocks
on the seat; the bike tipped to the right. I keep holding onto the
handlebars with both hands, bend my right knee and push off the ground
with my right foot. Simultaneously, I shift the weight on my buttocks to
the left so it becomes centered on the seat. Quickly, I apply pressure
to the left pedal, pushing it forward and then down. As I do that, the
right pedal, with my right foot on it, moves backwards and up. When it
reaches the top, I tilt the right pedal with my right foot, toes pointed
upward, and push it forward and down. I continue the forward and down
pressure on one pedal at a time. The bike moves forward. I keep straight
on the seat, controlling my balance by keeping my head upright and
letting my hips move from side to side ... No one approaches riding a
bicycle with such explicit narration. They would never get anywhere.
Clearly, explicitly remembering such a procedure is a laborious process.
Implicit memory certainly has many advantages. However, when it comes to
memory of traumatic events, implicit memories not linked to explicit
memories can be troublesome. It appears that traumatic events are more
easily recorded in implicit memory because the amygdala does not succumb
to the stress hormones that suppress the activity of the hippocampus. No
matter how high the arousal, it appears that the amygdala continues to
function. In some cases, upsetting emotions, disturbing body sensations,
and confusing behavioral impulses can all exist in implicit memory
without access to information about the context in which they arose or
what they are about. Conditioned Memory

A class of implicit memory includes behavior learned through classical
conditioning (CC) or operant conditioning (OC). These theories may be
familiar, as they are usually taught in basic psychology courses. Either
or both of them can be involved in the learned trauma responses of those
with PTS and PTSD. Classical Conditioning Classical conditioning,
discovered by Ivan Pavlov, involves pairing a known stimulus with a new,
conditioned stimulus (CS) to elicit a new behavior called a conditioned
response (CR). In Pavlov's famous experiment, he taught a hungry dog to
respond physiologically to a bell as though it were food. He repeatedly
rang a bell (CS) just before presenting food (S) to the dog. Of course,
it salivated---a normal response (R)---at the sight and smell of the
food. That sequence was repeated many times. Eventually the bell became
associated with the food. Pavlov then removed the stimulus of the food
and only rang the bell. Again the dog would salivate (CR). It was no
longer necessary to present the dog with food to elicit the now
conditioned response (Pavlov, 1927/1960). What had once been a normal
response to the stimulus of food became a conditioned response to a
bell: bell → association to food → salivation, becomes bell → salivation
Classical conditioning is especially germane to the discussion of PTSD.
It is likely that this process is the mechanism underlying the
phenomenon of traumatic triggers. To put it simply, during a traumatic
event, many cues can become associated with the trauma. Those same cues
can later elicit a similar response (CR). For example, if a woman is
raped (S) by a man in a red (CS) shirt and is very afraid (R), she may
later become fearful (CR) when she sees the color red (CS). If enough
information about the rape was recorded explicitly in her brain, she may
be able to make the connection and reduce her reaction, "Oh yes, the
color red frightens me because it reminds me of the time I was raped."
However, even if she doesn't remember one or more items of information,
she could still have a reaction. That is one consequence of classically
conditioned implicit memory:

automatic reactions in the absence of cognitive, factual thought. In the
case of trauma, the reaction is very distressing. Triggers (in this
case, the color red) often cause intense reaction. A person is unaware
of the cause unless the association is made, either spontaneously or
with the help of psychotherapy. An additional problem with the
phenomenon of triggers is that they can be very difficult to track down.
Classical conditioning can create chains of conditioned stimuli such
that an individual trigger (CS) may be several generations away from the
original stimulus-response scenario. The dog who learned to salivate at
the sound of the bell could be taught to salivate to a flashing light
just by pairing the bell to the light (second CS). The same could happen
following the above example of rape. At a later time, the same woman
walks down a street past a fabric store. In the window is an array of
red (first CS) material. A few steps past the store her heart starts
beating rapidly (CR) and she feels dizzy. She doesn't know what is
happening to her and her anxiety escalates into a panic attack. If she
has no conscious clue to what caused the panic, she might reach for an
explanation that makes sense and conclude (consciously or unconsciously)
that something on that street must be dangerous or unsafe. She may later
avoid walking on that street (second CS). If this pattern continues
without intervention, she might eventually have a panic attack just from
going out on any street (third CS) and become agoraphobic, unable to go
out at all without knowing why. Now this, of course, is not the only
explanation for agoraphobia, but it is a very plausible scenario of how
it could develop. Classically conditioned associated generations of
traumatic triggers can cause increasingly greater degrees of
restriction, avoidance, and, eventually, debilitation. (Charlie
generalized his fear of the type of dog that attacked him \[CS\] to all
dogs \[second CS\]---no matter what they looked like \[large/small\] or
how they acted \[aggressive/docile\]. His life became restricted as the
sight of any dog, even at a distance or on its owner's leash, caused his
heart to race and his skin to break out in a cold sweat.) Memory in the
Absence of Memory. Classical conditioning helps to clarify how it is
possible to react to a reminder of a traumatic event without

recalling that event. An interesting case from the early days of
psychology provides a simple, yet fascinating illustration. A female
patient of the early 20th century French physician Edouard Claparede was
unable to create new memories due to brain damage. Each time the doctor
met this patient, it was as if it was for the first time. She never
remembered him, even if the last time she had seen him was just a few
minutes before. Curious, Dr. Claparede devised an experiment. One time
he entered the examining room holding out his hand in customary
greeting; however, that time, he hid a tack in his palm. As usual, she
took his hand, but she withdrew it immediately in response to the
surprise of pain. When the doctor subsequently visited the patient, she
refused to shake hands with him, but could not say why (Claparede,
1911/1951). Familiarity with the theory of memory systems makes
understanding this seemingly phenomenal occurrence quite simple.
Claparede's patient was, indeed, able to create new memories, just not
explicit ones. Through classical conditioning a previously neutral
behavior (hand shaking) had become paired with a conditioned stimulus
(pain), causing a conditioned response (recoiling in pain and fear). It
only took one time to condition the response. The very next time the
doctor appeared, the patient refused to take his hand (conditioned
response). Her implicit memory system was fully intact (no pun
intended). Her hand remembered being the painful prick and her arm
remembered recoiling. She did not want to do that again. She did
recognize and remember the doctor, though not in the normal way that we
conceptualize recognition and memory. Operant Conditioning Operant
conditioning, first known from the work of B. F. Skinner, involves
shaping behavior through a cause and effect system of positive and/or
negative reinforcement. Behavior modification is based on operant
conditioning. In a typical Skinner-type experiment a bird is taught to
depress a pedal with its beak to receive food. It is rewarded with a few
grains each time it performs the desired behavior, in this case pedal
pecking. Eventually the behavior becomes automatic. What starts out as a
random occurrence---the first time the bird accidentally depressing the

pedal---quickly becomes associated and learned through rewards of food.
The bird is then able to deliberately depress the pedal when it wants
more. random behavior → reward → conditioned behavior → reward It is by
this same method that animal actors are trained to perform seemingly
impossible tasks. A desired behavior, such as turning clockwise, is
broken down into small steps, each step being rewarded as it appears:
first a turn of a foot, then a turn of the head, then a half-turn of the
whole body, etc. (Skinner, 1961). Operant conditioning is used to shape
behaviors of all kinds, consciously and unconsciously, in all walks of
life. Behaviors that are preferable and therefore rewarded (positive
response) are increased in frequency. Behaviors that are not desired,
and therefore punished (negative response) reduce in frequency or
disappear altogether. With humans, operant conditioning is a common
mechanism for shaping the behavior of children, friends, colleagues,
spouses---everyone. Once a behavior is shaped, the process that
facilitated the shaped behavior falls from awareness (if it ever was in
awareness), and the resulting shaped behavior remains as an implicit
memory. Many behaviors and habits were first shaped by operant
conditioning---learning to say "please" and "thank you," for example.
Praise, pleasure, and contact will increase a behavior; disapproval,
pain, and withdrawal will decrease it. Traumatic incidents can shape
behavior through operant conditioning. When this happens adapted
responses to stress can develop. For example, a person's difficulty
speaking in public may be traceable to a childhood where assertive
speech elicited violent reprisal. When natural impulses for assertive
speech become associated with punishment they are extinguished. If faced
with a situation where public speaking is required---even at a business
meeting---that individual might suffer an anxiety or panic attack with
symptoms including racing heart, cold sweat, difficulty breathing, etc.
When a traumatic incident is repeated, as with physical abuse, domestic
violence, incest, or torture, mental, emotional, and behavioral
strategies for coping can become habituated, closing off the possibility
of exercising other options, even in less stressful circumstances. Those
who were molested or beaten as children or teenagers might later be
vulnerable to

sexual abuse or violence, because their natural impulses to protect
themselves and protest (physical and verbal) were extinguished.
Expectation of hurtful treatment by others or one's own failed
capabilities can stubbornly persist despite overwhelming evidence that
such is no longer the case. Behaviors and beliefs conditioned during
traumatic events seem to have a greater enduring power than those
conditioned under lesser degrees of stress. Even one instance of a
failed or punished survival strategy during traumatic circumstances can
be enough to extinguish that behavior from one's repertoire. On a
hopeful note, operant conditioning can also work in reverse. When
strategies used to meet a traumatic threat are successful, they become
more available and more likely to be used again. Sometimes this is
called stress inoculation.

State-dependent Recall State-dependent recall is another important
phenomenon related to traumatic memory. When a current internal state
replicates the internal state produced during a previous event, details,
moods, information, and other states associated to that event may be
spontaneously recalled or set in motion. This theory has often been
applied to learning, predicting that information learned during specific
states induced by various drugs or alcohol are better recalled under the
same conditions, that is, under the influence of the same substance
(Eich, 1980; Reus, Weingartner, & Post, 1979). A tasty example is
provided by college students who have tried to use this phenomenon to
advantage in the hopes of increasing their chances of passing exams. The
strategy is to increase recall of the difficult material by eating
chocolate while studying and then eating chocolate while taking the
exams. It is not known, however, whether the success of this strategy
(as reported by the students) is determined by the internal state
elicited by the increased blood sugar, the stimulant in the cocoa, or
the psychological associations of the chocolate. And, of course, it
could just be a trumped-up excuse for indulgence by collegiate
chocoholics. State-dependent recall can also occur unbidden. It is not
uncommon for a trauma to be recalled into awareness by an internal
condition (increased

heart rate or respiration, a particular emotional mood, etc.) that is
reminiscent of the original response to the trauma. This process can be
set in motion by a multitude of classically conditioned external
triggers: a color, sight, taste, touch, smell, etc. It can also be
incited by exercise, excitement, or sexual arousal. Anything that is a
reminder of the trauma response is a possible catalyst. It is also
possible that state-dependent recall could be elicited under conditions
that replicate body posture. This has not been discussed in the
literature, but it is a logical extension of this theory and a ripe area
for research. Feedback from postural proprioceptive nerves could have
the same memory power as the proprioceptive nerves of internal
sensations that must be involved in state-dependent recall under the
influence of drugs or alcohol (see the next chapter for a discussion of
proprioception). Asking a client to reconstruct his posture before and
during a trauma will often bring details to awareness. However, such a
technique must be used with caution, as it can easily stimulate more
recall than the client is prepared to handle (see Chapter 5). Postural
state-dependent recall can also be caused unwittingly, as, for example,
when a physically abused child either freezes or screams when casually
or inadvertently tossed over another's knee in play. (Charlie's
traumatic recall was triggered by the sensation of pressure on his right
leg and his view of Ruff out of his right eye---replication of two
conditions from the dog attack. State-dependent reminders of touch and
sight set his reaction in motion.)

Memory and PTSD PTSD appears to be a disorder of memory gone awry.
Individuals with PTSD cannot make sense of their symptoms in the context
of the events they have endured. They are further plagued by
state-dependent triggers and/or other classically conditioned
associations to their traumas. Their traumatic experiences freefloat in
time without an end or place in history. An understanding of the somatic
side of memory may provide clues to understanding the special memory
features of PTS and PTSD. That is the topic of the next chapter.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER THREE

The Body Remembers Understanding Somatic Memory

Rhyme and Reason There was an old woman who lived in a shoe, She had so
many children, she didn't know what to do. But try as she would she
could never detect which was the cause and which the effect. ---Piet
Hein

This chapter addresses two questions: What is meant by somatic memory?
How can understanding this phenomenon be useful in the treatment of
posttraumatic stress disorder and other trauma-related conditions? The
implicit memory system is at the core of somatic memory. Individuals
with PTSD suffer inundation of images, sensations, and behavioral
impulses (implicit memory) disconnected from context, concepts, and
understanding (explicit memory). Hopefully, greater understanding of
somatic memory and implicit processes will help link implicit and the
explicit memory systems (which will be further discussed in Chapter 8).
Somatic memory relies on the communication network of the body's nervous
system. It is through the nervous system, via synapses, that information
is transmitted between the brain and all points in the body. A

basic understanding of its organization will help in understanding the
phenomenon of somatic memory. Three nervous system divisions are the
most relevant with regard to trauma: the sensory, autonomic, and
somatic. Each will be addressed separately, and then consolidated in the
section on "Emotions and the Body." Figure 3.1 illustrates the
organization of the body's central nervous system. Figure 3.1.
Organization of the central nervous system.

This diagram is adapted from numerous similar ones.

THE SENSORY ROOTS OF MEMORY The sensory system has everything to do with
memory. The nervous system transmits sensory information gathered from
both the periphery and the interior of the body via synapses, through
the brains thalamus, on the way to the somatosensory area of the
cerebral cortex of the brain. This is the first

step of memory, the processing and encoding of information. Some of it
will be stored for future reference and retrieved when pertinent. Much
of it will never be stored and is quickly forgotten. The sum total of
experience, and therefore all memory, begins with sensory input. It is
through the senses that one perceives the world. They provide continual
feedback to the brain on the status of both internal and external
environments. It is through the senses that reality takes form. Take a
minute to become aware of the mass of sensory information coming to and
from your body right now. First notice your external environment. You
are standing, sitting, or lying on some kind of surface. Without looking
at it, can you can identify if that surface is soft or hard, cold or
warm? What sounds are your ears hearing? Is there enough light to easily
see the words on this page? Can you feel your hands holding this book?
Notice how the cover and pages feel to your hands. Is the cover smooth
or textured? Your external environment also includes how your clothes
feel to your skin. Is your shirt smooth or scratchy? Slacks comfortable
or too tight? Is the air temperature comfortable for the amount of
clothing you have on? What about your internal environment? Without
looking in a mirror, can you estimate the position of your shoulders,
back, neck, and head? Where, and in which direction, are you tilted or
twisted? Are you sitting up straight? Are you relaxed or tense? And
notice that you shift position from time to time, even if only slightly.
What are the sensations that cause you to change your posture to
maintain comfort? Is your foot going to sleep or your neck beginning to
ache? You might also notice if there is a taste in your mouth---sweet,
sour, salt, smoke, bitter? Are there any smells that you are aware op
Soon you will probably become gradually preoccupied with additional
internal bodily sensations that will tell you that you are hungry,
thirsty, tired, restless, stiff, have a full bladder, etc.

All of this input and more is constantly being transmitted to the brain
all the time---whether consciously or not. Each of these cues, whether
coming from the body's periphery or from inside the body, is a
sensation.

Sensory Organization There are two main sensory systems: exteroceptive
and interoceptive. Exteroceptors are nerves that receive and transmit
information from the environment outside of the body by way of the eyes,
ears, tongue, nose, and skin. Interoceptors are nerves that receive and
transmit information from the inside of the body, from the viscera,
muscles, and connective tissue.

The Exteroceptive System The exteroceptive system is the one with which
you are likely to be the most familiar. It includes the sensory nerves
that respond to stimuli emanating from outside of the body, that is, the
external environment, via the basic five senses: sight, hearing, taste,
smell, and touch. All exteroceptors are responsive to large and small
changes in the external environment. An individual will usually have
greater facility in one or another sense or heightened sensitivity to
some kinds of stimuli. Individuals with damage to one of these senses
(for example, the visually or hearing impaired) will often compensate
for their deficit by developing greater acuity in one or more of the
others. The visually impaired, for example, often have acutely sensitive
hearing. Which of the five senses are you most receptive to? What gets
your attention? Do you become particularly alert when you hear a strange
sound, smell a particular odor, or when something moves suddenly across
your field of vision? Do you easily feel nuances of contact to the
surface of your skin? Perhaps there is more than one, but you probably
favor one over the others. Which of these senses is most active in your
memories? Are you

more likely to remember the taste of a meal, its smell, or how it
looked? Are you more visual, auditory, or tactile? When you are alone,
remembering your lover, do you have stronger images of his or her face,
voice, or touch? The Interoceptive System The interoceptive system is
comprised of sensory nerves that respond to stimuli emanating from
inside the body. There are two major types of interoception:
proprioception and the vestibular sense. Proprioception is further
comprised of the kinesthetic sense, which enables one to locate all the
parts of his body in space, and the internal sense, which gives feedback
on body states such as heart rate, respiration, internal temperature,
muscular tension, and visceral discomfort. The vestibular sense helps
the body sustain a balanced posture and maintain a comfortable
relationship with gravity. The Kinesthetic Sense

It is the kinesthetic sense that enables you to bring the tip of your
finger to touch the tip of your own nose when your eyes are closed. This
small task, familiar as a sobriety test, is an amazing feat. Those who
doubt it should sit beside a friend, and try to touch the friend's nose
while his own eyes are closed. Successful nose targeting relies on input
from muscles and skeletal connective tissue that indicate the height and
angle of one's arm, hand, and finger. It also requires an internal
sensory schema for where all parts of one's body are located, to
register just where the nose is. When aiming to touch another's nose
there is access to the former, but not the latter. The kinesthetic sense
also makes walking possible by indicating where legs and feet are
located at any given point in time. It is the kinesthetic sense that
makes it possible to learn and execute all sorts of motor tasks and
behaviors. The importance of the kinesthetic sense can best be
illustrated by an example of its loss. The APA Monitor (Azar, 1998)
reported the fascinating

case of a man who, as the result of a viral infection, had lost the
kinesthetic part of his proprioceptive sense, as well as his sense of
touch. Though all of his motor functions were intact, without looking
the man had not the least notion of the position of his body; he could
not even stand. Eventually he was able to compensate to some degree for
his loss. Through years of trial and error, he learned to move and walk
relatively normally, bring a glass to mouth, etc., relying on his sense
of sight to provide the cues that used to come from his kinesthetic
nerves. However, if when he was standing the lights went out and he was
deprived of visual cues, he would crumple to the floor and be unable to
rise until someone turned on the lights. Without vision to help him, he
had no idea how to place a hand palm down on the floor, raise his elbow
over his hand at the angle necessary to get enough leverage to push
himself up, etc. In addition, without vision he could not tell where or
how to place his feet under him or shift his weight properly for support
and to get his balance. Access to implicit memory of simple, usually
automatic movements and procedures was lost to him. Such cases are
exceedingly rare, but their study is useful in helping us understand how
necessary the senses are to everyday living. The kinesthetic sense is
central to implicit, procedural memory. It helps one learn and then to
remember how to do something. It keeps track of where to put and how to
move hands, fingers, feet, and trunk to replicate, for example, walking,
bike riding, skiing, typing, handwriting, or dancing. Active in our
waking hours, the kinesthetic sense functions automatically. Though it
is usually unconscious, you can increase your awareness of the
kinesthetic sense. Close your eyes and see how accurately you can
describe your current body position. Notice, for example, the angle of
your right arm. Is the palm of your hand facing up or down? Is your left
foot turned out or in? In which direction is your head tilted? You can
also try having a friend "sculpt" your body into a different position
and see if you can tell exactly where and how each limb has been placed.
Next time you sit down to write or eat---something which is normally an
automatic procedure for you, stored in implicit memory---try doing it
differently. Hold the

pen or fork in a different way or in the opposite hand. Can you now just
write or eat without thinking about what you are doing? Most likely you
will not be able to. If such a behavior is not stored in implicit
memory, success will depend upon conscious effort. The Internal Sense It
is the internal sense that registers the state of the body's internal
environment: heart rate, respiration, pain, internal temperature,
visceral sensations, and muscle tension. "Butterflies" or an ache in the
stomach is a familiar internal sensation. A "gut feeling" is a summation
of the internal sense. It is the internal sense that helps to identify
and name our emotions. Each basic emotion---fear, anger, shame, sadness,
interest, frustration, or happiness---has an accompanying set of
discrete body sensations, stimulated by patterned activity in the brain.
This biology of emotion in the body and brain is called affect. Can you
feel how fast your heart is beating without taking your pulse? Can you
feel your breathing---where and how deep? Where in your body are you
feeling tense or relaxed right now? Try again to eat or write with the
opposite hand. Notice your visceral reactions and any changes in
muscular tension. Do you feel discomfort anywhere? Is there a change in
the tension of your arm or shoulders? That is your internal sense
alerting you to a change in normal procedure. Then change back to write
or eat in the way that is normal for you and notice if there is a
corresponding relaxation of the internal alert. Remember the last time
you were embarrassed. Did your face get hot? How about when you are
angry; do your shoulders get tense? The internal sense is the foundation
for neurologist Antonio Damasio's theory of somatic markers. He proposes
that the experience of emotions is comprised of body sensations that are
elicited in response to various

stimuli. Those sensations, and their related emotions, become encoded
and then stored as implicit memories associated with the stimuli that
originally evoked them (classical conditioning). Memory of the emotions
and sensations can later be triggered into recall when similar stimuli
are present, though their origin will not always be remembered (Damasio,
1994). For example, if someone eats something and becomes ill, the next
time she sees, smells, or is offered that same food she may feel some
degree of nausea. After a time the strong reaction will likely fade, but
she may continue to have an automatic aversion to that food, perhaps
even forgetting the origin of her dislike, "Oh, no thank you. I never
eat that. I just don't like it!" Damasio's somatic marker theory will be
further discussed in the last section of this chapter. The Vestibular
Sense The vestibular sense indicates when one is in an upright position
in relationship to the earth's gravity. Centered in the inner ear it
may, when disturbed, cause bouts of dizziness or vertigo, motion
sickness, or loss of balance. People particularly attuned to this sense
may feel all the nuances of motion. For example, during an airplane
flight such a person will notice each slight turn and tip of the plane
that others register only when looking out of the window. Many amusement
parks have an attraction that tricks the usually cooperative
relationship between sight and the vestibular sense. The Haunted Shack
at Knotts Berry Farm in Southern California is one example. When one
walks through this stationary building it is impossible to keep one's
balance. It is necessary to hold onto railings to avoid falling. The
guides say it is because the house is built over a site where the
earth's gravity is different, though they have no trouble negotiating
the place themselves---standing at an angle. The secret of such
attractions is that a seemingly normal structure is actually built at an
angle. The floor, roof, and walls slant 20 or 30 degrees. The tables,
chairs, pictures, etc, are also placed at the same slant and nailed in
place. With eyes open, the normal person will rely on visual cues to
determine the direction of gravity. In this instance, that causes a bit
of chaos. One tries to get straight with what one sees. However, with
closed eyes the vestibular sense will kick in, telling

which way is up. The guides follow the vestibular information, which is
why they stand on a slant---but, of course it is never suggested that
the guests try that, as it would spoil the secret.

Somatic Memory and the Senses Each of the senses discussed above is
germane to the discussion of the somatic basis of memory in general and
traumatic memory in particular. Our first impressions of an experience
usually come from our senses---both interoceptive and exteroceptive.
These impressions are not encoded as words, but as the somatic
sensations they are: smells, sights, sounds, touches, tastes, movement,
position, behavioral sequences, visceral reactions. Memory of an event
stored in implicit memory as sensations can sometimes be elicited if
similar sensory input is replicated (state-dependent recall). There are
many examples of this from normal daily life. Just about everyone has at
one time or another experienced state-dependent sensorybased memory
recall triggered by a song, taste, or smell: "Oh my gosh, I hadn't
thought about that in years!" Sometimes it is something positive,
sometimes negative, but it happens all the time.

Sensory Memory and Trauma Sensory memory is central to understanding how
the memory of traumatic events is laid down---how, as Bessel van der
Kolk (1994) would put it, "The Body Keeps the Score." Memories of
traumatic events can be encoded just like other memories, both
explicitly and implicitly. Typically, however, individuals with PTS and
PTSD are missing the explicit information necessary to make sense of
their distressing somatic symptoms---body sensations---many of which are
implicit memories of trauma. Which information is missing varies: for
some it will be a specific fact or facts that have been forgotten; for
others it may be a key, the "aha!" that puts the facts at hand together
into something meaningful. One of the goals of trauma therapy is to help
those individuals to understand their bodily sensations.

They must first feel and identify them on the body level. Then they must
use language to name and describe them, narrating what meaning the
sensations have for them in their current life. At times, though not
always, it then becomes possible to clarify the relationship of the
sensations to past trauma. One of the difficulties of PTSD is the
phenomenon of flashbacks, which involve highly disturbing replays of
implicit sensory memories of traumatic events sometimes with explicit
recall, sometimes without. The sensations that accompany them are so
intense that the suffering individual is unable to distinguish the
current reality from the past. It feels like it is happening now.
(Chapter 6 includes tools to help clients use sensory awareness to
distinguish the reality of the moment from memories of a past reality.
Chapter 8 includes a protocol for stopping a flashback.) A flashback can
be triggered through either or both exteroceptive and interoceptive
systems. It might be something seen, heard, tasted, or smelled that
serves as the reminder and sets the flashback in motion. It can just as
easily be a sensation arising from inside the body. Sensory messages
from muscles and connective tissue that remember a particular position,
action, or intention can be the source of a trigger. It is not uncommon,
for example, for a woman who has been raped to be just fine making love
with her husband except in the position that is reminiscent of the rape.
Even an internal state aroused during a traumatic event, for example,
accelerated heart rate, can be a trigger. For that reason, some
individuals with PTSD do not do well with aerobic exercise. The
accelerated heart rate and increased respiration can be implicit
reminders of the accelerated heart rate and increased respiration that
accompanied the terror of their trauma. Accelerated heart rate caused by
stimulants in coffee, tea, cola, or dark chocolate can also be
problematic for some. These are all examples of triggers elicited
through state-dependent recall. The following case excerpt (continued
from p. 4) will illustrate.

CHARLIE AND THE DOG, PART II

Charlie summoned my attention in the most restricted of voices. I turned
to see him sitting on a cushion on the floor at my right, stricken. His
body was totally rigid---arms pinned to his sides, legs stretched out in
front---and he could barely speak. Ruff was calmly lying beside him with
her head on Charlie's knee. He managed to squeak out, "I am very
distressed right now. I am terribly afraid of dogs." I asked if he could
move Ruff away, or move away himself but I could see that was not
possible. Charlie was literally, and visibly, frozen stiff (tonic
immobility). With the help of a group member, I managed to get Ruff to
move away from Charlie. But he remained frozen in place. Later,
following therapeutic intervention (which will be described in Chapter
8), as we talked about what had just occurred, Charlie was convinced
that Ruff had had her mouth on his thigh where he had previously been
bitten, not on his knee. In fact, he was astounded to learn that Ruff
had just laid her head on his knee. Charlie's reaction was set in motion
by exteroceptive stimuli of touch and sight. Ruff's contact with
Charlie's right leg, combined with a glimpse from his right peripheral
visual field, had been reminiscent enough of his previous traumatic
encounter to trigger Charlie's traumatized condition. His body instantly
remembered the attack. This example illustrates state-dependent recall
brought about by specific, state-related conditions. Amazingly, Charlie
was a regular at this retreat center and had encountered Ruff many times
previously without incident, though he avoided her. He had never been
triggered on previous occasions because the right combination of stimuli
had never before occurred.

THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM: HYPERAROUSAL AND THE REFLEXES OF FIGHT,
FLIGHT, AND FREEZE The limbic system of the brain could be called
"survival central." It responds to extreme stress/trauma/threat by
setting the HPA axis in motion, releasing hormones that tell the body to
prepare for defensive action. The

hypothalamus activates the sympathetic branch (SNS) of the autonomic
nervous system (ANS), provoking it into a state of heightened arousal
that readies the body for fight or flight. As epinephrine and
norepinephrine are released, respiration and heart rate quicken, the
skin pales as the blood flows away from its surface to the muscles, and
the body prepares for quick movement. When neither fight nor flight is
perceived as possible, the limbic system commands the simultaneous
heightened arousal of the parasympathetic branch (PNS) of the ANS, and
tonic immobility (sometimes called "freezing")---like a mouse going dead
(slack) or a frog or bird becoming paralyzed (stiff)---will result
(Gallup & Maser 1977). As mentioned previously, it is not yet known what
is happening in the HPA axis that causes the body to freeze instead of
fight or flee. In the case of PTSD, cortisol secretion is not adequate
to halt the alarm response. The brain persists in responding as if under
stress/trauma/threat. At this time it is not known which is the first
driving factor: a continued perception of threat in the mind or
insufficient cortisol. The result, however, is the same: The limbic
system continues to command the hypothalamus to activate the ANS,
persisting in preparing the body for fight/flight or going dead, even
though the actual traumatic event has ended---perhaps years ago. People
with PTSD live with a chronic state of ANS activation---
hyperarousal---in their bodies, leading to physical symptoms that are
the basis of anxiety, panic, weakness, exhaustion, muscle stiffness,
concentration problems, and sleep disturbance. It is a vicious cycle,
first set in motion in the service of survival, but enduring as
impairment. During a traumatic event the brain alerts the body to a
threat. In PTSD, the brain persists in calling and recalling the same
alert, stimulating the ANS for defensive reactions of fight, flight, or
freeze. The once protective reactions of heightened pulse, paled skin,
cold sweat, etc., so necessary for defense, evolve into the distressing
symptoms of disability. With Pavlov's dog, an originally neutral
stimulus (the bell) became associated with and capable of eliciting a
normal physiological response to food (salivation). With PTSD the same
thing happens. Objects, sounds, colors, movements, etc., that might
otherwise be insignificant neutral stimuli become associated through
classical conditioning to the traumatic incident, causing traumatic
hyperarousal. These stimuli then become external triggers that are
experienced internally as danger.

Confusion can result when recognition of external safety doesn't
coincide with the inner experience of threat. Symptoms can become
chronic or can be triggered acutely. Breaking this cycle is an important
step in the treatment of PTSD. Under normal circumstances, the PNS and
SNS branches of the ANS function in balance with each other (see Table
3.1). The SNS is primarily aroused in states of stress, both positive
and negative. The PNS is primarily aroused in states of rest and
relaxation, pleasure, sexual arousal, and others. Both branches are
always engaged; however, one is usually more activated, the other
suppressed---like the dipping and rising arms of a scale. When one side
is up, the other is down. In other words, under normal circumstances
they constantly swing in complementary balance to each other (Bloch,
1985). The following scenario illustrates the interactive balance of the
SNS and PNS: Table 3.1. Autonomic nervous system (smooth muscles,
involuntary). SYMPATHETIC BRANCH PARASYMPATHETIC BRANCH Activates during
positive and negative stress states, including: sexual climax, rage,
desperation, terror, anxiety/panic, trauma States of activation include:
rest and relaxation, sexual arousal, happiness, anger, grief, sadness
Noticeable signs Noticeable signs Faster respiration Slower, deeper
respiration Quicker heart rate (pulse) Slower heart rate (pulse)
Increased blood pressure Decreased blood pressure Pupils dilate Pupils
constrict Pale skin color Flushed skin color Increased sweating

Skin dry (usually warm) to touch Skin cold (possibly clammy) Digestion
(and peristalsis) increases Digestion (and peristalsis) decreases During
actual traumatic event OR with flashback (visual, auditory and/or
sensory) During actual traumatic event OR with flashback (visual,
auditory and/or sensory) Preparation for quick movement, leading to
possible fight reflex or flight reflex Can also activate concurrently
with, while masking, sympathetic activation leading to tonic immobility:
freezing reflex (like a mouse, caught by a cat, going dead). Marked by
simultaneous signs of high sympathetic and parasympathetic activation.

You are sleeping peacefully; the PNS is active and the SNS suppressed.
Then you awaken and find you set the clock wrong and are already one
hour late for work. The SNS shoots up; your heart rate accelerates, you
are instantly awake. You move quickly---showering, dressing, then
leaping into your car and gunning it to get you down the road. When you
get to the first corner you notice the clock on the church tower and
realize this was the weekend that winter time started and the clocks
have turned back one hour; actually, you are not late after all. The SNS
decreases and the PNS rises. Your heart rate slows; you breathe more
easily and continue your journey more relaxed. However, when you get to
work, you find you double scheduled your first appointment time and have
two irate clients to deal with. The SNS again accelerates, suppressing
the PNS.... So it goes throughout the average day, with the SNS and PNS
swaying in balance with each other to meet the variety of stresses and
demands typical of daily life. However, something very different happens
under the most extreme form of stress, traumatic stress. First the
limbic system commands the SNS to prepare the body to fight or flee. But
if that is not possible--- there is not time, strength, and/or stamina
to succeed---the limbic system commands the body to freeze.

The most commonly observed instance of freezing is the mouse that "goes
dead" when caught by a cat. That image is useful to many with PTSD who
have frozen in the face of mortal threat, as they can relate to the
mouse's dilemma as well as its physiological response. Instinctively, a
mouse will flee if its limbic system estimates it can get away. As with
all animals facing threat, the SNS activates drastically in order to
meet the demand for fight or (in this case) flight. If, however, the
mouse becomes trapped, or if during its attempt to flee, the cat nabs
it, the mouse will "go dead." It will lose muscle tone, like a rag doll.
According to Gordon Gallup (1977) and Peter Levine (1992, 1997), the
likely mechanism underlying this hypotonic response, tonic immobility,
is an unusual imbalance in the ANS. In this extreme circumstance the SNS
will remain activated, while the PNS simultaneously becomes highly
activated, masking the SNS activity, causing the mouse to "go dead."
This has several evolutionary purposes, including relying on the
likelihood that the cat will lose interest (felines will not eat dead
meat unless they are starving), affording the possibility of escape.
Analgesia is also an important function of tonic immobility, numbing the
body and the mind. If the cat does eat the mouse, in its deadened state
the pain and horror of death will be greatly diminished (Gallup & Maser,
1977; Levine, 1992, 1997). Something similar appears to happen with
humans when mortally threatened. Interviews with people who have fallen
from great heights, or been mauled by animals and survived, reveal that
they tend to go into a kind of altered state where they feel no fear or
pain. Rape is another prime example. It is typical for the victim of
rape, at some point, to become literally unable to resist. The body goes
limp, and many report being in an altered state during that time. Many
victims of rape suffer from dreadful shame and guilt because of it. It
is infuriating to continue to hear of rape cases being thrown out of
court because the victim had not fought back. "Going dead" and being
unable to fight back are frequent reactions to physical violence such as
rape and torture (Suarez & Gallup, 1979). How one
reflexively/instinctively responds to a life-threatening situation
depends on many factors, including one's own instincts and one's
physical and psychological resources. Bruce Perry and colleagues (1995)
have theorized that men respond more often to threat with fight and
flight, and women and children more often with going dead or freezing.
Their theory makes sense,

as men often have more physical resources---constitutionally greater
strength, speed, and agility---than women and children. Additionally,
this could be due to learned behavior, as men and women are conditioned
to respond differently to threat. This is another area ripe for
research. (Charlie fainted when he was attacked. Whether fainting is a
form of tonic immobility is not known at this time, but it is a likely
consequence of an overwhelmed ANS.) Understanding the functioning of the
ANS helps in explaining the vulnerability to stress of those with PTSD.
PTSD is characterized, in part, by chronic ANS hyperarousal. The system
is always stressed. A person with a normal balance in the ANS will be
able to swing with rises and falls of arousal. When a new stress comes
along the arousal in the SNS moves from little or no arousal to higher
arousal and then back again when the stress is dealt with. For those
with PTSD the picture is different: When SNS arousal is constantly high,
adding a new stress shoots it up even higher; it is easy to go over the
top, causing them to feel overwhelmed. This difficulty is familiar to
many with PTSD who wonder why they cannot handle daily stress like
everyone else or like they used to be able to.

THE SOMATIC NERVOUS SYSTEM: MUSCLES, MOVEMENT, AND KINESTHETIC MEMORY
The somatic nervous system (SomNS) is responsible for voluntary movement
executed through the contraction of skeletal muscles. Understanding the
function of the SomNS is pertinent to grasping the mechanism by which
traumatic events can be remembered implicitly through the encoding of
posture and movement. Basically, the only thing a muscle can do actively
is contract. That is it. A muscle contracts when it receives an impulse
through the nerve that serves it. Impulses for contraction of visceral
muscles are primarily transmitted through nerves of the autonomic
nervous system (ANS); impulses for contraction of skeletal muscles are
carried through nerves of the SomNS. As long as a muscle continues to
receive neural impulses, it continues to be contracted. When lifting a
heavy object, for example,

several muscles are stimulated to contract, remaining contracted until
the object is released. Muscle tension is an active process comprised of
chronic muscle contraction. Relaxation, usually thought of as an active
process, "Hey, just relax," is actually a passive state. It is the
absence of neural impulses, noncontraction. To move any part of the body
in any way, in any direction, it is necessary to contract at least one
skeletal muscle. Look at the palm of your left hand. Try to separate
your left little finger from the other fingers of that hand without
moving the rest of your hand or other fingers. That little movement is
accomplished by a neural impulse, sparked by the words in the previous
sentence. The impulse is transmitted from the brain along the ulnar
nerve and causes contraction of the muscle abductor digiti minimi of the
left hand, causing the little finger to move away from the other
fingers. When the finger is not purposefully moving to the side, it will
come back toward the other fingers. That lesser movement is actually
caused by the noncontraction (relaxation) of the abductor digiti minimi.
Most physical movement is much more complex, accomplished through
multiple, simultaneous, and/or consecutive muscle contractions and
noncontractions. Next try to move your right index finger to touch your
nose in slow motion. That simple movement is actually made up of several
muscle contractions ---some consecutive, some simultaneous---and
noncontractions. Specific muscles are being stimulated to contract in
order to point the finger, close the hand, turn the hand, bend the
elbow, and raise the arm. At the same time, there are other muscles that
must remain noncontracted (relaxed) in order for the arm to bend and
permit the movement of the elbow away from the body. All of these
elements are necessary to accomplish what appears to

be the single, simple movement of touching index finger to nose. It is
the SomNS that commands the movement and the kinesthetic sense that
assures its accuracy. It is through the SomNS that behaviors, movements,
and physical procedures are performed. It is via interoceptive,
proprioceptive nerves that they are perceived. For a movement to be
encoded and recorded as implicit memory, both nerve sets are necessary.
The somatic nerves cause a movement, the interoceptive nerves give you
the feeling of it. It is the interoceptive system that helps you know
that you are making the correct movement, especially when you are not
observing what you are doing. For a new procedure, movement, or behavior
to be maintained in memory, proprioceptive nerves from muscles, tendons,
and skeletal connective tissue---ligaments and fascia---relay
information on position, posture, and action via afferent nerves to the
brain. For an old procedure, movement, or behavior to be recalled into
use, those same schemata need to be activated and then relayed via
efferent nerves, through the SomNS and proprioceptive system, out to the
appropriate muscles and connective tissues. The SomNS will cause the
contraction of the muscles necessary to accomplish the movement. The
proprioceptive nerves will give feedback on the correctness of the
movement. When a new behavioral sequence is learned, images associated
with that learning experience (positive or negative) may be stored
simultaneously. When that same behavioral sequence is repeated, those
images are sometimes also recalled. Have you ever taught a child to tie
a shoe? I did last year and I remember it as being a bit exasperating.
As I'd been tying my own shoes for many, many years, it was totally
automatic. It took me several minutes to think of just how I do it, and
a while longer to be able to communicate the maneuver to my young
friend. I endeavored to simply describe what for my fingers became
automatic long ago. Once I had a feel for the procedure, I had to
further slow it down and break it up into microsteps that the child
could follow. For years, without thinking about it, each hand "knew"
which lace to take, which way to turn one over the

other, etc. It was a great challenge to resolutely think about what I
was doing and, furthermore, explain it. I sometimes became confused and,
while in the midst of it all, I had flashes of remembering my father
teaching me to tie my shoes in this same way. Were those images
triggered by the situation, the theme, the replicated movements, or a
combination of all of these elements? Eventually, I was able to
competently explain and demonstrate the procedure in slow motion. My
young friend watched with great interest and attempted to duplicate my
every move. But for her, of course, it was something new and she tried
many times before getting it right once, several more to get it right
consistently. She had to concentrate intensely on what her fingers were
doing each step of the way. By the next week she had it down pat. That
experience gave me pause: I wonder if she will recall some of these
images of me teaching her when as an adult she engages in the behavior
of teaching a child to tie his laces in the same way? Will replicating
these same movements bring me to mind?

Trauma, Defense, and the Somatic Nervous System The autonomic nervous
system, among other things, directs blood flow away from viscera and
skin to the muscles for the duration of fight, flight, and freezing
responses. The somatic nervous system directs the musculature to carry
out that response. Without quick and powerful movements of muscles
controlled by it, there would be no fight and there would be no flight.
The freezing---tonic immobility---state would also be impossible without
its action. Defensive behavior can be instinctual or learned through
instruction or conditioning. Even usually instinctual defensive reflexes
must sometimes be taught. Some infants born prematurely will lack, for
example, the falling reflex. Many can then be taught to reach out hands
and arms to catch their falls. In such a circumstance the specific
neural impulses must be trained to respond automatically to the cue of
falling.

Other types of training can go a long way to prepare individuals to meet
certain kinds of stressful or traumatic incidents, raising
self-confidence. For example, many women and men who have been assaulted
or raped have benefited from self-defense training, which reawakens
normal fight responses and teaches additional protective strategies.
Self-defense training is accomplished through repeatedly practicing
defensive movements, building synaptic patterns that will repeat
spontaneously under threat. Safety in schools and on the job also
depends on the creation of automatic reactions and behaviors. Fire,
earthquake, and other types of drills prevent panic through rehearsal of
precise behaviors (where to go and what to do) and sometimes of specific
movements (dive under the desk). Operant conditioning plays a role here,
too. Fight, flight, and freeze responses are not just instinctual
behaviors; they are subject to influence--- positive and
negative---according to how successful or unsuccessful they have been in
actual use. When a defensive behavior is successful, it becomes recorded
as effective; the chance of the same behavior being used in a future
threatening situation increases. Likewise, when a defensive behavior
fails, the chance of repeating it decreases. For example, if a boy is
harassed by a group of bullies and is successful in defending himself,
later as an adult, he will be more likely to strike a defensive posture
when threatened. If, however, he is overpowered by the bullies and,
furthermore, goes into tonic immobility, when threatened as an adult he
will be more likely to freeze. A behavior does not always require
repetition to be encoded and stored. Behaviors associated with traumatic
incidents can be instantly stored via the SomNS. In some cases it takes
only one traumatic incident where defensive behavior was either
impossible or unsuccessful for it to be wiped from an individual's
protective repertoire. (See Daniel's case on p. 89 for an example of
applying behavioral repetition as a resource in the therapy session. The
conclusion of Charlie's therapy on p. 171 also illustrates this
principle.)

Traumatic Memory Recall and the Somatic Nervous System

You were just in your living room and wanted something. You come into
the kitchen and ... "What was it I came in here for?" You scratch your
head. You swear. You can't remember. You wrack your brain. You go back
to the spot where the intention originated, assuming the same sitting
posture you were in at that moment---BINGO! "Now I remember!" That
recall strategy doesn't always work, but it does often enough that many
use it. What is it about resuming a particular body posture, one held at
the time an idea is germinated, that aids in memory recall? The above
example is a useful application of the concept of state-dependent
recall. As previously mentioned, the theory of state-dependent recall
holds that if you return to the state you were in at the time a piece of
information was encoded, you can retrieve that same piece of
information. Though usually discussed in reference to internal states,
state-dependent recall is exceedingly relevant to postural states.
State-dependent recall can sometimes be triggered through the SomNS by
inadvertently (or purposely) assuming a posture inherent in a traumatic
situation. When used purposefully, it can aid the possibility of memory
recall and/or reestablishment of behavioral resources. Reconstructing
the movements involved in a fall or a car accident can often accomplish
this. However, when state-dependent recall hits unexpectedly, it can
cause chaos: A mid-thirties woman sought therapy for panic that
developed while making love with her husband. Her arm had accidentally
gotten caught under her in an awkward position, firing off memories of a
rape she thought she had long put behind her. The rapist had pinned the
same arm under her in the same position. Often, the movements caused by
the SomNS can be used to intentionally facilitate state-dependent
recall. Following nuances of movement can also be useful. The following
case illustrates how focusing on a seemingly trivial movement has the
potential to catalyze a trauma therapy.

Carla's 3-year-old daughter had died four years ago. Carla had become
fixated on the horror of the illness and was unable to speak of her
child's death and process the meaning of her loss. During one therapy
session, Carla mentioned one of the medical consultations; she
remembered it as being particularly difficult, but couldn't recall why.
As she spoke, I saw that Carla's head was making slight jerking
movements to her right. I brought this to her attention. She had not
been aware of it, but noticed it now that I mentioned it. I encouraged
her to let the movement develop if she could. Slowly the movement became
bigger, becoming an obvious turn of the head to the right. When her head
made its full turn, Carla began to cry. Now Carla remembered. At that
consultation, she sat facing the doctor, but to her right was the
illuminated x-ray that told the tale of her daughter's fate; she had not
been able to look at it. It was at that consultation that Carla first
knew her daughter would not be able to survive. Making this connection
was an important step in helping Carla to move past the horror of the
diagnosis to the grief of her loss. The SomNS has many roles in the
experience of trauma. It carries out the trauma defensive responses of
fight, flight, and freeze through simple and complex combinations of
muscular contractions that result in specific positions, movements, and
behaviors. In cooperation with proprioception, the SomNS is also party
to encoding traumatic experiences in the brain. Somatic memory recall
can occur when those same positions, movements, and behaviors are
replicated either purposefully or inadvertently.

EMOTIONS AND THE BODY Emotions, though interpreted and named by the
mind, are integrally an experience of the body. Each emotion looks
different to the observer and has a different bodily expression. Every
emotion is characterized by a discrete pattern of skeletal muscle
contraction visible on the face and in body posture (somatic nervous
system). Each emotion also feels different on the inside of the body.
Different patterns of visceral muscle contractions are discernible as
body sensations (the internal sense). Those sensations are

then transmitted to the brain through the proprioceptive nerves. How an
emotion looks on the outside of the body, in facial expression and
posture, communicates it to others in our environment. How an emotion
feels on the inside of the body communicates it to the self. To a large
extent, each emotion is the result of interplay between the sensory,
autonomic, and somatic nervous systems interpreted within the brains
cortex. The English language is a bit awkward when it comes to
differentiating the conscious experience of emotions from body
sensations. The word "feeling" usually stands for both: I feel sad and I
feel a lump in my throat. Perhaps it is no accident that "feel" stands
for both experiences, a semantic recognition that emotions are comprised
of body sensations. A possible way out of the confusion, though, might
be to distinguish between feelings, emotions, and affects. Donald
Nathanson (1992) addresses this dilemma. He distinguishes affect as the
biological aspect of emotion, and feeling as the conscious experience.
Memory, he suggests, is necessary to create an emotion, while affects
and feelings can exist without memory of a prior experience. That
emotions are connected in some way to the body should come as no
surprise. Everyday speech is full of phrases---in many languages---that
reflect the link of emotion and body, psyche and soma. Here are a few
examples from American English: Anger---He's a pain in the neck.
Sadness---I'm all choked up. Disgust---She makes me sick. Happiness---I
could burst! Fear---I have butterflies in my stomach. Shame---I can't
look you in the eye. There is also commonality in physical sensation of
emotion---how an emotion feels in the body:

Anger---muscular tension, particularly in jaw and shoulders
Sadness---wet eyes, "lump" in the throat Disgust---nausea
Happiness---deep breathing, sighing Fear---racing heart, trembling
Shame---rising heat, particularly in the face And typical physical
behaviors that go with each emotion: Anger---yelling, fighting
Sadness---crying Disgust---turning away Happiness---laughing
Fear---flight, shaking Shame---hiding And, of course, many facial and
postural expressions of emotion are easily recognized (though some are
much more subtle) by the observer: Anger---clamped jaw, reddened neck
Sadness---flowing tears, reddened eyes Disgust---wrinkled nose with
raised upper lip Happiness---(some kinds of) smile, bright eyes
Fear---wide eyes with lifted brows, trembling, blanching
Shame---blushing, averted gaze

Emotions are expressed from the first moments of life outside of the
womb. The typical wail of the newborn as it exhales its first breath
could be interpreted as a first expression of emotion. The newborn is
limited in its emotional repertoire. At first it is only able to
distinguish between discomfort and comfort, wailing in response to the
former, calm in response to the latter. During the first weeks of life,
distinct emotions are of limited range. Quickly, though, the baby's
collection increases, differentiating nuances within the ranges of
discomfort and comfort. There are several theoretical models of emotion.
What to call individual affects is subject to debate, though most models
include some form of "anger," sadness, rear, disgust, happiness, and
shame among their lists. Certainly how an individual names his own
emotions is subject to variation, depending on how emotions were labeled
by her family and culture. In this chapter, though, our concern is not
with what an emotion is called. What is pertinent to this part of the
discussion of trauma and the body is how an emotion is sensed and
expressed.

A Select History of the Emotion-Body Connection Charles Darwin's
Cross-cultural Survey Charles Darwin was the first scientist to
systematically investigate the universality of emotion and the somatic
features of emotional expression in man. In 1867 he surveyed an
international group of missionaries and others who were living around
the world in different cultures: Aboriginal, Indian, African, Native
American, Chinese, Malayan, and Ceylonese. He asked specific questions
in order to find out if types of emotions, as well as their observable
expressions, were consistent throughout different cultures. He
discovered that not only was there great commonality to all ranges of
emotion across unrelated and often isolated cultures, but there was also
commonality to the somatic expression of those emotions (Darwin,
1872/1965). When reviewing Darwin's work, one can have little doubt that
emotions and the body go hand in hand the world over.

Tomkins's Affect Theory Silvan Tomkins's affect theory was born
simultaneously with his first child. As he witnessed this momentous
event he was drawn to the infant's emotional outburst, amazed at the
similarity of expression between the infant's cry and an adults. From
this impetus his study broadened to encompass identifying the similarity
of emotional expression across generations. He was most interested in
categorizing each identified affect by physical expression, noting not
just the facial characteristics of each, but also changes in body
posture. Donald Nathanson (1992) has taken Tomkins's theories several
steps further. Joseph LeDoux's Emotional Brain Joseph LeDoux's theories
on the relationship of the body and emotions are well known and highly
respected. He recognizes the interdependence of brain and body, as well
as the bodily expressions of emotion. The evolutionary function of
emotions, he believes, are associated with survival ---both with regard
to dealing with hostile environments, and in furthering the species
through procreation (LeDoux, 1996). Antonio Damasio's Somatic Marker
Theory Neurologist Antonio Damasio has worked with and studied
individuals with damage to regions of the brain having to do with
emotion. He has discovered that emotion is necessary to rational
thought. Further, he found that body sensations cue awareness of the
emotions. Damasio (1994) concludes that to be able to make a rational
decision, one has to be able to feel the consequences of that decision.
Just projecting a cognitive judgment is not enough; it is the feel of it
that counts. According to Damasio, an emotion is a conglomerate of
sensations that are experienced in differing degrees, positive and
negative. They make up what he calls somatic markers, which are used to
help guide decisionmaking. That is, body sensations underlie emotions
and are the basis for weighing consequences, deciding direction, and
identifying preferences.

The most recognizable example of the function of somatic markers are the
kinds of choices people make everyday based on "gut feelings."

The Somatic Basis of Emotion The following four-part exercise is
intended to offer a firsthand experience of what is meant by the somatic
basis of emotion. First, take a minute to survey the sensations of your
body right now. Notice your breathing---where and how deep. What is your
skin temperature---is it consistent all over? Check your heart
rate---either subjectively or by taking your pulse. Check out the
position of your shoulders---are they raised, fallen, hunched? Are they
tense or relaxed? Notice the sensations in your gut--- relaxed, tense,
butterflies, hungry, etc. Lastly, notice if you are moving or twisting
or tilting your body or any body part in a particular way. Second, think
about the emotion of anger. Remember, the last time you were angry. Can
you bring forth any of that feeling? What were you angry about and who
were you angry with? What did you say and/or think? Are there any
remnants of that emotion? Again survey your breathing, skin temperature,
heart rate, shoulder position and tension, stomach sensations. Also
notice your position, posture, or behavior. Has anything changed from
your first survey: autonomic signs, muscle tension, movement? Third,
remember a time you felt happy and safe. Where were you? What were you
wearing? Who were you with? Bring up the scene with as much visual,
auditory, and sensory imagery as you can muster. What do you feel in
your body? Has it changed from when you were feeling angry? Is your
muscle tension the same? How about your heart rate? Are you smiling?
Fourth, remember a time you felt afraid. Do not pick your worst
traumatic event, but something with a small amount of

fear. What was it that scared you? When you remember it now, what
happens in your body? Are you breathing differently? Has your heart rate
changed? Have muscles become tense or flaccid? What is the temperature
of your hands and feet? Before ending the experiment, return to the
memory of when you felt happy and safe. Bring back the imagery of the
place, activity, and others who were present. Now what do you sense in
your body?

Emotions and Trauma Anger/Rage Anger is an emotion of self-protection.
It may involve an effort to prevent injury or specify a boundary. It is
also a common response to having been threatened, hurt, or scared, or to
the person who caused it. Anger can escalate to rage when the threat is
extreme or when assertions of "Don't!" or "Stop!" are not respected.
When anger or rage become chronic in the wake of trauma, difficulties
can emerge in an individual's daily life. Inappropriate or misdirected
anger can interfere with interpersonal relationships and job stability;
provoking others to anger can become a danger in itself. How many
instances of "road rage," for example, are incited by a short temper
that has its roots in unresolved trauma? Anxiety/Fear/Terror Fear alerts
one to danger or potential harm. Both fear and anxiety are common
emotions for those with PTS and PTSD. LeDoux (1996) distinguishes
between the two: Fear, he believes, is stimulated by something in the
environment; anxiety is stimulated within the self. LeDoux also sees
fear as the driving force in several psychological disorders: phobias,
anxiety and panic disorders, and obsessive-compulsive disorders. Terror
is the most extreme form of fear. It is central to the experience of
trauma, the result of the (perception of) threat to life. The biology of
terror

involves the HPA axis and sympathetic nervous system arousal discussed
previously in this chapter. Once the trauma is over, terror usually
reduces to fear, even for those suffering its aftermath. However, during
a flashback, terror can return in all of its original intensity. One of
the problems for individuals with PTS and PTSD is that fear persists
long after the threat abates, frequently associating to more and more
aspects of their environment. The fear they once felt to an external
threat becomes anxiety generated from within. As discussed earlier, this
might be caused by insufficient cortisol production, or it could be
caused by a continued perception of threat. Whatever the cause, the
result is debilitating. When fear is so broadly generalized, its
protective function becomes handicapped. When everything is perceived as
dangerous, there is no discrimination of what truly is dangerous. It is
like a burglar alarm that's ringing all the time. You never know when it
is ringing for real. It is typical for those with PTSD to repeatedly
fall prey to dangerous situations. Their internal alarm systems are so
overloaded that they have become disabled. One result of trauma therapy
is the reestablishment of the protective function of fear.
Shame---Disappointment in the Self Shame is a difficult emotion to deal
with in any context. This is no less true for shame that arises as the
result of trauma. Individuals with PTSD often have a large component of
shame involved in the disorder. Shame is expected to be a component of
PTSD when the trauma is the result of sexual abuse or rape. It is less
expected under other circumstances. Why, then, is shame such a common
feature of other trauma constellations? In almost any unresolved trauma
there will be the question of "Why couldn't I stop that (do more, fight
back, run away, etc.)?" It is possible that individuals with PTSD
believe on some deep level that they have let themselves (and perhaps
others) down and/or that something integral is wrong with them that they
fell victim to the trauma. Of course, shame is not the only driving
force in PTSD, but it may be an important one. One of the difficulties
with shame is that it does not seem to be expressed and released in the
same way as other feelings: Sadness and grief are

released through crying, anger through yelling and stomping about, fear
through screaming and shaking. What, then, can be done to alleviate
shame when it does not discharge, abreact, or cathart? Acceptance and
contact appear to be keys to relieving shame. Though it appears not to
discharge, it does seem to dissipate under very special
circumstances---the nonjudgmental, accepting contact of another human
being. When considering shame, it can be important to look at both of
its sides. Usually shame is perceived as a terrible emotion, because it
is so awful to feel. Who wants to feel shame? However, shame, like every
other affect has a survival value. Fear, for example, warns of danger,
while anger tells the other not to take one step (literally or
figuratively) closer. What, then, is the survival value of shame? It
appears that shame, at least through evolution, has served to keep an
individual's behavior in line with cultural norms that further "survival
of the tribe." It socializes. Shame is an accepted component of
socialization in many cultures. It is an emotion that has been elicited
for thousands of years when a person's behavior has threatened not only
himself, but also his whole group. Shame is one element that stops us
from behaving in ways that might hurt us, our families, and our
communities. It may, in fact, be the emotion that underlies the
formation of a conscience. As an affect, shame is not all bad. It is
common knowledge that acceptance is the first step in resolving any
unwanted emotional state, and seeing shame as having a positive function
might assist in achieving that step. Grief Grief is a response to loss
or change. It is a great resource in the treatment of trauma and PTSD.
By its nature, grief is a sign that an experience has been relegated to
the past. It is usually a positive sign when a trauma client reaches the
stage where grief arises. Sometimes a client will fear that his grief is
a regression into trauma, but it is usually just the opposite, a healing
progression. When working with body awareness, most clients will notice
that their grief helps them to feel more solid, less fearful, if more
sad. Grief usually emerges at various steps along the way in trauma
therapy when an aspect of the trauma is resolved and the internal
experience changes from

present to past: "I was really scared," "That was really bad," etc. In
this context grief is a sign that healing is taking place.

Integrating vs. Disintegrating Emotional Expression---A Proposal
Catharsis and abreaction are often used interchangeably to describe
expression of emotions in the therapeutic setting. Catharsis actually
refers to the cleansing power of emotions when disturbing memories are
brought forth into consciousness. Abreaction is the emotional discharge
that often accompanies catharsis. Regardless of what one calls these
emotional eruptions, care must be taken, especially with trauma clients.
There is an ongoing professional debate as to the usefulness of
abreaction in the treatment of PTSD. When a client is crying or
expressing anger, it is not always easy to tell if such emoting is
helping or making matters worse. The question usually debated is whether
or not abreaction should be allowed or encouraged at all. However, the
relevant question is: When does abreaction help and when does it not?
This debate points the way to an important area for research: how to
distinguish integrating from disintegrating abreaction. Is it possible
that observation of autonomic nervous system (ANS) arousal could hold a
key to distinguishing these two ranges of emotional expression during
trauma therapy---the one that appears to be therapeutic and integrating
and the other that might be disintegrating and possibly retraumatizing?
It is possible that therapeutic abreaction can be recognized by
hallmarks of primarily parasympathetic arousal: The skin has color,
respiration is deep with emotional sounds coming on the exhale.
Disintegrating abreaction, on the other hand, might be revealed to have
hallmarks of primarily sympathetic arousal: The skin is pale, sometimes
clammy, respiration is rapid, sometimes jerky, emotional sounds come
mostly on the inhale. Observing the ANS to differentiate types of
abreaction could greatly facilitate and simplify the therapeutic
process.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER FOUR

Expressions of Trauma Not Yet Remembered Dissociation and Flashbacks

Traumatic dissociation and traumatic flashbacks are the two most salient
features of PTSD. Both are at the root of its most distressing
psychological and somatic symptoms. As mentioned before, dissociation
might be a constant factor in every case of PTSD. Some form of flashback
might also be a constant. These two aspects of PTSD often occur in
tandem; it is not possible to have traumatic flashbacks without some
form of traumatic dissociation also being operable, though dissociation
can occur without flashbacks. As mentioned before, dissociation implies
a splitting of awareness. During a traumatic incident, the victim may
separate elements of the experience, effectively reducing the impact of
the incident. The process of dissociation involves a partial or total
separation of aspects of the traumatic experience---both narrative
components of facts and sequence and also physiological and
psychological reactions. Amnesia of varying degrees is the most familiar
kind of dissociation, but there are others. One person might become
anesthetized and feel no pain. Another might cut off feeling emotions.
Someone else might lose consciousness or feel as if he had become
disembodied. The most extreme form of dissociation happens when

whole personalities become separated from consciousness (dissociative
identity disorder). Later those same reactions and/or others may still
be operational. One might continue to become anesthesized when under
stress, be unable to access emotions, or feel disembodied when anxious.
A flashback is a reexperiencing of the traumatic event in part or in its
entirety. Most familiar are visual and auditory flashbacks, but the term
flashback might also apply to somatic symptoms that replicate the
traumatic event in some way. Whatever the sensory system involved, a
flashback is highly distressing, because it feels as though the trauma
is continuing or happening all over again. In people with PTS and PTSD,
traumatic event(s) are remembered differently than nontraumatic events.
They are not yet actually "remembered" in the normal sense. Usually,
"memory" implies the relegation of an event into one's history---a
position on one's lifeline. Memory puts an experience into the past, "I
remember when ..." With PTS and PTSD traumatic memories become
dissociated, freefloating in time. They pounce into the present unbidden
in the form of flashbacks.

DISSOCIATION AND THE BODY The term dissociation has been within the
psychological lexicon for over one hundred and fifty years. It was first
coined by Moreau de Tours in 1845 (van der Hart & Friedman, 1989) as an
attempt to understand hysteria. The concept was further developed by
Pierre Janet beginning in 1887 with his article, "Systematized
Anesthesia and the Psychological Phenomenon of Dissociation." Janet
could be called the "father of dissociation," as it is his work in this
area that laid the foundation for current theories. He hypothesized that
consciousness was comprised of varying levels, some of which could be
held outside of awareness. In the latter part of the twentieth century,
Janet's work was rediscovered and applied to modern theories of
dissociation and PTSD (van der Hart & Friedman, 1989; van der Kolk,
Brown, & van der Hart, 1989). Even though the concept has been in use
for a long time, how dissociation occurs is not yet known, though there
is plenty of speculation.

It appears to be a neurobiological phenomenon that occurs under extreme
stress. Whether it is an attempt by body and mind to dampen traumas
impact or a secondary result of trauma is unknown. It is possible that
dissociation is the minds attempt to flee when flight is not possible
(Loewenstein, 1993). Individuals who report dissociative phenomena
during traumatic incidents express it as: "It was like I left my body."
"Time slowed down." "I went dead and could not feel any pain." "All I
could see was the gun, nothing else mattered." After an event the victim
can still feel dissociated, continuing to feel "beside oneself" long
after the event is over. In Sue Grafton's (1990), "G" is for Gumshoe,
protagonist Kinsey Millhone describes dissociation a few hours after she
was nearly shot as, "My souls not back in my body yet."

Calvin and Hobbes ©1992 Watterson. Reprinted with permission of
Universal Press Syndicate. All rights reserved.

Following a traumatic event, dissociative phenomena can continue for
years or even arise for the first time years later. They may be
identified by

numbing, flashbacks, depersonalization, partial or complete amnesia,
outof-body experiences, inability to feel emotion, unexplained
"irrational" behaviors, and emotional reactions that seemingly have no
basis in reality. It is likely that some form of dissociation is fueling
every case of PTS and PTSD.

The SIBAM Model of Dissociation Peter Levine's SIBAM dissociation model
is most useful for conceptualizing dissociation. It is based upon the
supposition that any experience is comprised of several elements.
Complete memory of an experience involves integrated recall of all of
the elements. SIBAM is the acronym for: Sensation, Image, Behavior,
Affect, and Meaning (Levine, 1992). These are the elements of experience
identified by Levine. He postulates that elements of highly
distressing/traumatic experiences can be dissociated from one another.
This postulation is based on the premise that less distressing
experiences remain intact in memory. A simple example of a complete
experience can be found in the memory of last night's dinner: I had a
Mexican meal. Right now I can still feel the bite of the chilis in my
mouth (sensation). I can visualize my plate with the variety of colors
(image). There is more saliva in my mouth and a urge to swallow
(behavior). I feel content and peaceful as I remember the pleasant meal
(affect). And it was a relaxing break from my work (meaning). Memories
associated with a greater degree of stress can also be remembered fully.
When Karen was about 6 she fell from a tree swing. When as an adult she
described the incident during a therapy session, she remembered she was
pushed from behind: "I can feel the hands on my back side and the drop
feeling in my stomach from the swish of the swing (sensation). I can see
the

ground below as I swing, and then the sky above after I fell (image). I
feel a little anxious, and then angry as I remember (affect) and I stop
breathing so deeply (behavior). I remember feeling I was out of control
because the girl pushing me wouldn't stop (meaning)." Levine proposes
that during some episodes of traumatic stress elements of the experience
become disconnected. An individual with PTS or PTSD might later report a
disturbing visual memory (image) and a strong emotion connected to it
(affect), but cannot make any sense of it (dissociated meaning); a child
might exhibit repetitive play after a disturbing event (behavior), but
doesn't display any emotion (dissociated affect) or appear to remember
it at all (image). One shortcoming of the SIBAM model is that there is
no mechanism for distinguishing traumatic dissociation from simple
forgetting. Of course, forgetting might be just the result of an
experience not being significant enough to encode fully or at all into
long-term memory. Returning to the concept of memory systems,
understanding dissociation in the context of the SIBAM model becomes
easier. Implicit memory involves sensory images, body sensations,
emotions, and automatic behaviors. Explicit memory involves the facts,
sequence, and resolution (meaning). Dissociation can appear in many
forms, as varying combinations of elements are dissociated. And of
course, unless there is complete amnesia, when some elements are
dissociated others are associated. In Figure 4.1, possible pairings are
proposed for understanding three symptoms of PTSD. Figure 4.1. A
sampling of relationships of dissociated SIBAM elements with specific
trauma reactions. The dark lines indicate which elements are associated;
the lighter lines, which elements are dissociated.

Clients with anxiety and panic attacks may talk persistently about
disturbing physical sensations and resulting fear (affect). It may be
difficult or impossible for them to identify what they heard or saw that
triggered the anxiety (image), what they need to do to reduce the
anxiety (behavior), or what the fear actually stems from (meaning).
Clients trapped in visual flashbacks will shuttle between the images and
terror, blocked in their ability to feel their body in the present
(sensation), move in a way that would break the spell (behavior), or put
the memory into context (meaning). The SIBAM model can be an effective
tool for helping to identify which elements of an experience are
associated and which are dissociated. Once identified, missing elements
can be carefully assisted back into consciousness when the client is
ready. (Charlie remembered most of the attack; he had visual images of
it. He was very aware of his body sensations and emotions, and he knew
what it meant to him. However, he was missing at least two salient
pieces. One was an additional aspect of meaning: being

able to discriminate the dog who attacked him from other dogs. The other
was a protective behavioral strategy that he could engage to protect
himself See Chapter 8 for a description of how those elements were
finally integrated.)

FLASHBACKS The term flashback was popularized in the 1960s to describe
disturbing sensory experiences reported by individuals who had used the
drug LSD. Following use of the drug---days, weeks, even years
later---some of them reexperienced aspects of their most frightening
hallucinogenic "trips." Traumatic flashbacks are quite similar. They can
occur while awake or in the form of nightmares that disrupt sleep. One
client called them "having nightmares while I am awake." Traumatic
flashbacks are comprised of sensory experiences of terrible events
replayed with such realism and intensity that they are difficult to
distinguish from in-the-moment reality. Flashbacks that are primarily
visual and/or auditory are the type most commonly identified. They are
easily recognized, as the individual can usually describe what he is
seeing or hearing. Less familiar are flashbacks that are primarily
emotional, behavioral, and/or somatic. Instances of hyperarousal,
hyper-startle reflex, otherwise unexplainable emotional upset, physical
pain, or intense irritation may all be easily explained by the
phenomenon of flashback. Lindy, Green, and Grace (1992) reported on
sensory and behavioral flashbacks, describing what they termed "somatic
reenactment" of traumatic events. One woman's recurring somatic and
behavioral flashback involved a persistent, debilitating symptom of
urinary urgency that caused her repeated, unnecessary trips to the
restroom. Both symptom and behavior developed following a restaurant
fire where her life was literally spared by an empty bladder; her
friends had died, trapped in the restroom. She had not needed to join
them and escaped with her life. "Mrs. F's symptom repetitively captured
the moment when she, sensing no pressure on her bladder, chose not to
join her friends while they, sensing full bladders, went to their
deaths" (Lindy et al., 1992, p. 182). This example poignantly
illustrates how someone can act in ways that seem to make no

sense unless you know the trauma history. However, the nature of somatic
reenactment becomes clear when the missing pieces of information are
supplied. It is possible that certain unexplainable physical symptoms
that puzzle doctors and plague patients may be incidents of somatic
reenactment. Behavioral flashbacks are quite common, though not often
recognized as such. Young children, for example, are apt to act out
their traumatic experiences rather than verbalizing them. Which types of
behavior are flashbacks is sometimes not clear. For example, is the
child who molests or physically harms another youngster being
aggressive, or is he reenacting what was done to him? This is another
area worthy of scientific research.

Flashbacks and the Brain Flashbacks can be varied. They can involve the
recall of implicit memory of a traumatic event in the absence of
explicit memory, so that the references necessary to make sense of the
memory or to put it in perspective are lacking. They can also involve
explicit memory of the sequence (including scenes) of the whole or parts
of the event. Flashbacks almost always include the emotional and sensory
aspects of the traumatic experience; that is why they are so disturbing.
This implies that the amygdala is part and parcel of the flashback
process. At the same time, it appears that the contextual features
typical of hippocampal processing are absent, which would be consistent
with theories indicating hippocampal suppression during trauma and
trauma recall (Nadel & Jacobs, 1996; van der Kolk, 1994, among others).
In addition, flashbacks are usually set in motion through either
classically conditioned or state-dependent triggers. That would imply
that the whole nervous system is involved in the phenomenon. Three
examples: Roger was in his early twenties when as a rookie policeman he
shot and killed a suspect for the first time. He froze as he watched
blood flow from the man's chest. He kept yelling, "I'm sorry. Why'd you
make me do that?" He seemed to recover and handle the situation well
until two years later when he was the first officer on the scene where a
man had been shot

during a brawl. The next officer to arrive found Roger yelling those
same words, apparently confusing the two situations. With Roger it is
clear that a visual cue, blood flowing from a dead man's chest,
triggered his flashback. He was horrified to have killed someone. When
at first he could not reconcile what had happened, he just forgot about
it and it seemed not to bother him anymore. Obviously that was not the
case. Marie was 29 when her daughter, Tanya, turned 5. On the first day
of kindergarten, Marie went into a panic and would not let Tanya go to
school. Marie kept Tanya home for several weeks, panicking each morning
when she should have dropped her off at school. The rest of the day,
Maria was fine. Finally her husband convinced her to seek treatment.
Maria had reacted without knowing why. It was only during psychotherapy
that she recalled being molested at the same age in her kindergarten.
Newspaper archives confirmed that a teacher's aide had been convicted of
molesting several of the children. Marcy suffered chronic bladder
infections as a child. She was subject to many forms of invasive
treatments in an effort to cure her condition. As she grew up, though
she always remembered having the infections, she had no memory of the
doctor visits. Shortly after she was married she suffered a bout of
cystitis---not uncommon for a new bride. During the doctor's
examination, she became so hyperaroused that she broke into a cold sweat
and became panicked. She was unable to tell the doctor what she was
feeling and she proceeded to faint. Marcy's sensory flashback was
triggered by sensation and posture. It was only later that she was able
to connect her reaction to her earlier treatments. They had clearly been
more distressing than she had remembered.

Summary

Understanding the phenomenon of flashbacks is one of the best ways to
consolidate the theory that has been presented in Part I. Flashbacks are
comprised of dissociated, implicitly stored information that becomes
elicited under state-dependent conditions. They can be triggered by
interoceptive or exteroceptive sensory cues, and are expressed through
hyperarousal of the autonomic nervous system as well as behaviors
directed by the somatic nervous system. In Part II, principles and
techniques for stopping and preventing flashbacks, as well as other
trauma-related symptoms, will be presented.

OceanofPDF.com

PART TWO

Practice OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER FIVE

First, Do No Harm

Timing Toast There's an art of knowing when. Never try to guess. Toast
until it smokes and then twenty seconds less. ---Piet Hein

Most psychotherapists know all too well just how tricky trauma therapy
can be---regardless of the theory or techniques that are being applied.
The risk of a client's becoming overwhelmed, decompensating, having
anxiety and panic attacks, flashbacks, or worse, retraumatization,
always lingers. Reports of clients' getting such overwhelming flashbacks
during therapy sessions that the treatment room is misinterpreted as the
site of the trauma and the therapist perceived as the perpetrator of the
trauma are common. It is also not unusual for clients to become unable
to function normally in their daily lives during a course of trauma
therapy---some even requiring hospitalization. Working with trauma
seems, universally, to be rather more precarious than other areas of
psychotherapy. We talk about the dangers, but we do not usually write
about them.

The dangers inherent in the therapeutic treatment of trauma are not news
even though posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) did not appear as an
official diagnosis until the publication of DSM-III in 1980. In 1932,
psychoanalyst Sándor Ferenczi presented a courageous paper before the
12th International Psychoanalytical Congress in Wiesbaden. In it he
admitted to his colleagues that psychoanalysis could be retraumatizing:
"some of my patients caused me a great deal of worry and
embarrassment... \[they\] began to suffer from nocturnal attacks of
anxiety even from severe nightmares, and the analytic session
degenerated time and again into an attack of anxiety hysteria"
(Ferenczi, 1949, p. 225). He acknowledged that the usual way to explain
such phenomena among his colleagues had been to blame the patient for
having "too forceful resistance or that he suffered from such severe
repressions that abreaction and emergence into consciousness could only
occur piecemeal." But he dug deeper, "I had to give free rein to
self-criticism. I started to listen to my patients. ..." He went on to
speculate that both premature interpretations, and unspoken
countertransference feelings could lead to an undermining of the
therapeutic process, including patient decompensation to the point of
"hallucinatory repetitions of traumatic experiences" (Ferenczi, 1949).
In a more recent but equally courageous paper, "Relieving or Reliving
Childhood Trauma?" Onno van der Hart and Kathy Steele (1997) remind us
that directly addressing traumatic memories is not always helpful and
can sometimes be damaging to our clients. They propose that those
clients who are not able to tolerate memory-oriented trauma treatment
may still benefit from therapy geared to relieve symptoms, increase
coping skills, and improve daily functioning. Just what is going wrong
when trauma therapy becomes traumatizing? A client is most at risk for
becoming overwhelmed, possibly retraumatized, as a result of treatment
when the therapy process accelerates faster than he can contain. This
often happens when more memories are pressed or elicited into
consciousness---images, facts, and/or body sensations---than can be
integrated at one time. The major indicator of overly accelerated
therapy is that it produces more arousal in the client's autonomic
nervous system (ANS) than he has the physical and psychological
resources to handle. It is like an automobile speeding out of control,
the driver unable to find and/or apply the brakes.

ON BRAKING AND ACCELERATING I've taught several friends to drive. The
lessons always took place in my car. I sat in the passenger seat with no
dual controls. Being a bit worried about my own safety as well as that
of my student and my car, I always began the same way. First, before my
driving student was allowed to cause the car to move forward, I taught
her how to stop, how to brake. My driving student was drilled in
shifting her foot to the brake pedal repeatedly until the movement was
automatic, accurate, and performed confidently without looking. Only
when my student (and I) were secure in her ability to find the brake
pedal and stop the car reflexively did I deem it safe for her to use the
gas pedal and learn to (slowly) accelerate, while periodically returning
to the brake pedal---stop and go. The more confident my student became
in handling the car and braking appropriately, the more acceleration
(within the bounds of the speed limit) she could dare. Safe driving
involves timely and careful braking combined with acceleration at the
rate that the traffic, driver, and vehicle can bear. So does safe trauma
therapy. It is inadvisable for a therapist to accelerate trauma
processes in clients or for a client to accelerate toward his own
trauma, until each first knows how to hit the brakes---that is, to slow
down and/or stop the trauma process---and can do so reliably,
thoroughly, and confidently (Rothschild, 1999).

Why Brake, Slow Down, or Stop the Therapy Process? The symptoms of PTSD
are depleting. Typically, the client with PTSD alternates periods of
frenetic energy and periods of exhaustion. Sometimes the therapy process
is difficult because the client just doesn't have the reserves necessary
to focus, confront, and resolve the issues at hand.

Reducing hyperarousal both in the therapy session and in the client's
daily life will not only give the client much needed relief but also
enable him to rest more effectively. This, in turn, will give him a
greater capacity and resources to face his traumatic past. A useful
analogy is to liken the person with PTSD to a pressure cooker. The
unresolved trauma creates a tremendous amount of pressure both in the
body and in the mind in the form of ANS hyperarousal. With a modern
pressure cooker, once the pressure is built up, it becomes impossible to
open it, but if you could it would explode. You must first slowly
relieve the pressure, a little "pft" at a time. Then, and only then, can
you open any pressure cooker safely. The same applies to PTS and PTSD.
If you try to open the client up to trauma while the pressure is
extreme, you risk explosion---which in a client's case can mean
decompensation, breakdown, serious illness, or suicide. However, with
judicious application of the brakes to gradually relieve the pressure,
the whole process of trauma therapy becomes less risky. Each client
should be evaluated on an individual basis. Some require more liberal
braking than others. Optimally, the pace of the therapy should be no
slower than necessary, but no quicker than the client can tolerate while
maintaining daily functioning.

EVALUATION AND ASSESSMENT Determining which type of trauma and which
type of trauma client you are dealing with will go a long way in helping
to determine the treatment plan. Lenore Terr (1994) has distinguished
two types of trauma victims, Type I and Type II. She originally made
this distinction with regard to children. Type I refers to those who
have experienced a single traumatic event. Type II refers to those who
have been repeatedly traumatized. Terr's typing system is quite
applicable to adults, though further designation is useful. Two subtypes
of Terr's Type II traumatized individuals should be distinguished: Type
IIA are individuals with multiple traumas who have stable backgrounds
that have imbued them with sufficient resources to be able to separate
the individual traumatic events

one from the other. This type of client can speak about a single trauma
at a time and can, therefore, address one at a time. Type IIB
individuals are so overwhelmed with multiple traumas that they are
unable to separate one traumatic event from the other. The Type IIB
client begins talking about one trauma but quickly finds links to
others---often the list goes on and on. Type IIB clients can also be
divided into two categories. The Type IIB(R) is someone with a stable
background, but with a complexity of traumatic experiences so
overwhelming that she could no longer maintain her resilience. Typical
of this type of client are the Holocaust survivors described in the
aforementioned Norwegian study by Malt and Weisaeth (1989). Type IIB(nR)
is someone who never developed resources for resilience, as described by
Schore (1996). One of the reasons for evaluating the client's trauma
type is that each has different therapeutic needs, especially with
regard to the therapeutic relationship and transference. Usually, Type I
and Type IIA individuals require less attention to the therapeutic
relationship and develop a less intense transference to the therapist.
Many have already internalized the resources that might be offered
within the framework of a long-term, transference-focused relationship.
This is not to say that transference issues will not arise; however,
with this kind of individual, the therapeutic relationship is in the
background and their need to work on specific traumatic memories is the
foreground. After the initial interview and assessment, Type I and Type
IIA clients can usually move quickly to working directly with the
traumatic incident(s) that brought them to therapy. For Type IIB
clients, on the other hand, resource (re)building through the
therapeutic relationship will be a prerequisite to directly addressing
traumatic memories. With the Type IIB(R), the therapeutic relationship
will help reacquaint the client with resources she knew but has lost
touch with due to the complex and overwhelming nature of the traumas she
has endured. With the Type IIB(nR) client, the therapeutic relationship
may be the whole of the therapy, building resources and resilience that
were never developed. The special needs of both categories of Type IIB
clients will be further discussed in the following section on the
therapeutic relationship. There is an additional type of client that is
worthy of mention when discussing trauma clients. This is the client who
has many symptoms of PTSD but reports no identifying event(s) that
qualify him for that diagnosis.

Scott and Stradling (1994) proposed an additional diagnostic category
they call prolonged duress stress disorder (PDSD). Chronic, prolonged
stress during the developmental years (from neglect, chronic illness, a
dysfunctional family system, etc.) can take its toll on the autonomic
nervous system, just short of pushing it to the point of fight, flight,
or freeze. The needs of this type of client often resemble those of the
Type IIB(nR) client. When they do, the most helpful treatment method may
also be the same. In both instances, the therapeutic relationship has
the potential to infuse many of the coping skills and resilience that
may have been missed during development.

THE ROLE OF THE THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP IN TRAUMA THERAPY There can be
a tendency for a trauma therapy to be focused more on individual
traumatic incidents than on the overall impact a trauma has on the
client's interpersonal relationships, including the therapy
relationship. For some clients that bias is beneficial; for others it
can be detrimental. It is important to address, at least briefly, the
role of the therapeutic relationship in trauma therapy in order to
stress the individual needs of trauma clients. In addition, the body
does figure significantly in work with the therapeutic relationship, as
attention to it while focusing on the therapistclient interaction can be
very informative. Observing signs of autonomic nervous system arousal,
patterns of tension, and intentional movements (Levine's \[1992\] name
for slight muscle contractions that may indicate a behavioral intention
that has not been fulfilled) may provide insight into the impact of the
relationship between therapist and client. With some trauma clients, the
trauma is reenacted in the transference---sometimes as psychological
symptoms (i.e., mistrust), sometimes as somatic symptoms (as with the
case example on p. 141). Schore (1996) suggests that experiences in the
therapeutic relationship are encoded primarily as implicit memory, often
effecting change within the synaptic connections of that memory system
with regard to bonding and attachment. Attention to the therapeutic
relationship will, with some clients,

help to transform negative implicit memories of relationships by
creating a new encoding of a positive experience of attachment. When
this is successful, the client internalizes a new representation of a
caring relationship in both mind and body. This does not change the
clients past, but will give him a new somatic marker (Damasio, 1994)
when he thinks of relationships or anticipates entering into one(s) in
the future. When successful, the positive attachment to the therapist
can change habituated avoidance or fear of interpersonal relationships
into desire for healthy contacts.

The Therapeutic Relationship: Foreground or Background? It is generally
accepted that the therapeutic relationship is critical to the outcome of
any psychotherapy. This is no less so in trauma therapy; however, it
will be of varying importance. Direct work with traumatic memories
should not begin until the therapeutic relationship is secure for the
client and the client feels safe with the therapist. Many clients will
move through this stage fairly quickly, sometimes even by the second or
third session. Others will require several sessions before they feel
safe with the therapist and the therapy process. For those clients the
principles and tools outlined in future chapters will aid in preparing
them for the difficulties of delving into their traumatic memories with
the models of trauma therapy favored by their therapists. There are also
a good number of trauma clients for whom developing safety within the
therapeutic relationship will take a very long time. In some cases,
working on feeling secure in that relationship may in fact be a large
portion of the therapy, pushing direct work with trauma to the
sidelines. The building of resources outlined in the next two chapters
will be important for such clients: body awareness, braking, muscle
toning, resource building, boundaries, dual awareness, etc. Trauma
issues will not be avoided, though they cannot be addressed directly.
Instead, much of the traumatic material will arise within the
interaction between the therapist and the client. When that happens,
trauma is addressed through the transference the client develops to the
therapist as well as the therapist's own countertransference reactions.
This type of trauma therapy is often arduous. However, it can be

very rewarding when both therapist and client are willing and able to
see it to completion. What distinguishes these types of trauma clients?
Why is the therapeutic relationship a more critical aspect of their
therapy? What happens if the therapist misjudges and directly addresses
trauma prematurely with this kind of client? It is the Type IIB trauma
client for whom the therapeutic relationship will be most urgent.
Included in this category is what Judith Herman (1992) calls complex
PTSD. As discussed above, these clients have suffered such massive
and/or multiple trauma that they lack the resources and resilience
necessary for any direct confrontation of traumatic memories to be
constructive. A betrayal of trust appears to figure in the overall
picture of these clients. Many clients in this group have suffered at
the hands of others in some way, either through neglect in their
developing years or humancaused victimization at any age (abuse,
assault, rape, incest, war, torture, domestic violence, etc.). The
earlier this has occurred in life, the greater the damage to the ability
to trust other humans. When victimization occurs later in life, betrayal
of previously developed trust is the larger issue. In some cases
developmental deficits (neglect or other bonding failures) may also be a
factor. As discussed in Chapter 2, failures of attachment can contribute
to an individual's vulnerability to developing PTSD or other disorders
(Schore, 1996). With clients who have suffered interpersonal trauma,
addressing trust issues in the therapeutic relationship increases in
importance. The client who has never been able to trust another will
need a chance to build it. The individual whose trust has been betrayed
will need the chance to reestablish it. Both processes take time.
Without trust, traumatic memories cannot be constructively confronted.
Not until trust in the therapist is established does the client have an
ally with whom to confront his traumas. If traumatic memories are
addressed directly before this trust has been developed, the client will
be in the unfortunate situation of confronting his traumas (often again)
in isolation. Under that condition, not only is the trauma not resolved,
but it also can be made considerably worse.

Affect and Pain Regulation While Allan Schore (1994) does not ponder the
issue of trust directly, his massive work in the area of early bonding
and attachment holds many clues to building trust with the Type IIB
trauma client. Schore asserts that bonding between caretaker and infant
is necessary for the child to develop the capacity to regulate its own
emotions. He suggests that this capacity grows through the interaction
of the child and the caretaker over time and has three critical phases:
attunement, misattunement, and reattunement (Schore, 1994). Basically,
the child and caretaker interact in face-to-face contact. As this
proceeds at tolerable levels for the infant, it remains in contact
(attunement). When the arousal level goes too high---either because of
excitement or because of anger or disapproval on the part of the
caretaker ---the infant breaks contact (misattunement). When the
infant's level of arousal reduces again to a tolerable range, it
reestablishes contact with the caretaker---usually at a higher level of
arousal than was previously tolerated before (reattunement) (Schore,
1994). This type of interaction forms the basis of attachment and may be
critical to increasing the child's (and later the adult's) capacity to
regulate stress, emotion, and pain. When 6-year-old Tony fell and gashed
her leg it hurt very much. In addition, she was very frightened as she
was wheeled into the emergency room to be stitched up and her mother was
told to stay outside. Tony became hysterical. Finally, the doctor
allowed her mother to stand in the doorway of the emergency room, where
Tony could see her. Tony vividly recalls how both her terror and her
pain reduced dramatically at the sight of her mother. As the doctor
worked on her leg, Tony kept her eyes riveted on her mother's.
Implications for the therapeutic relationship are many. Most therapists
are familiar with its affect-regulating function. Unstable clients will
often, for periods of time, seek out the therapist when upset, calming
or crying with relief as they first catch sight of the therapist in the
waiting room or at the sound of the therapist's voice on the telephone.
There are a number of

clients who are soothed between sessions just by hearing the therapist's
outgoing voicemail message. Attunement, Misattunement, and Reattunement
There is a conundrum with some Type IIB trauma clients. Trust in the
therapist may grow following a conflict (a perception or suspicion of
betrayal or other type of disruption), provided it is followed by repair
of the relationship---misattunement and reattunement. When conflict risk
is high, it can be a good idea to prepare the client for periods of
perceived injury or betrayal by the therapist. Actual planning for such
occurrences can go a long way toward turning them into constructive
events. Frank had never in his life had someone to depend on but himself
Both of his parents had been alcoholics, his father violent. Frank was
fiercely independent and feared intimacy. He was also unstable
emotionally. He had trouble keeping a job, as he was prone to emotional
outbursts. The first stage of therapy was aimed at increasing his
stability. Resource building (see the next chapter), both physical and
psychological, figured strongly in our early work together. Locating
interpersonal resources, however was difficult. Frank's level of trust
in anyone was very low. From the start I believed Frank to be a good
candidate for premature therapy termination due to a conflict
(misattunement). I waited, however, to broach the subject until we had
developed a bit of a relationship. During an early therapy session I
discussed with Frank the likelihood that later in the therapy he might
become so angry with me that he would want to quit. He agreed that was
possible; it had, in fact, been a problem with three previous
therapists. I discussed Schore's concepts of attunement, misattunement,
and reattunement with Frank, explaining that misattunement was not only
predictable but desirable. Without it there was no opportunity for
reattunement, which was necessary to strengthen the relationship. What,
I asked, had he needed at those times when he could not resolve his
anger with the earlier therapists? He claimed that his previous
therapists had abdicated any responsibility for his feelings, that they
had been unwilling to see what they had actually done and, most
importantly, apologize.

Discussing this with Frank before the fact gave me many insights into
his personality, as well as the psychological injuries he had suffered.
He was able to further reveal that the pain of his father's violence had
paled when compared to his lack of remorse. Frank had never received an
apology for his father's violent behavior. A few weeks later, when I had
to reschedule an appointment due to illness, Frank became furious and
felt abandoned. He canceled his next appointment, leaving a message on
my voicemail that he would call me if and when he wanted another.
Because we had previously set the stage, I was in a good position to
make contact with him and remind him of the earlier prediction. I
suggested that he come in at least once for us to discuss what had
happened. He agreed, but he was still very angry. In the session he
ranted for a long time. When he seemed well vented, I ventured an
apology for not being available when he needed me. He was skeptical and
required reassurance that I really meant what I said and wasn't just
apologizing because of what he had told me earlier. When I explained
that I could see and hear the pain underneath his anger and felt
genuinely sorry to not have been there for him, he began to cry. When he
recovered he was able to accept my apology and our work together
continued. That was our first, but far from our last, experience with
misattunement and reattunement. Another type of misattunement can occur
when the client transfers the memory of a perpetrator onto the therapist
and becomes afraid in her presence. When this occurs, the therapist must
help the client to reality test and separate the two. This type of
transference is not conducive to trauma therapy, as the client needs the
therapist as an ally. Leaving a client to stew in this type of
transferential misattunement can be very detrimental to the therapy
process and can reinforce in the client a fear that nobody is safe. As
one can see, there are many routes to trauma treatment. The therapeutic
relationship is of more and less importance to trauma therapy depending
on the individual needs of the client. Evaluating the client's type as
well as current level of functioning will help determine how much
emphasis to give to the relationship.

SAFETY In the Client's Life The first rule of any trauma therapy is
safety (Herman, 1992). That applies not only within the therapy setting,
but also in the clients life. It is not possible to resolve trauma when
a client lives in an unsafe and/or traumatizing environment. Resolving
trauma implies releasing the defenses that have helped to contain it. If
one is still living in an unsafe or traumatic situation, this will not
be possible or advisable. When that is the case, helping the client to
be and/or feel safe must be the first step. Much of this is common
sense. For example: a battered wife must be safely separated from the
violent husband; a client who was assaulted in his home might need to
install extra door and window locks; a rape victim may need to await
dealing with the memory of the rape until the rapist is adjudicated and
imprisoned, etc. Another strategy for increasing safety in the client's
life is to identify and (temporarily) remove as many triggers as
reasonably possible. Sometimes clients will protest removing triggers.
They usually insist that they need to learn to live with their fears.
However, sometimes they need the relief that comes with removal of a
trigger to be able to later tolerate living with it. Temporarily
removing a trigger will sometimes reduce or eliminate its effect and it
can be returned to the client's life with little or no consequence.
Rodney frequently suffered episodes of depersonalization He literally
lost the sense of his own skin, a very frightening experience. I
suggested that he might regain it with the aid of a cool shower (the
temperature differential might bring back the sensation of the periphery
of his body, his skin---see a discussion of skin boundaries in Chapter
7). Though he agreed with this idea in principle, he was reluctant to
try it, he told me, because he was terrified to take a shower. "Oh!" I
responded, "What do you do instead?" "I just hold my breath and take one
anyway, as fast as I can," he replied. He was submitting himself to this
torture daily. At that point in time I was less interested in why he was
scared of the shower than I was in removing this daily terror from his
life---giving him some relief Inquiring further I

discovered that he was not afraid of water or washing himself just the
shower. I asked him if he could wash his hair in the kitchen sink and
take a sponge bath. Yes, both those would be fine. (Had bathing itself
been the issue, a bit more ingenuity would have been required to provide
some relief for him within the bounds of good hygiene.) We negotiated
that he would cease showering for at least three weeks. After four weeks
he reported to me that he had resumed daily showering. He still didn't
like it very much, but no longer suffered terror of it. Removing that
trigger for a brief period of time was enough to loosen its hold on him.

In the Therapeutic Setting No trauma therapy can or should take place in
the absence of a developed, secure relationship between client and
therapist. Of course, it is not possible for a client to fully trust a
new therapist; nor is it advisable. But there must be enough basis for
trust and some time for each to get used to the other. Some instances of
therapeutic failure can be traced to premature introduction of
techniques---sometimes during the first meeting. There should be at
least one session, preferably a minimum of two or three, before trauma
therapy techniques are applied, to allow the client time to get to know
and build trust in the therapist. But there is no rule of thumb. Some
clients may need years before they are ready to move beyond relationship
building to directly addressing traumatic memories.

DEVELOPING AND REACQUAINTING RESOURCES The more resources the client
has, the easier the therapy and the more hopeful the prognosis. When
taking a case history it is a good idea to be equally on the lookout for
resources as for traumas. It is advisable to evaluate resources and
build those that are lacking before embarking on a difficult course of
trauma therapy, though, of course, some must be developed along the way.
There are five major classes of resources: functional, physical,
psychological, interpersonal, and spiritual.

Functional resources include the practical, like a safe place to live, a
reliable car, extra locks, etc. In addition, it may be necessary to
provide resources in the form of protective contracts with clients
during trauma therapy. This idea stems from Transactional Analysis
(Goulding & Goulding, 1997). A trauma client is often confronted with
situations that mirror the issues being explored in therapy. It is a
mystical, if common, occurrence. The client working on trauma from a car
accident has a near miss; the one working on the aftermath of a rape is
followed at night, etc. The popular term for this phenomenon is
"synchronicity." Safety contracts can be helpful in those circumstances.
It may be useful, for example, to make a contract to pay extra attention
to safe driving with a client working on PTSD following a car accident,
or a contract for extra caution at night with a client who has been
assaulted. Physical strength and agility are examples of physical
resources. For some clients, weight training that increases muscle tone
will be beneficial. For others, techniques that drill the body in
protective movements, such as self-defense training, will be useful
adjuncts to trauma therapy. In general, building physical resources will
give many clients a greater feeling of confidence. Daniel had suffered
anxiety since surviving a big earthquake. He was hypervigilant, sleeping
poorly and even having trouble bathing. He felt he must be always at the
ready for the next quake. As he talked I noticed a dissonance in his
posture. He appeared to be leaning back comfortably in his chair, but
his feet were placed on the floor in a manner suggestive of preparation
to bolt. When I pointed this out to him he agreed that he was not able
to relax at any time; he was always preparing to dive under the nearest
table or run to the nearest doorway for protection. In addition, right
at that moment, his heart rate was elevated and his hands were sweaty. I
asked him if he had practiced any of these defensive maneuvers. He had
not. I suggested that he do so now, following the impulse in his already
defensively positioned feet. He did, bolting toward my office door. He
opened it and crouched in the doorway. I encouraged him to repeat that
movement several times---chair to doorway to crouch. After three
practices I inquired as to his heart rate and hand moisture. Both were
normalized. I

encouraged Daniel to continue practicing at home and at work, finding
the best routes to safety. By the next week his constant vigilance had
eased considerably, as he had by then anchored in his body the defensive
moves necessary to reach protection during an earthquake. Psychological
resources include (but are not limited to) intelligence, sense of humor,
curiosity, creativity (including artistic and musical talents), and
almost all defense mechanisms. It is empowering to regard defense
mechanisms as the positive coping strategies they once were. Each is a
positive resource. The only exceptions are defenses that harm other
people. Every defense was, at one time, an (usually successful) attempt
to protect the self. The problem with a defense mechanism is not in the
mechanism itself, but that it is one-sided, therefore limiting. What is
missing with each defense mechanism is the choice of its opposite
(Rothschild, 1995b). Three examples: 1. The defense of withdrawal is not
a problem in itself---who of us doesn't need to withdraw at times?
However, one is at a disadvantage when only able to withdraw and never
able to engage with others. On the other hand, the person who is afraid
to be alone and must always be in the company of others---who has no
capacity to enjoy solitude---is equally handicapped. 2. The person who
always expresses anger when stressed is able to defend herself, but
sometimes at a cost of alienating others. Though the person who is
unable to express anger may avoid alienation, he may be unable to defend
himself when necessary. Both strategies are resources. 3. Many would
envy an individual who can so dissociate at the dentist that painful
work can be done without anesthesia. But, of course, unchecked
dissociation of that caliber can cause problems in other areas of daily
functioning. What is needed in such an instance is to help the client
learn to

control his dissociation, maintaining the ability to do it when it is
useful (like at the dentist) and being able to stay present when that is
safer or more useful (for example, when driving). The solution to a
limiting defense mechanism is not in removing it, but in developing its
opposite for both balance and choice. Such a positive view can also help
the client who feels ashamed of his defenses. A client's current social
network, including spouse or partner, other family members, and friends,
is the core of interpersonal resources. In addition, remembering
significant people from the client's past can bring about positive
feelings and sensations. Remembered friends, parents, grandparents,
teachers, and neighbors can all be powerful resources used to facilitate
the therapy. Animals also belong in this category. Pets are often potent
sources of resource---especially current pets, but often past pets as
well. Alex's love of rock climbing was cut short when she had a serious
fall. She suffered a concussion and broken arm. Four years later she was
still plagued by images of her fall, sometimes waking in a cold sweat in
the middle of the night. As she told me about it she paled and her
breathing quickened. Her husband was not sympathetic. He had never
approved of her choice of sport and had been angry when she was injured.
That the accident still haunted her was, for him, assurance that she
would not go climbing again. As we explored the aftermath of the
accident (see Chapter 8 for the rationale behind working with the
aftermath of the trauma first), Alex remembered feeling totally
abandoned by her husband. His reaction was worse for Alex than her
physical injuries. She came home from the hospital in need of care and
nurturing, and he was too angry to provide it. He provided for her basic
needs but was unable to give her the nurturing support she needed. "How
did you survive that?" I asked. "You know," Alex said, "I don't think I
would have if it weren't for my Golden Retriever. Solo stayed with me
day and night, only leaving my side for short periods of time." I
encouraged her to remember Solo's attention now. Where did he

lie? How did his fur feel in her hand? Could she remember his warmth? As
she remembered her contact with Solo, Alex calmed and cried softly. She
felt touched to remember the dog's love for her. Her breathing
normalized and color returned to her face. Spiritual resources include
belief in a higher power, following a religious figure, adherence to
religious practice, and communing with nature. Sometimes utilizing a
client's spiritual resources is difficult for the therapist whose belief
system differs. One must come to terms with this countertransferential
response, since spiritual resources can be very powerful aids to the
healing of traumatic conditions. In addition, some victims of trauma
feel betrayed by their beliefs. For those individuals, reclaiming the
lost relationship to the spiritual will be a crucial step toward
healing. Sometimes, helping clients with PTSD look at how they have
survived their lives and their traumas is a useful adjunct to treatment.
Every survivor of trauma has had some role in his or her survival, even
if it is by freezing or dissociating. Through such an exercise, many
discover how many resources they actually have. The result can be very
hopeful. At the least, reminding clients of their resources can prevent
despair. Fifty-year-old Arnold was at the threshold of hospitalization.
His downward spiral following a work-related traumatic incident had
resulted in a belief that he was totally hopeless and helpless. He
feared his ability to cope was so lost that the hospital was his only
option. His wife forced him to call me for an appointment, and she had
to drive him as his anxiety was too high to come alone. During the
intake interview Arnold could only complain about all of the faculties
he had lost: He could no longer work, he had lost friends, everyone was
giving up on him, he was anxious all the time, he could do nothing for
himself. I picked up on that last comment and observed, "I see you are
clean shaven. Who shaved you today?" "Why, I did," he replied. "Who
dressed you, then?" I asked further. "I dressed myself," he answered a
bit suspiciously. I pressed on, "Who fed you your breakfast?" "I didn't
eat much," he asserted. "That's okay," I answered, "but what you did
eat, who fed you?" "Well I did, of course!" he answered,

beginning to get a little irritated with me. By the end of that session
Arnold was slightly encouraged. He had so convinced himself of total
helplessness, he had forgotten that he was still quite capable of taking
care of his own basic needs. Of course this one intervention was no
cure, but it was a microstep that enabled Arnold to remain at home.

OASES, ANCHORS, AND THE SAFE PLACE Oases Many trauma clients benefit
from engaging in activities that give them a break from their trauma.
What works will be different for each, but diverting activities have
common features. An oasis must be an activity that demands concentration
and attention. Watching TV and reading do not usually work well, as it
is easy to wander into one's own thoughts. Procedures that have not yet
become automatic often do the trick. For example, knitting will work for
some, but not for those who have been doing it all their lives---unless,
of course, an exceedingly difficult pattern is chosen. For some it will
be car repair, for others gardening; many find computer games or
solitaire work well. Whatever is chosen, its value as an oasis will be
recognized through body awareness (see the next chapter), by the
reduction in hyperarousal as well as quieting of internal dialogue.

Anchors The concept of anchors sprang from neuro-linguistic programming
(NLP) (Bandler & Grinder, 1979), but has been adapted for use in several
trauma therapies. Basically, an anchor is a concrete, observable
resource (as opposed to an internalized resource like self-confidence).
It is preferable that an anchor be chosen from the client's life, so
that the positive memories in both body and mind can be utilized.
Examples include a person (grandmother, a special teacher, a spouse), an
animal (favorite pet), a place (home, a site in nature), an object (a
tree, a boat, a stone), an activity

(swimming, hiking, gardening). A suitable anchor is one that gives the
client a feeling (in body and emotion) of relief and well-being. When
working with trauma, it is useful for each client to establish at least
one anchor to use as a braking tool anytime the therapy gets rough.
Anchors can also be improvised by introducing a previously noted
resource. I noticed that when Cynthia told me about her best friend
during the assessment interview her demeanor changed. She had entered
the office almost apologetically, fearful and suspicious. She sat
hunched, anxious, and pale. When speaking of her friend, though, Cynthia
literally expanded; her head straightened and her chest broadened. Color
rose to her cheeks and her breathing eased. I drew a star beside my
notes about her friend. Later during the interview, Cynthia became quite
pale while telling me about the many traumas she had experienced. She
reported that her heart was racing. At that point I interrupted and
suggested we go back to some of the things she had mentioned previously,
"What was your friend's name? I forgot to write it down. Tell me a
little more about her." Just naming her friend reduced Cynthia's
hyperarousal. While talking about the friend, color returned to
Cynthia's face, and she told me her heart rate had decreased. When she
was more relaxed, she was better able to resume naming the traumatic
incidents she thought I should know about. Anchors can also be used to
insert a different spin on a traumatic event--- not changing the fact of
it, but the internal impression. In a subsequent session further on in
Cynthia's therapy, I was again able to make use of her best friend.
Cynthia trembled as she related an incident of abuse at the hands of her
mother. She had been terrified and too little to defend herself I asked
her, "How would that incident have been different if your best friend
had been there?" "Well, that's not possible," Cynthia replied, "I didn't
know her then!" I persevered, "Of course, but if you had, and she had
been there at the time, how would it have been different?" "Well, she
would have stopped my mother completely. My friend is bigger than my
mother was, she could have overpowered her!" "If you remember

that incident now," I suggested, "and imagine your friend there, how do
you feel in your body?" "I feel calmer. (She begins to cry.) I wish she
had been there, it was so awful!" The tears were calm and healing.
Cynthia was beginning, for the first time, to grieve just how bad it had
been. Inserting an anchor, especially one from the client's current
life, cannot---in any way---change reality, but it might give a new
impression and help to separate the past trauma from current life.
Applying the anchor is easy. When the hyperarousal gets too high, the
therapist just changes the subject. "Let's just stop this for a moment.
Tell me about \[insert anchor\]." The connection can be deepened by
giving sensory cues that are associated to the anchor. One of the
biggest difficulties of applying anchors is getting used to interrupting
the client's "flow." When it is clear how much inserting anchors helps
the process, both therapist and client gain greater tolerance for such
interruptions. Anchors make it possible to continue addressing difficult
memories while periodically lowering the base level of hyperarousal
rather than allowing it to build and build. Each time the anchor is
used, the hyperarousal lowers. When the client resumes addressing her
trauma, it is from a lower level than before the break. In this way, a
traumatic memory can be fully addressed without the hyperarousal going
out of control. addressing trauma → hyperarousal → anchor → lowered
arousal Use of the anchor figures prominently in the detailed therapy
session at the end of Chapter 6.

The Safe Place The safe place is a specialized anchor. It was first used
in hypnosis for reducing the stress of working with traumatic memories
(see, e.g., Napier, 1996). A safe place is a current or remembered site
of protection (Jørgensen, 1992). It is preferable for the safe place to
be an actual, earthly location that the client has known in life. As
such, there will be somatic

resonance in the memory of it---sights, smells, sounds, etc., connected
to that site will all be recorded as sensory memory traces---which will
make it highly accessible and useful to the client. The client can
imagine his safe place during times of stress and anxiety, or it can be
used as any anchor is used, to reduce hyperarousal during a therapy
session.

And When Nothing Works? A few clients will appear unable to imagine
and/or use calming images of anchors and safe places. What may happen
with such individuals is that each time they begin to imagine one, it
becomes contaminated in some way and feels unsafe. This pitfall can
occur when the client believes that the fantasy controls him, rather
than that he controls the fantasy. For example, a client with a
nurturing grandparent as anchor will suddenly remember a disappointment,
or the client will become afraid a safe place in the woods could be
invaded. When this happens, the therapist needs to have a frank
discussion with the client, first reminding the client that it is his
fantasy and he can make it anything he wants, and then explaining that
what is required is not the perfect anchor or safe place but one that is
"good enough." The fantasy safe place and safe person can be controlled
in ways that real life places and people cannot. For example, limit the
anchor to the best or ideal memories of the grandparent. Another
strategy might be to imagine a barrier (visible or invisible) around the
safe place in the woods and/or sentries posted for protection
(Bodynamic, 1988--1992). Imagined embellishments that serve to
strengthen the calming effect of the anchor or safe place are often
useful in these circumstances. Problems with positive affect tolerance
can also limit the usefulness of an anchor or safe place. A small
percentage of clients will become anxious when imagining or actually
being in positive situations or feeling states. For some PTSD clients it
is difficult to differentiate the nervous system responses of positive
emotions (happiness, excitement, etc.) from those of anxiety; increased
heart rate and respiration can accompany both. Body awareness training
(see the next chapter) will help this discrimination, as anxiety is
usually accompanied by pallor and decreased temperature in the

face and extremities, whereas excitement and happiness are usually
accompanied by increased color and temperature. Another problem with
positive affect tolerance occurs when the client fears the good feeling
because he anticipates it will not last. Again, body awareness can be
useful in helping to recognize that no emotional or somatic state lasts
forever. Learning to follow the ebb and flow of somatic sensations may
reinforce the idea that emotional states also ebb and flow.

THE IMPORTANCE OF THEORY One of the ways the therapist can increase the
safety of trauma therapy is to be familiar with trauma theory. When the
therapist knows what she is doing and why, she is less apt to make
mistakes. Theory is more useful than technique, as techniques can fail,
but theory rarely lets you down. When one is well versed in the theory
of trauma, it is not even necessary to know a lot of techniques, as
ideas for interventions will arise from understanding and applying
theory to a particular client, at a particular moment, with a particular
trauma. Moreover, when a therapist is well versed in theory, it becomes
possible to adapt the therapy to the needs of the client rather than
requiring the client to adapt to the demands of a particular technique.
Sometimes teaching theory itself to the client will be just what is
needed. Teaching theory is especially useful when the client has
multiple traumas and is not ready for the use of techniques. Two
examples: Fred had struggled for a while to connect his debilitating
physiological reactions to beatings he received as a child.
Intellectually he knew that there must be a connection, but he couldn't
relate to it. One day he came to therapy very depressed. He was worried
because he had become "suicidal"---unusual for him. As we explored his
feelings and his body awareness he began to cry, "It's not that I want
to die, it's just that I feel so dead inside." A picture formed in my
mind. I asked him if he had ever seen a mouse caught by a cat. Having
grown up in a rural area, he had seen this many times; he remembered the
mouse "playing dead." I asked him to consider the mouse's behavior,
which led to a discussion about the

autonomic nervous system and the theory of freeze reactions. He was very
touched, quickly able to relate to the mouse's talent for surviving by
going dead. He remembered doing the same numerous times in response to
the beatings. After a few minutes of letting this information sink in,
it clicked. Fred realized that he was not suicidal after all, but
connecting to his own "mouse." His relief was palpable. That session was
a catalyst to his subsequent therapy. Having found a positive
explanation for his deadness, he became less afraid to identify other
body sensations and their connection to his traumatized past. Previously
frightening sensations became friends (like the mouse going dead for
survival) rather than enemies. Scott came to therapy in his early
twenties because he lacked selfconfidence. A major problem was his
inability to pass a driving test; he had failed numerous times. He felt
like a failure---all of his friends had passed their tests and begun to
drive. His parents were frustrated and could not understand what his
problem was. His driving teacher noticed that Scott could drive quite
competently at times, but at other times Scott would not even notice a
truck right next to him. The teacher was at her wit's end. On closer
probing during our first meeting, Scott described his difficulty as
something that sounded akin to a kind of dissociation. He would "space
out" and lose track of what he was doing and where he was going. As
Scott described this phenomenon to me, he began to dissociate in a
similar manner right in the therapy session. He lost track of what he
was going to say, became rather pale, and heard my voice from a great
distance. I changed the subject, pulling up something positive he had
mentioned previously, and he stabilized. He was then able to take up the
thread of what he had intended to say. After taking a case history,
which included several incidents of earlier trauma, I proceeded to
explain the function of the ANS and the phenomenon of dissociation.
Scott was easily able to see his dissociative reaction and speculate its
cause. The impact was dramatic. By the next session he had stopped
thinking of himself as a bungling and incompetent driver. He realized he
had a driving difficulty, not because something was inherently wrong
with him, but because he had some past experiences that were still
affecting him adversely. He was able to explain this to his parents and

friends, who mostly became more sympathetic. Amazingly, he was able to
use the information and the experience of controlling the dissociation
during the session to decrease his dissociation while driving. He would
distract his thoughts to something positive and then was able to keep
his focus on the road. Scott was so successful that soon after he was
able to pass his test. Scott, his instructor, parents, and friends were
all amazed. Moreover, as Scott's perception of his problem changed to
one of past traumatic incidents rather than innate ineptitude, his
self-perception also changed. He began to see himself as someone having
past experiences to deal with rather than being a "bungling fool." That
shift gave Scott the courage to take on other tasks, both physical and
interpersonal, that he had previously felt were beyond him. Of course,
such dramatic changes are not the norm. But for many, theory is a key
that unlocks a wealth of resources.

RESPECTING INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES Therapeutic error can be reduced by
never expecting one intervention to work the same for two clients. When
a technique does not work, it is advisable for the therapist to look for
the failure in the timing, or in the choice of or application of the
technique, not in the client. Consider that what this client needs may
not yet have been discovered. This perspective will keep the therapist
from blaming a client for "resistance." Further, it is a good idea for
any therapist working with PTSD to be trained in more than one modality.
This will go a long way in assuring that the therapy is tailored to the
needs of the client, not vice versa. And, of course, the therapist must
be prepared for those times when the best technique is no technique.
Sometimes the most effective intervention is just to be with the client
talking about mundane things.

TEN FOUNDATIONS FOR SAFE TRAUMA THERAPY

The following list distills the most salient points of safe trauma
therapy and serves as a review of this chapter. 1. First and foremost:
Establish safety for the client within and outside the therapy 2.
Develop good contact between therapist and client as a prerequisite to
addressing traumatic memories or applying any techniques---even if that
takes months or years. 3. Client and therapist must be confident in
applying the "brake" before they use the "accelerator." 4. Identify and
build on the client's internal and external resources. 5. Regard
defenses as resources. Never "get rid of" coping strategies/defenses;
instead, create more choices. 6. View the trauma system as a "pressure
cooker." Always work to reduce---never to increase---the pressure. 7.
Adapt the therapy to the client, rather than expecting the client to
adapt to the therapy. This requires that the therapist be familiar with
several theory and treatment models. 8. Have a broad knowledge of
theory---both psychology and physiology of trauma and PTSD. This reduces
errors and allows the therapist to create techniques tailored to a
particular client's needs. 9. Regard the client with his/her individual
differences, and do not judge her for noncompliance or for the failure
of an intervention. Never expect one intervention to have the same
result with two clients.

10. The therapist must be prepared, at times---or even for a whole
course of therapy---to put aside any and all techniques and just talk
with the client. Principles and techniques for increasing client
resources, slowing down processes, and applying the brakes follow in the
next chapters.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER SIX

The Body as Resource

A Toast The soul may be a mere pretense, the mind makes very little
sense. So let us value the appeal of that which we can taste and feel.
---Piet Hein

The potential benefits of being able to use the body as a resource in
the treatment of trauma and PTSD, regardless of the treatment model,
cannot be overemphasized. In this chapter, non-touch strategies and
interventions for increasing somatic resources---making the body an
ally---will be presented. Most should find the ideas outlined here to be
easily adapted to their own way of working.

BODY AWARENESS

Employing the client's own awareness of the state of his body---his
perception of the precise, coexisting sensations that arise from
external and internal stimuli---is a most practical tool in the
treatment of trauma and PTSD. Consciousness of current sensory stimuli
is our primary link to the here and now; it is also a direct link to our
emotions. As a therapeutic tool, simple body awareness makes it possible
to gauge, slow down, and halt traumatic hyperarousal, and to separate
past from present. Moreover, body awareness is a first step toward
interpreting somatic memory. The practice of concentrating on body
sensations and body processes is not new. There are many body-oriented
therapies that, more and less, use body awareness as the foundation of
or adjunct to their methods. The usefulness of cultivating awareness of
the state of the body has ancient roots in the Eastern practices of
meditation and yoga. The idea of utilizing body awareness as a tool of
Western psychotherapy was first introduced by Gestalt therapist Fritz
Perls in Ego, Hunger and Aggression in 1942. It was then popularized in
his 1969 book, In and Out of the Garbage Pail. Personal growth exercises
based on Perls's awareness principle---following shifts in precise
sensory awareness of the internal and external environments---were
published two years later in Awareness: Exploring, Experimenting,
Experiencing by John O. Stevens. Attention to the body has not commonly
been central to the psychotherapeutic treatment of trauma and PTSD.
While it is well documented that PTSD goes hand in hand with disturbing
bodily sensations and avoidance behaviors (APA, 1994), attention to
sensation and movement as a part of the trauma treatment strategy in
psychotherapy has not often been proposed.

What Is Body Awareness? It is difficult to define something as
subjective as body awareness. The following is a definition that will
have to suffice for the purposes of this discussion and future reference
in this book:

Body awareness implies the precise, subjective consciousness of body
sensations arising from stimuli that originate both outside of and
inside the body. Body awareness has everything to do with the awareness
of cues from the sensory nervous system discussed earlier. Just to
refresh your memory, body awareness from exteroceptors originates from
stimuli that have their origin outside of the body (touch, taste, smell,
sound, sights). Body awareness from interoceptors consists of sensations
that originate on the inside of the body (connective tissue, muscles,
and viscera). Body awareness is not an emotion, such as "afraid."
Emotions are identified by a combination of distinct body sensations:
shallow breathing + elevated heart rate + cold sweat = afraid Terms that
help to identify the various bodily sensations include (but are not
limited to): breathing: location, speed, and depth; position of a body
part in space; skin humidity (dry or moist); hot, cold; tense, relaxed;
big, small; restless, calm; movement, still; dizzy; shivers, prickles;
pressure, pulling; rotation, twist; contraction, expansion; pulse rate,
heartbeat; pain, burning; vibration, shaking; weak, strong; sleepy,
awake; yawning; tears, crying; light, heavy; soft, hard; tight, loose;
crooked, straight; balanced, unsteady; upright, tilted; butterflies;
shaky; empty, full

Developing Body Awareness Many clients already have a good idea of what
they sense in their bodies and will be able to communicate this to you.
With them, you can go straight to utilizing their body awareness as a
resource (see the next section). However, some clients, when asked,
"What are you aware of (or sense) in

your body right now?" will not know. They may be unable to feel their
body sensations at all, or they may feel something but not have the
vocabulary to describe the sensations. Others will have so little
contact with their bodies that when they are asked that same question,
they respond on a totally different topic, "It feels like what I was
telling you about my boss last week...." But do not despair. Most
clients can learn to identify and pay greater attention to their
sensations. Many will even find the experience quite rewarding. The
following exercise illustrates basic body awareness: • First, do not
move. Notice the position you are sitting in right now • What sensations
do you become aware of? Scan your whole body: notice your head, neck,
chest, back, stomach, buttocks, legs, feet, arms, hands. • Are you
comfortable?---Do not move, yet. • How do you know if you are
comfortable or not? Which sensations indicate comfort/discomfort? • Do
you have an impulse to change your position?---Do not do it yet, just
notice the impulse. • Where does that impulse come from? If you were to
change your position, what part of your body would you move first?---Do
not do it yet. First follow that impulse back to the discomfort that is
driving it: Is your neck tense? Is there somewhere that is beginning to
become numb? Are your toes cold? • Now follow the impulse and change
position. What changes have occurred in your body? Do you breathe
easier? Is a pain or area of tension relieved? Are you more alert? • If
you have no impulse to change your position you might just be
comfortable. See which bodily cues you get that signal that you are
comfortable: Are your shoulders relaxed? Is your breathing deep? Is your
body generally warm?

• Next, change your position whether or not you are comfortable (again,
if you already did it above). Change where or how you are sitting. Move
somewhere else: Try a new chair, stand up, or sit on the floor. Take a
new position and hold it. Then evaluate again: Are you comfortable or
not? Which bodily sensations tell you: tension, relaxation; warmth,
cold; ache; numbness; breathing depth and location, etc. This time also
notice if you are more alert or awake in this position or in the last
one. • Try a third position. Evaluate as above. • Jot a few notes about
your experience, keeping in the language of body sensation: tension,
temperature, breathing, etc. "When I was sitting in my chair I felt
tense in my shoulders and my feet were warm. When I moved to stand on
the floor, my feet became cold and my shoulders relaxed...." The above
exercise can be adapted for clients. It will help many to get the idea
of identifying body sensations, though some it will not. Following up
the exercise with inquiries about body awareness in subsequent therapy
sessions will reinforce and further develop this resource. For clients
who cannot distinguish sensations as they scan their body, specific
questions will help: "What is the sensation in your stomach right now?"
"What is the temperature of your hands?" "Do you notice where your
breath goes?" etc. With those for whom the whole area of body awareness
is just too foreign, frightening, untimely, and/or frustrating, it is
often possible to first approach it indirectly. One way to encourage
body awareness in such clients is by asking their opinion on room
temperature, if the chair cushion is soft or hard, or if they are
thirsty and want something to drink. Another strategy for increasing
body awareness would be to explore the kinesthetic sense: "Without
looking, can you tell how your legs (or hands) are positioned right
now?" Angie was trying to stay away from her abusive husband. Sometimes
he would show up where she was staying and she would go with him. It
wasn't

until later that she realized she had made a mistake. For her it was
like she entered an altered state. The fact that she couldn't control
her behavior, let alone describe what that state felt like, disturbed
her immensely; she felt stupid and ashamed. Body awareness was
difficult, generally, for Angie, but despite some anxiety, she was
willing to try. I decided not to ask her about her body specifically, as
she could quickly become frustrated when she did not produce the "right"
answer. Instead I asked, "Can you feel the chair under your buttocks?"
That she could feel. I ventured, "What does it feel like?" She was able
to describe how the consistency of the cushion felt, as well as that the
chair was unsteady since one leg was slightly shorter than the others.
"Do you feel more anxious, less anxious, or the same as when you
arrived?" She felt slightly less anxious. So far, so good; I could dare
a bit more. "You can feel the chair under you now. Do you think that
when your husband is around, you would be able to feel the chair?" Her
interest increased as she answered the question, "No, I don't think I
could. Actually, I don't think I can feel anything when I get around
him." For the first time she could describe an aspect of her altered
state: the absence of sensation. Already, via this short introduction to
her body, it began to make sense to Angie that if she couldn't feel
anything in the presence of her husband she would easily acquiesce. This
was a microstep on the road to helping her gain control over her life.
In a few instances it will be possible to eliminate some trauma symptoms
just by using body awareness. Such an intervention will not necessarily
resolve the trauma, but it could go a long way to restoring normal
functioning. At that point the client will be in a much more powerful
position to decide the direction of his therapy. Carl began having
periodic flashbacks and frequent panic attacks as an adolescent
following two bad LSD trips. He had tried medical help to no avail. At
25 he decided to try psychotherapy. After a few sessions Carl became
able to identify and describe what it was that initiated the current
panic attacks. It was a particular sensation in his gut that he
recognized as preceding the onset of a flashback. When he felt that
sensation, he feared he was about to have another one and broke into
panic. The fact that the

actual flashbacks were decreasing in frequency didn't help. That gut
sensation scared him and set the panic attacks in motion. We discussed
the alternatives. There were two possible directions the therapy could
take: (1) focusing on the here-and-now situation (gut sensation and
panic attacks), or (2) delving into the past (the bad LSD trips). Carl
did not want to go near memories of those LSD trips, but he was willing
to work on his current situation. We further developed his body
awareness and explored what the gut sensation felt like, specifically,
when it occurred. I asked Carl to become a detective, carefully noting
when he got the sensation, what time, under which circumstances, of how
long duration, etc. Over the next few weeks he found out that he usually
had that sensation around mid-morning on days that he was constipated.
On days that he had a morning bowel movement, there was no sensation to
contend with, and he would be free of panic. Then the way became clear.
The next assignment was for Carl to observe his morning routine and
breakfast menu to find out what was different on the non-panic days.
This was easy. On mornings that he woke up with at least one and a half
hours before he had to leave for work and ate breakfast, he would be
fine. On panic mornings he bolted awake with only a half-hour before
running out the door, gulping a cup of coffee and skipping breakfast
altogether. I proposed that the caffeine kick unmediated by any protein
or carbohydrates, plus the drop in blood sugar from skipping breakfast
probably added to his vulnerability to panic on those days. Voluntarily,
Carl began a strict schedule of early rising and daily breakfast. Within
a very short time the panic attacks had disappeared entirely. At that
point he decided to take a break from therapy, as his goal had been met.
However, his therapy experience was so successful that he was determined
to return within the year to address his fears of the flashbacks and the
impact of the bad LSD trips themselves. A caution: There are several
situations where teaching body awareness would be contraindicated. Here
are two examples (there are certainly others): (1) Some traumas are so
damaging to the bodily integrity that any attempt at sensing the body
will overly accelerate contact to the trauma(s), causing overwhelming
feelings and risking decompensation; (2) there are clients who will feel
pressured to sense their body "correctly" and so

develop a kind of performance anxiety. With such clients, the task of
developing body awareness must be laid aside in favor of work with the
basics outlined in the previous chapter---developing safety,
establishing the therapeutic relationship, building internal and
external resources, finding oases. Later, when such clients are feeling
calmer, delving into the daunting territory of body sensation usually
becomes more manageable.

MAKING FRIENDS WITH SENSATIONS As can be seen from the above case
example, clients with PTSD, particularly those with anxiety and panic
attacks, often come to identify their current body sensations as
dangerous when they remind them of previous trauma. When it is not
possible to distinguish safe sensations from dangerous ones, all
sensations may become perceived as dangerous. Through well-timed and
paced body awareness training, a client can be reintroduced to the
friendly function of sensations. Sensations are a gauge. They tell us
when we are tired, alert, hungry, full, thirsty, sated, cold, warm,
comfortable, uncomfortable, happy, sad, etc. With clients who are scared
to feel their sensations, or those who wish they had none, imagining the
consequences of being unable to feel pain or the sensations that
indicate fear can be illuminating. How would you know the pot was too
hot to touch? You could get burned and not know it. How would you know
where the limits of exercise were? Injuries would be common. How would
you know not to walk on a deserted street alone or not to approach a dog
on the street if you could not feel fear? It does not take long to
realize that life would be very dangerous if these sensations and
emotions could not be perceived. With graduated body awareness training
clients become familiar with their body sensations. Usually they
discover that the better acquainted they are with them, the less scary
they become.

Body Awareness as the Basis of Identifying Emotions

You may remember from the discussion in Chapter 3 of Damasio's theory of
somatic markers that each emotion has a discrete set of body sensations
associated with it, though individual body sensations may be shared by
several emotions. With clients who are unable to identify and name their
emotions (the clinical term is alexithymic), establishing body awareness
is invaluable. One strategy for helping clients to identify emotions
involves taking advantage of situations in which the therapist observes
an expression of emotion in the client: facial expression, posture, tone
of voice. This is a good time to interrupt the current discussion or
procedure and ask the client, "What are you aware of in your body right
now?" or, more specifically, "Did you notice your breathing just change
(or heat rise in your face, or how hard it was to swallow just then)?"
Gradual association of body states may accumulate until the client
experiences several at one time. At that point the client can be asked
if he has experienced those sensations together earlier in his life, and
if so, what emotion he was feeling then. Another possibility is to
externalize the experience by asking the client what someone else would
be feeling if that person had those same body sensations.

THE BODY AS ANCHOR Awareness of current body sensations can anchor one
in the present, here and now, facilitating separation of past from
present. One is less likely to stay lost or stuck in the past while
aware of body sensations. This is very important when working with
trauma and PTSD, since the pull into the memories of the past can be
great and decompensation severe. Sensing the body is a current-time
activity. One can remember a sensation, but one feels the remembered
sensation now. Of course, some clients will require an added reminder of
that when the sensations trigger a flashback.

Body Awareness as Anchor vs. Accelerator

This next brief installment, Charlie and the Dog, Part III (continued
from pp. 45--46), illustrates the use of body awareness as an anchor.
Helping Charlie to focus on his body awareness was critical to calming
and thawing his frozen state. I repeatedly directed his attention to his
body, "What is happening in your body right now? And what else are you
aware of?" His legs were stiff, his breathing restricted, his mouth was
dry, and his heart was racing. Luckily, Charlie had a well-developed
sense of his body and we used it to great advantage. I kept leading him
back to the same areas to evaluate nuances of change in legs, breath,
heart, and mouth. The more he scanned his body, the calmer he felt.
Round after round, his legs loosened, his breathing and heart rate
relaxed; only the dryness in his mouth persisted without relief. When
anchoring is the goal, body awareness inquiry must be fairly quick
paced---not speeding, but not allowing the client to focus on any one
sensation for very long. The question must also be phrased in the
present tense. The aim is to keep the client in the here and now. This
type of quick body awareness query is used to "pft" or reduce some of
the pressure. The opposite, going slowly, staying with one sensation a
long time, risks stirring up more memories. (That would have been
contraindicated for Charlie, as he was not ready to handle more at that
time---the pressure cooker was already at maximum pressure.) Contrary to
expectation, clients usually become less, rather than more, anxious when
encouraged to notice and describe their body sensations under this quick
scan method. Once they become adept at it, many clients report that
during trauma therapy it is a relief for them to shift focus to current
sensations. Body awareness can become a secure link to the present. Body
awareness can also be used to reinforce the anchors and safe places as
discussed above. The greater the degree of positive body sensations
associated to them, the greater calming effect they will have.

THE BODY AS GAUGE

Monitoring the client's body sensations, particularly those that
identify the state of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) (see Figure
3.1, p. 38), provides a dependable guide to the pacing of the therapy.
The ability to recognize indications of hyperarousal, ANS
overactivation, is an easily acquired skill. But like any skill it takes
practice. By noticing what is happening in the client, the therapist
secures a valuable, objective gauge for reading the client's arousal
state. It can also be useful to teach the client to recognize signs of
ANS activation in himself---to gain a greater sense of body awareness
and of self-knowledge and control. The ANS is not the only usable gauge
in trauma therapy. It can be useful to note other types of body
awareness: tightness, stomach upset, changes in vision or hearing, etc.
Sometimes sticking with one sensation, tracking changes in it as the
therapy progresses, will be useful (see the detailed session at the end
of this chapter).

Limitations Therapist observation combined with client sensory feedback
on the state of the ANS is one of the most powerful tools available to
the trauma therapist for pacing the therapy. But there are certain
limitations to those observations. Observing skin tone is a major tool
for evaluating the state of the ANS, as the skin---particularly of the
face---is usually quite available to the eye of the therapist. Of
course, this is easier with light-toned skin; however, dark skin also
flushes and pales. It is just a matter of attuning the eye to recognize
it. A dark skin doesn't blush in the same way a light skin does. With
the increase of blood flow to the skin, it darkens. Likewise, it doesn't
blanch white, but when it loses the red pigment caused by blood flow, it
becomes more gray than brown. The visually handicapped therapist is, of
course, limited in the task of observing ANS arousal. However, some of
those limitations can be converted into advantages. The client must
supply the information that the therapist cannot observe firsthand,
giving him practice in noticing and reporting sensations. A similar
problem arises with clients whose hyperarousal is clearly worsened by
eye contact. With these clients, turning

about or changing the direction of the therapists gaze for a time can be
very helpful. When that happens, take advantage of the situation: "It is
just fine for me not to look at you. However, since I can't see you,
I'll need a little help. Tell me, what is the temperature in your face
right now?" (Elevated temperature goes hand-in-hand with more flush;
cold skin with pale.) "Where is your breath going mostly---is your chest
moving up and down or your stomach moving out and back?" etc. Clients in
that situation are usually happy to help---even when their body
awareness skills appear to be minimal under other circumstances.

Gauging and Pacing Hyperarousal Gauging the ANS through observation and
the client's body awareness can increase reliability of the popular SUDS
scale (Subjective Units of Disturbance Scale) (Wolpe, 1969). As its
title indicates, this is a subjective measure. The client gives his
opinion of his emotional state on a 1--10 scale, 1 = totally calm, 10 =
the most disturbed possible. By observing the ANS, both visually and
with client feedback on sensory awareness, the therapist secures an
additional measure. It is not uncommon, for example, for clients to give
a low SUDS rating while hearts race or hands are clammy (signs of high
ANS arousal), which might indicate underlying anxiety that is being
dissociated in some way. Using both SUDS and ANS observation gives the
therapist important information when there is agreement and when there
is disagreement. Once you learn the indicators, good pacing of the
therapy is possible only when those tools are applied. The following is
an example of what can go wrong. Grette was assaulted as a small child.
A mass of emotional problems ensued as she grew up. She came to therapy
in her early thirties quite decompensated and terrified to confront
memories of the assault. After many, many sessions of helping her to
stabilize, develop a therapeutic relationship, etc., she came to therapy
one day with newfound courage to tell me about the incident. I listened
to her, both moved and transfixed. I

was pleased that she felt ready to delve into her trauma and I was
curious about what she would reveal. In my interest, I forgot one of my
own rules of thumb: Sometimes it is better to contain my curiosity. I
also neglected to monitor her ANS reactions and to periodically help her
to apply the brakes. Despite my peripheral awareness of her gradually
paling and increasingly immobile face, I let her talk on. By the end of
the session, her once animated features were frozen into a mask. She
said that she was okay, if feeling a little "weird." After she left the
session, it didn't take long for the anxiety to hit. The rest of the
week was filled with panicked phone calls. All that was needed to make
Grette's discourse containable was monitoring of her growing
hyperarousal and increasing facial tension. Periodic pauses, diverting
to an anchor, safe place, or other resource, before hyperarousal got too
high would have changed the therapeutic result completely. It would have
been easy to take breaks---and put on the brakes. And even if she had
not been able to finish her whole story, she would have had a much
easier week. Interrupting a client in such a fashion prevents the level
of arousal from climbing to the point of dissociation or freezing or
becoming overwhelming. Periodic breaks, braking, and resource building
lowers the arousal level. Continued intervention of this type throughout
a therapy session makes it possible for the client to work with
terrifying memories at a greater level of comfort. When observing the
client and asking about body awareness, it is fairly simple to evaluate
the state of the ANS. The following outlines a scale of arousal to
hyperarousal: • Relaxed system---primarily moderate activation of
parasympathetic nervous system (PNS). Breathing is easy and deep, heart
rate is slow, skin tone is normal. • Slight arousal---signs of low to
moderate PNS activation combined with low-level sympathetic nervous
system (SNS) activation. Breathing or heart rate may quicken while skin
color remains

normal; skin may pale and moisten slightly without increases in
respiration and pulse, etc. • Moderate hyperarousal---primarily signs of
increased SNS arousal: rapid heart beat, rapid respiration, becoming
pale, etc. • Severe hyperarousal---primarily signs of very high SNS
arousal: accelerated heart beat, accelerated respiration, pale skin
tone, cold sweating, etc. • Endangering hyperarousal---signs of very
high activation of both SNS and PNS, for example: pale (or reduced
color) skin (SNS) with slow heart rate (PNS); widely dilated pupils
(SNS) with flushed color (PNS); slow heart rate (PNS) with rapid
breathing (SNS); very slow respiration (PNS) with fast heart rate (SNS),
etc. A relaxed system indicates the client is calm and that the therapy
is progressing at a comfortable rate. Slight arousal indicates
excitement and/or containable discomfort. A primarily relaxed or
slightly aroused PNS system might include emotions of sadness, anger, or
grief. Most clients are stable enough to tolerate slight arousal.
Moderate arousal may mean the client is having trouble dealing with what
is going on and may be quite anxious; it may be time to apply the
brakes. Severe arousal is a sign that it is time to hit the brakes with
any client. Endangering arousal is a sign that the client is in a highly
traumatized state; the process is speeding out of control. He is likely
experiencing some type of flashback (in images, body sensations,
emotions, or a combination), which could lead to panic, breakdown, or
tonic immobility. High states of arousal might also include emotions of
rage, terror, or desperation. At this point one must apply the brakes,
either through body awareness and/or strategies that are addressed in
the next chapter. Before sending the client home or continuing with the
exploration or working through of trauma memories, the therapist must
help him stabilize. Stabilization is indicated by either low sympathetic
activation or primarily parasympathetic

activation. One purpose of learning to observe the bodily signs of ANS
arousal is to become competent in avoiding this highly traumatized (and
possibly retraumatizing) state, slowing down the therapy before that
state is reached. During a therapy session, while working with a trauma,
Bob became noticeably flushed in his face and upper chest (he was
wearing a v-neck shift). He reported feeling heat in the front of his
face and trunk, and an elevated heart rate. I could also see that his
breathing was very quick and shallow---signs of high activation in both
SNS and PNS. The client was experiencing a high degree of discomfort,
and I could see it. We hit the brakes by changing the topic to one that
reminded him of his strengths and resources. Once he was calmer (his
color, breathing, and heart rate mostly normalized), he returned to the
difficult topic. It took a few sessions, shuttling back and forth
between the traumatic material and the brakes, but eventually both Bob
and I knew we had reached a resolution. Finally, while again addressing
the traumatic material, his heart rate, color, and temperature remained
in PNS ranges, and his breathing deepened and slowed---all signs of
normal PNS activation. He could feel and I could see that his SUDS had
dropped to 0. The purpose of hitting the brakes and dropping the level
of arousal is not just to give a pause and a sense of safety. It also,
as with the above example, enables the therapy to proceed at a reduced
level of arousal. Without hitting the brakes, arousal will just build
and build (see Figure 6.1). Figure 6.1. Addressing the trauma in therapy

Pacing the Trauma Narrative In retelling the circumstances of a
traumatic event, the greater the amount of detail the client uses, the
greater the risk of hyperarousal. ANS monitoring with the option of
braking will go a long way toward making this process tolerable and
digestible for the client. Dividing a narrative into three stages will
also help control the process: (1) name the trauma, (2) outline the
trauma by designating titles to the main incidents, (3) fill in the
details of each incident, one at a time. First have the client just name
the trauma (e.g., "I was injured during a terrorist bombing"). Observe
and ask for feedback on the client's body

state. If there is hyperarousal already, the client is not in a
psychophysical condition to narrate any more of the story.
Stabilization, muscle toning, building trust and safety should be the
priority. If, however, the client can name the incident without
significant arousal or dissociation, or if emotion discharges in a
managable catharsis and the arousal drops, the next step is to outline
the main topics of the trauma--- again, without details: "There was an
explosion." "I was hit by shrapnel and thrown against the ground."
"Paramedics thought I was dead and passed me by." "I was able to call
for help and was then attended to." "At the hospital my mother got
hysterical and called me stupid for being in that area of town."
Sometimes it will be difficult for a client to keep to the titles;
instead she will digress into details. It may be necessary for the
therapist to interrupt, holding the client within the parameters of the
task and containing potential hyperarousal. Even when the client wants
to tell the whole story in detail at once, it may not be a good idea. If
a client insists, sometimes it will be best to let her go ahead,
sometimes not. A better idea may be to explain the rationale of pacing
to the client and encourage her to monitor her own responses. Monitoring
the ANS and other somatic signs will be a good gauge. It is best to not
go any faster than the client's ANS can handle. It is also preferable to
set a pace that facilitates the client's ability to make sense out of
her responses and the events that caused them. Finally, when the client
is ready---which could be immediately or only after many years---the
client narrates each incident in detail while both she and the therapist
monitor her level of hyperarousal: "There was an explosion. It was
deafening. I felt it before I heard it. I didn't have time to be scared
because everything happened so fast. Everyone was screaming---I couldn't
hear

them because of the blast, but I could see mouths opened in anguish. I
tried to move, but I couldn't. I nearly fainted ..." During this step,
it will be important for the therapist to periodically interrupt the
client and check the level of ANS arousal. If an anchor has been
established, it can be used during breaks to calm any hyperarousal,
which makes continuing with the narrative easier for the client. Clients
usually report that this strategy gives them a sense of control over
their memories that was not possible before.

THE BODY AS BRAKE The following case, reprinted from an earlier article
(Rothschild, 1993), illustrates how simple body awareness can be used to
reduce hyperarousal and halt persistent panic attacks. A young woman was
referred to me for therapy because of panic attacks and agoraphobia.
Initially our work involved focusing on building her body awareness,
increasing her boundaries, and establishing a network of friends. The
body awareness work involved structured increase of tolerance for her
body sensations, which she was quite frightened of. We would discuss an
issue and keep returning to her sensations to notice how they changed
from topic to topic. If she became anxious, we would stay with the
sensations until they subsided. After a short time she was able to move
into her own apartment and begin a job that was close to her home. After
five months she came to therapy and announced that the previous week at
work she had the worst panic attack of her life. She proceeded to
describe in precise bodily detail the course of the attack: where the
anxiety began, what happened in her breathing, heart rate, muscles,
temperature. She ended the report, "I became very warm all over, and
then it ended"---it had lasted only one or two minutes. She was
tremendously proud of herself. It was the first time in her long history
of such attacks that she was able to follow a course of panic to its
conclusion. She never knew that it was

possible or that a panic attack was actually so short. To my knowledge,
although she experienced occasional anxiety, she never had a panic
attack again.

THE BODY AS DIARY: MAKING SENSE OF SENSATIONS Through its sensory
storage and messaging system, the body holds many keys to a wealth of
resources for identifying, accessing, and resolving traumatic
experiences. Identifying traumatic triggers is one of the great
challenges of trauma therapy Stimuli from the environment can
inadvertently set off a traumatic reaction in a client. Often the client
is left with the reaction but has no idea what caused it. Tracing the
reaction back to the source, the trigger, can be an important task. To
that end, body awareness can be a useful assistant. The following
protocol is useful for identifying triggers: • Notice what you feel in
your body right now. Be as precise as possible, particularly with regard
to disturbances in breathing, heart rate, and temperature. • Think back
and identify when you were last feeling calm---that is point A. •
Identify, approximately, when you began to feel disturbed---that is
point B. • Shuttle back and forth between points A and B, taking note of
all aspects of your environment: people, conversation, objects,
behaviors. Recall, also, what you were thinking about each step of the
way. Notice your body awareness as you focus on each aspect. • For each
element, ask yourself, "Is this what upset/scared/disturbed me?" and
notice your bodily and emotional response. • You will likely identify
the triggering element by an increase now in disturbing body sensations
and/or an increase in emotion.

This protocol doesn't work for everyone, but it is very useful for many
of my clients, particularly those with panic and anxiety attacks. Sarah
used this procedure after she saw a film that left her in a highly
distressed state. Her heart raced for the duration of the evening after
seeing the film, much to her confusion. It was no mystery that the
disturbance arose in the course of the movie (she had been quite calm
beforehand), but she couldn't grasp just what it was that had upset her,
or why. As she had learned in therapy, before going to bed (sleep would
have been difficult in her hyperaroused state anyway), she sat alone and
retold herself, aloud, the story of the film. It was toward the end of
the retelling that her tears gushed forth and she began to tremble. The
source of her upset was a bit of a surprise, but made sense---a
neglected corner of her history that had been illuminated by the light
of the film. She suspected she had hit the right spot, for when she
stopped crying her pulse had again returned to normal and remained so.
She made a note of the incident to take up in therapy later that week.
After a nurturing cup of chamomile tea, she had a good night's sleep.
Through simple body awareness and shuttling between point A (before the
film) and point B (after the film), Sarah identified the source of her
upset. It was the reminder of an unresolved issue from earlier in her
life. Identification of the trigger halted the anxiety, and she was able
to contain the issue until her therapy session later that week.
Sensations can also be used to make sense of somatic memory. This is
often facilitated by slow body awareness inquiry. The client stays with
any one sensation a minute or more to see what emerges. An example:
Sixty-year-old Donna was still mourning the death, five years earlier,
of her husband of 35 years. It had been a shocking blow. He had a heart
attack while a passenger in the car she was driving. She had driven like
a maniac in an attempt to get him to an emergency room before he died.
Of course we spent a lot of time processing the incident and her grief.
She also suffered a persistent right hip problem, which caused chronic
pain. The condition had emerged about one year after her husband's
death. Each in a series of

orthopedists, chiropractors, and acupuncturists had helped a little, but
the pain persisted. She decided she wanted to see if I could help with
that, too. I had her focus on the hip, describing the sensations and
being as specific as she could about the pain---its type, location, if
it was steady or throbbing, etc. Inspired by Levine's SIBAM model
(discussed in Chapter 4), I investigated other aspects of her
consciousness. While she stayed focused on the hip pain, I asked about
other sensations in her body. It seemed that the more she focused on the
pain, the faster her heart beat. I also asked her to notice what
emotions she was feeling. She was scared. I had her just stay with those
sensations a few minutes: pain, heart rate, fear. As she persisted her
right foot dug deeper and deeper into my carpet. It wasn't long before
she took a huge breath and began to sob, "I drove as fast as I could. I
floored the accelerator. It was an old car and I just couldn't get it to
go faster!" It became very clear that a significant part of her hip
problem was this memory of bearing down on the gas pedal. This work
didn't cure her physical problem completely, as she had been holding
that leg tension for four years. But the pain eased and medical
treatment became more effective. The session also facilitated her
mourning process. She was able to release some of the guilt she had
harbored for not making it to the hospital soon enough.

SOMATIC MEMORY AS RESOURCE The term somatic memory is usually associated
with the memory of frightening traumatic events. But the body also
remembers positive feelings. Awareness of body sensations can be a
superhighway to the past, a tool for helping the client connect not only
with forgotten traumatic memories but also with forgotten resources.
Remembering how safe and secure it felt to sit in grandma's kitchen---
with an emphasis on the comfortable body sensations---may be even more
important to current functioning than remembering a frightening
incident. Sometimes a positive somatic memory can help an individual
resolve a current difficulty without having to confront the terrifying
traumatic memory that is triggering it. Then, eventually, if the client
decides to work

with the traumatic incident, the successful use of the positive memory
can be used to help ease the terror. Tom had to ask his boss for a
raise. He couldn't afford to continue his job at the same rate of pay.
And he had put off the confrontation too long as it was. Tom's father
had been rather tyrannical and had beaten Tom severely when he had shown
any signs of aggression. The idea of having to assert himself at work
left Tom weak with fear. We decided, at this particular juncture in his
therapy, that it would be more useful to build up his resources than to
work on his father issues. I asked Tom to remember if there was any time
when he had been able to safely and successfully assert himself His
biggest triumph in this arena had been five years earlier, when,
gathering his courage, he had asked a woman he was attracted to out on a
first date. She later became his wife, and he was still very much in
love with her. I helped him recall, in both body and mind, how afraid he
had been before he asked her out, and how victorious and proud he felt
afterward. He made some slight movements with his feet as he recalled
leaving her door after their first date. I drew his attention to the
movement. Was he aware of it? No, he had not been, but when I mentioned
it he was. I encouraged him to repeat the movement and then to slightly
exaggerate it. He recognized it immediately. He had virtually danced
down the stairs of her apartment building after their first date, and
his feet were, subtly, remembering their celebration. How did he feel as
his feet danced? Great! Excited, confident, relaxed. Next came the
challenge. I suggested he imagine approaching his boss for the raise
while dancing with his feet. He still felt anxious but less so, and he
was able to feel a little excited at the idea of a challenge. Now, of
course, it would not be prudent for Tom to "dance his way" into his
boss's office. So we worked on refining the dance movement down into
very subtle small turns of toe and heel that he could, without drawing
attention, make while he was talking with his boss, whether sitting or
standing. When he eventually approached his boss the next week, he did
get his raise---not as much as he asked for, but acceptable. He was also
very proud of himself He had been scared, but making the subtle dance
movements with

his feet had reinforced his memory of successful assertion as well as
the love and support of his wife, and that had helped him persevere.

FACILITATING TRAUMA THERAPY USING THE BODY AS RESOURCE The following
case illustrates the application of body awareness, braking, and an
anchor to reduce the distress of addressing a traumatic memory.
Therapists will be able to recognize where their own disciplines would
fit well: extending exposure, using bilateral stimulation, suggesting
viewing the memory from a distance, etc. Explanatory comments regarding
the therapist's intention and/or theory are identified by italic print
in parentheses. (Gail is a forty-something mother of two. She had been
wanting for some time to face dealing with a car accident that happened
when she was 18. She is just now feeling prepared to confront it. G =
Gail, T = Therapist.) T: Are you okay with how we are sitting? (I am
sitting in a chair, while G had chosen a spot on the floor.)
(Establishing safety by attending to boundaries, position, and
distance.) G: No. You're too far away and we're uneven in height. T: How
do you want to change that? (G comes closer and moves from the floor to
a chair.) (Giving the client control where possible.) G: This distance
feels good. T: How do you know it feels good? (Connecting body awareness
to cognitive evaluation.) G: Because I don't feel myself leaning forward
or leaning back. T: Okay. What do you want from this session? (Client
control: working on what G wants to work on.)

G: To work with that car accident that happened when I was a teenager.
It's still really affecting me. T: How does that feel in your body when
you say that? Sounds like you're making a commitment. G: Scary. T: What
do you feel in your body that tells you you're scared? (Connecting body
awareness to emotions.) G: My hands feel clammy and sweaty, and I just
feel jittery in here (points to chest). I think, "do I really want to do
this?" And I also feel jittery across my shoulders. T: Do you really
want to do this? G: YEAH!! (Smiles) T: How do you feel the part that
does? That comes across differently when you smile and say, "YEAH!"
(Reinforcing the part that is up to the challenge of facing the trauma.)
G: That accident affected me in lots of ways and I don't want that
effect in my life. T: How does that feel in your body when you say that?
Does the jitteriness feel the same? G: No, it's less. T: So you can be
in touch with the part of you that does want to go ahead and work
through this? G: Yes. T: Can you also feel the part that doesn't?
(Acknowledging and containing both realities for G: Part of her wants to
face and work through the trauma; part of her doesn't. That's true for
almost everyone with almost any trauma. Trauma work is rewarding, but
not particularly fun.) G: I can feel my heart beat faster. I feel
scared. I'm thinking, I don't know what this means. I don't know what
this means. T: Okay. And do you know why you want to work with this now?
Why you think it's important to address it? (Engaging the part of G that
wants to confront the accident. That part will be a resourceful ally
when the process gets more difficult.)

G: I keep getting scared people will hurt themselves. I know I do that
when my kids are being adventurous. I get afraid they won't know their
limits and will get hurt. That's exactly what happened in the car
accident. I didn't respect a limit. I now know it's connected with that.
I can do something about that! I realize that accident has had a lot of
power in my life, and now I feel I can deal with it. T: What you said a
minute ago was, "I can do something about that!" G: That's what it feels
like, I can do something about this. It feels within my power to do
something about it. T: Say that sentence, "I can do something about
that!" and see what it feels like in your body (Supporting G's
confidence that she is ready to deal with this now by connecting to her
body sense.) G: It feels like I have the power to do something about it.
T: How do you sense that power in your body? G: I feel it in here
(points to chest). T: The same spot as the jitteriness? G: Yes. T: How
does that feel there? G: It feels good; it really feels really good that
I have the power to do something. T: And you feel that power here (I
point to my chest), just to the left? G: Yes. T: Okay. Let's go on then.
If we get into a place in working with this that you feel pretty
uncomfortable: anxious, stiff (possible freezing), or whatever, how
could we take a vacation, a break, from that? Is there any topic I could
bring you into that is a source of strength or good feelings for you?
(Establishing an anchor for when the trauma work becomes too
distressing.) G: Nature, trees, a walk in the woods. T: Is there a
particular path you like to walk on?

G: With a clear stream and lots of rocks, trees ... T: Are you
remembering a particular place? G: Yes. There is one place that's my
favorite. T: How do you feel in your body when you speak about it?
(Bringing in as many body senses as possible when connecting and
reconnecting with an anchor: sight, hearing, touch, smell, taste,
movement, posture.) G: I feel very nice (laughs). I feel myself smiling.
T: I think we can go forward a little now. Do you think so too? (Again,
giving G the control, even while I am steering.) G: Yes. T: Okay. First,
I would like to hear a very brief outline of the accident---not the
details. (Holding her to the edge of connection with the trauma at this
point, not allowing G to fall too deeply into the memory. Not going
deeper than G has resources---cognitive, physical, and emotional---to
handle.) G: I was in my late teens. I was driving. The car hit a soft
shoulder. I lost control and it flipped about three times. I was stuck
in the car until somebody got me out. T: What happens in your body when
you tell me the outline? G: My heart is beating a lot faster. My palms
are sweaty again. I feel something here (points to head). (Even when
keeping to an outline she experiences a lot of arousal in the ANS.) T:
Can you still see me? G: Yes ... but you're not as clear as you were. T:
Something happened with your eyes, I can see it. (I saw G's eyes lose
their focus.) G: I feel like I'm further away from you. T: Is there any
physical sensation with feeling further away? G: No. If anything it's
more like a sense of tunnel-y-ness. T: With your eyes? Like retreating
in a tunnel? G: Yes. (G may he at the edge of dissociating and/or
freezing. Time to divert to the anchor.)

T: Where was that place you like to walk? G: (Names and describes the
location of a river.) T: Are there particular kinds of rocks or trees
there that you like? G: The rocks are granite, and they are really big.
I like to step across the rocks and sit on the ones in the middle of the
river; the water moves all around me. T: How are you feeling in your
body right now? G: Really different. I've got sort of tingly feelings in
my arms. T: A positive kind of tingly? G: Yes. And a lot cooler. T:
How's our distance right now? (Checking to see if G has associated
again.) G: I'm closer again, and you're clearer. And I can feel the
smile on my face. T: Okay Good. So, it works? (Reassuring both G and
myself that the anchor technique is effective.) G: Yeah. (laughs) T: Is
it okay we go back a little bit to the accident? (Steering the process,
I take G back to the trauma after the break.) G: Yes. T: What happened
after the accident? You said you were stuck. You got out sometime, you
know that? (It is my preference to explore the events after a traumatic
event first. Often the events after are as or more traumatizing than the
traumatic event itself. And it is in the wake of the traumatic event
that decisions and changes in the belief system are often made. See
Chapter 8 for a more detailed discussion of this strategy.) G: Yes, I
was conscious the whole time, but I can't remember who got me out. Then
we rode in an ambulance or a police car. My friend kept asking the same
4 questions, over and over again. I could tell that was really driving
the policeman crazy (laughs). I sort of went into shock at that

time. I started to feel nauseous and all that. The policeman was worried
I had internal injuries, but he kept being distracted by my friend. T:
Was your friend in the car? (A new piece of information emerges.) G:
Yeah, but I was driving. I was officially a learner, I was just about to
take my test. T: I stick on your saying, "but I was driving." Did you
stick on that too? (A suspicion worth checking out. There are often
decisions, judgments, or beliefs connected to feelings of
responsibility.) G: Yes. It's really relevant because we'd made a
contract to switch at (names a junction before the accident). But I had
been doing so well and was enjoying it so much that we decided I'd drive
further. It was after that we had the accident. T: How are you feeling
in your body right now? G: Weird in my stomach, something about making
that decision for me to drive on, if we hadn't ... T: What does that
mean to you, that you two had an agreement and then decided to go beyond
the agreement, and that it was in the part where ... G: ... beyond the
limit we'd set ... T: ... "beyond the limit" you'd set that you had the
accident? (Understanding the meaning of a traumatic event is often
crucial to integrating that event into the continuum of one's life.) G:
When I say that I can feel anger at myself for not sticking to a limit I
set. T: What do you sense in your body? G: Not much. It's not a body
anger. More like a criticism, "Why do I do that?" T: I want to do a
little reality check with you: Do you think that had anything to do with
the accident? (Reality testing can be very useful, challenging a
client's view, conclusion, judgment.)

G: Totally! T: Why? G: Because just going onto the shoulder shouldn't
have made us flip. I didn't know how to control a car in a skid. But my
friend had done a lot of driving and could have controlled a skid. I
don't believe my friend would have driven off the edge in the first
place---there was no reason to. I'd been distracted and lost my
concentration. T: How are you feeling in your body right now? G: Okay.
T: How's our distance? G: Our distance is fine. And you're clear. I
think this is interesting. T: It sounds like you think that you were
distracted, but that you went over the shoulder and into a skid because
you'd gone over your limit. Is it possible that could have happened also
in the stretch before you'd come to the agreed limit? G: Oh. It could
have happened then, too. But the area where the accident happened was
much less safe. I hadn't said that. On the other side of the road where
we flipped over there was a long drop down to a raging river. In the
stretch I'd agreed to drive, there were no drop-offs. T: And how are you
feeling in your body right now? G: A bit more nauseous. It turned out
okay, but what might have happened!? (This is something to come back to.
Some of G's trauma response might come from imagining contingencies. But
first, I'm concerned about the nausea.) T: And our distance? G: I'm a
bit further back, but not as far as I was. You kind of go dark. Your
face stays white, but the rest of you goes dark. (Possible edge of
dissociating, again. Time to go back to the anchor.) T: Let's talk about
a different river. G: (Laughs)

T: What was the name of that one you like? G: (Names it again and we
discuss its difficult pronunciation). T: What color are the rocks? G:
White with speckles of gray and lots of moss on them. T: Are there also
trees? G: Yes. Oak. Oak forest. I've probably spent more time there with
the leaves off the trees than on. A lot of winter walks. T: What time of
day do you like to walk? G: Anytime I can. T: In light? In dark? G: Only
in light. T: Are there any smells? G: I find it really hard to imagine
smells. T: How do you feel right now? G: More here, but still a little
distant. I want to tell you what I can do. I can't do smells, but I can
tell you what I feel. I can feel the moistness, the humidity. T: Where
do you feel that humidity? G: On the skin of my arms and face, in my
hands. T: How's our distance? G: Much better. (G told me at a later date
just how significant it had been to be able to connect with the senses
that were available, not focus on the ones that weren't. Everyone varies
in which senses are more prominent---some more visual, some more
tactile, some more auditory, etc.) T: Are you ready to go back a little
bit? G: Yes. T: I wanted to ask you, you said this stretch you were
driving on was much more dangerous than the stretch you had been driving
on before. Did you and your friend know that when you two made the
decision that you would continue to drive? G: Yes. T: Who's responsible
for the decision?

(Assigning sensible responsibility is often crucial to working through a
trauma.) G: I guess it was pretty mutual. We discussed it. T: How do you
feel in your body right now? G: Fine. T: Does that mean anything to you,
that the decision was mutual? (I wanted G to connect her new statement
with her previous judgment.) G: Not really. I'm thinking maybe it should
after what I said earlier, but it... T: About what that you said
earlier? G: About that I can be angry with myself for going over my
limits. T: I was thinking the same thing. Do you know why I would ask
you about that? (I will often ask a client if he knows why I asked a
question. I'm not wanting to start a guessing game, and will answer my
question if the client is not able to. However, the question is often
useful in helping the client's cognitive process.) G: Because it wasn't
only my responsibility It was our responsibility. It seemed a reasonable
decision. And, in fact, I don't know if that stretch actually was more
dangerous than the other stretch I drove. They're dangerous in different
ways. There's a lot less traffic on that stretch of road. There was a
lot of traffic on the road before the junction. Differently dangerous.
Oh! That feels nice. (A dramatic change in G's making sense of the
accident) T: How does that "nice" feel, in your body? G: More relaxed.
It was an understandable decision. (The change in judgment seems
congruent, as G's body sense has also changed.) T: It wasn't far-out? G:
It wasn't far-out. T: How are you feeling about what we've done so far?

G: It's really interesting. It's less of a big deal. I realize I've been
blaming myself that if I hadn't been driving it wouldn't have happened.
That's why I haven't been trusting my driving now. That's important. T:
I think, this is a good stopping point. G: Yes, that feels right for me
as well. T: How's our distance? G: We're both here. T: How's your heart
rate? G: It's normal. T: The nervousness? G: It's gone. T: Okay, then
let's stop here. With a useful insight and the ANS back to primarily PNS
activation, it is safe to end the session. Of course, this trauma is not
fully resolved, but resources are in place to further that process. In
addition, now that the issue of responsibility has been clarified, the
rest of the work should go more easily. A subsequent session with Gail
follows in Chapter 8.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER SEVEN

Additional Somatic Techniques for Safer Trauma Therapy

DUAL AWARENESS

A normal process among the nontraumatized, dual awareness simply
involves being able to maintain awareness of one or more areas of
experience simultaneously. As with body awareness, the concept of
holding simultaneous awareness of multiple stimuli has its roots in
meditation and in gestalt therapy. Here we focus on dual awareness as a
prerequisite for safe trauma therapy and as a tool for braking and
containment.

PTSD Splits Perception Most of us are able to strike a balance between
the many internal and external sensory stimuli that occupy our awareness
at any one time. We are able to notice more than one aspect of our
current experience as our focus shifts from one sensation, movement, or
activity to another, reconciling physical sensations with respect to our
current environment and activity. We are able to shuttle our perceptions
from one point of reference to the other, negotiating, compromising, and
reconciling the various inputs into a

cohesive whole that we term our current "reality." You get a pain in
your gut and are able to process that sensation with other information
and perceptions you have at hand and remember that you ate too much
lunch. In another situation, a similar pain might lead you to the
conclusion that you don't like the direction of the current conversation
or the tone of someone's voice. A third possibility is that someone just
mentioned going to the dentist and you are reminded that it will be your
turn tomorrow. One of the problems that develops in individuals with
PTSD is that they become habituated to paying an inordinate amount of
attention to internal stimuli and interpreting the world from that point
of view. They lose discrimination. Internal sensations become associated
with past events, and current reality is evaluated on that restricted
information. External perception pales in significance compared to the
internal stimuli. The customary reconciliation between what we
experience in the body and what we perceive outside of the body is lost.
The ability to process multiple stimuli simultaneously becomes
diminished. Perception narrows. This can lead to severe distortions in
perceptions of reality and provoke further distress. For example, when a
sensation has been associated with the experience of danger (as is the
norm with PTSD), perception of any kind of similar sensation may cause
one to leap to the conclusion that something dangerous is going on in
the environment. There is no regard for other stimuli or information.
Anxiety or panic may ensue. As the traumatized individual becomes more
and more hypervigilant in an effort to foresee danger, she actually
becomes less and less able to identify it. When danger cannot be
adequately identified, recognition of safety also becomes impossible.
Danger is everywhere, and fear is constant. I have heard several terms
to describe this perceptual split between internal and external sensory
stimuli: self and observing ego, core self and witness, child and adult,
internal and external reality, etc. However, I prefer the terms coined
by van der Kolk, McFarlane, and Weisaeth (1996): the experiencing self
and the observing self.

Developing Dual Awareness

Reconciling this perceptual split is not only necessary to healing
trauma but also mandatory for conducting safe trauma therapy. It is not
possible for clients to safely address traumatic memories until and
unless they are able to maintain a simultaneous awareness and
discrimination of past and present. They must be able to know, at least
intellectually, that the trauma being addressed is in the past, even
though it may feel as though it is happening now. Delving into traumatic
memory with a client who is unable to maintain this dual awareness risks
uncontainable hyperarousal and a possible dive into flashback. This is
fertile ground for retraumatization: reexperiencing trauma with all the
terror, hopelessness, and desperation first tied to it. Developing or
reconnecting with the facility for dual awareness enables the client to
address a trauma while secure in the knowledge that the actual, present
environment is trauma-free. It is an extremely useful tool for healing
discrepancies between the experiencing and observing selves. The
following client exercise illustrates the difference between the
experiencing and the observing selves and demonstrates how to move
between the two. This type of exercise can be used with a client before
delving into trauma memories. Not only does it give him a chance to
practice this new skill, but it is also an indicator of the client's
capacity for dual awareness and thereby his readiness to address more
difficult material. The instructions are directed to the client. •
Remember a recent mildly distressing event---something where you were
slightly anxious or embarrassed. What do you notice in your body? What
happens in your muscles? What happens in your gut? How does your
breathing change? Does your heart rate increase or decrease? Do you
become warmer or colder? If there is any change in temperature, is it
uniform or variable in sectors of your body? • Then bring your awareness
back into this room you are in now. Notice the color of the walls, the
texture of the rug. What is the temperature of this room? What do you
smell here? Does your breathing change as your focus of awareness
changes?

• Now try to keep awareness of your present surroundings while you
remember that slightly distressing event. Is it possible for you to
maintain awareness of where you are physically as you remember that
event? • End this exercise with your awareness focused on your current
surroundings.

Applying Dual Awareness to Panic and Anxiety Attacks Acknowledging the
split between the experiencing self and the observing self has helped
many clients to tolerate being in situations where they are prone to
anxiety attacks. A simple technique involves accepting and stating
(aloud or in one's thoughts) the reality of both the selves
simultaneously: "I'm feeling very scared here" (experiencing self's
reality), while at the same time actually looking around, evaluating the
situation, and saying (if it is true), "and I'm not in any actual danger
right now" (observing self's reality). It is very important that the
conjunction is "and," as that implies a connection between the two
phrases; "but" would imply negation of the first phrase. The message is,
"Both realities count," not, "There is nothing to be afraid of."
Accepting the two perspectives (that of the experiencing self and that
of the observing self) simultaneously will often reduce anxiety quickly.
It is not clear why this works so well. Perhaps anxiety escalates with
nonacceptance of the experiencing self's reality, and when that changes,
the whole system relaxes.

Applying Dual Awareness to Flashbacks It is not advisable to try to
resolve PTSD through flashbacks as the experience of a flashback
reinforces terror and feelings of helplessness. Psychological tools that
were missing to meet the overwhelming trauma are also usually missing to
meet the overwhelming flashback; otherwise it would not be a flashback.
Integration under those circumstances was and is not possible.
Reexperiencing a trauma with the same feelings of

helplessness and terror only serves to reinforce its impact. A first
step in helping many individuals with PTSD is to teach them to stop and
prevent their flashbacks. When flashbacks are under control, it will be
possible to equip clients with the resources necessary to meet their
traumatic memories on more stable ground. Controlling flashbacks makes
it feasible to approach digestible portions of traumatic memories, one
at a time. One problem with flashbacks is that they cannot be predicted.
They are difficult to prepare for. They can be triggered anywhere,
anytime, even by the therapy setting. A common therapeutic dilemma
occurs when a client goes into flashback during the session, believing
the therapy room to be the scene of the trauma and the therapist to be
the perpetrator. When this is a regular occurrence, the therapy can be
compromised. It is a sign that the client's experiencing self is having
free rein, perceiving danger in the place where he is seeking help. The
therapist who is perceived as dangerous is not in a position to be
helpful. Under these circumstances, the client's observing self must be
awakened and called back into the therapy room, usually with a measure
of authority (firm, but not angry) from the therapist: "Look where you
are now. What color is the wall here? What color is the rug? What kind
of shoes do you have on right now? What is today's date? etc." When the
client's observing self is (again) operational, the following flashback
halting protocol can be taught. It is based on the principles of dual
awareness, reconciling the experiencing self with the observing self. It
usually will stop a traumatic flashback quite quickly. The client says,
preferably aloud, the following sentences filling in the blanks and
following the instructions: • Right now I am feeling \_\_\_\_\_\_,
(insert name of the current emotion, usually fear) • and I am sensing in
my body \_\_\_\_\_\_, (describe your current bodily sensations---name at
least three), • because I am remembering \_\_\_\_\_\_. (name the trauma
by title, only---no details).

• At the same time, I am looking around where I am now in\_\_\_\_\_\_
(the actual current year), • here \_\_\_\_\_\_, (name the place where
you are) • and I can see \_\_\_\_\_\_, (describe some of the things that
you see right now, in this place), • and so I know \_\_\_\_\_\_, (name
the trauma, by title only, again) • is not happening now/anymore. An
example: I was consulted by a therapist whose client had been held
hostage in a cellar. Recently she had arrived at her therapist's new
office to find it slightly below street level. The superficial
similarity of the placement and approach to the new office to the site
of the captivity triggered a flashback in the client. It was so strong
that she became terrified of her (otherwise trusted) therapist of two
years and considered termination of treatment---he became associated
with her captor. I suggested that her dual awareness needed to be
reestablished---separating the therapist's new office from the site of
the captivity and the therapist from the captor. The therapist brought
this distinction into awareness at the next session, helping the client
to acknowledge the realities of both her experiencing and observing
selves. Using the flashback halting protocol, the client said, "I am
feeling very scared of you because the placement of your new office
reminds me of when I was a hostage, and I got afraid you were my captor.
And I can see you right now and I know you are my therapist. I can also
see right now that you are not, nor are you about to, hurt me. And I
know I can leave here any time I want." The client was able to regain
her separation of past from present and they were able to continue the
therapeutic relationship and therapy.

The flashback halting protocol can also be effectively adapted for use
with nightmares that may be traumatic flashbacks. This has been used as
a ritual before sleep, to prepare for the expected nightmare: • I am
going to awaken in the night feeling \_\_\_\_\_\_, (insert name of the
anticipated emotion, usually fear) • and will be sensing in my
body\_\_\_\_\_\_, (describe your anticipated bodily sensations---name at
least three), • because I will be remembering \_\_\_\_\_\_. (name the
trauma by title, only---no details). • At the same time, I will look
around where I am now in\_\_\_\_\_\_ (the actual current year), •
here\_\_\_\_\_\_, (name the place where you will be) • and I will
see\_\_\_\_\_\_, (describe some of the things that you see right now, in
this place), • and so I will know\_\_\_\_\_\_, (name the trauma, by
title only, again) • is not happening now/anymore. If the client awakens
with a flashback or nightmare, the regular protocol can be used. The
client might teach her partner or parent (who ever she is living with)
to prompt the protocol, or even state it herself until the client's
observing self wakes up.

MUSCLE TONING: TENSION VS. RELAXATION Chronic muscle contraction
underlies what is commonly called "tension." Muscle contraction is not a
bad thing; it is necessary to be able to hold ourselves up and for all
the movements we make throughout our day. It is also necessary for the
development of muscle tone. As previously

mentioned, a muscle can only do one thing: contract. When a muscle is
not contracting, it is doing what is usually called relaxation.
Actually, though, a relaxed muscle is not doing anything. Muscle tension
has come to be regarded as a foe. It seems no one wants to be "tense."
People spend a fortune for massages, spas, potions to relax, relax,
relax. The positive function of muscle tension is rarely discussed.
Muscle tension is taken for granted; it is often regarded with scorn. It
is uncomfortable, so how can it possibly be something good? That muscle
tension is a friend is rarely considered. But what would life be like
without it? First of all, our bodies would collapse to the ground in a
blob of bone and flesh. It is the tension in our muscles that makes it
possible for us to stand and sit straight. Muscle tension gives our
bodies form, grace, posture, and locomotion. Without muscle tension it
would not be possible to perform even the simplest of tasks. Dressing or
feeding oneself, holding a pen, playing a sport would not be possible.
It is muscle tension that makes possible a baby's first step and the
socialization of toilet training. If you are still in doubt, consider
muscle-wasting diseases like muscular dystrophy and amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS). They may serve as reminders of just how important
muscle tension is. Muscle tension is necessary for daily living.
Certainly there are times when the degree of chronic muscle tension
becomes discomforting. And for some, induced relaxation through massage,
hot baths, muscle stretching, progressive muscle relaxation, etc. may be
very beneficial. However, there are many with PTSD for whom induced
relaxation will precipitate a trauma reaction, increasing hyperarousal
and anxiety, risking flashbacks. There are no studies that discuss this
phenomenon; it is an area yet to be researched. However, there are a few
articles that mention increases in anxiety in some people due to
relaxationtype trainings (Heide & Borkovec, 1983, 1984; Jacobsen &
Edinger, 1982; Lehrer & Woolfolk, 1993).

© The New Yorker Collection 1987 Arnie Levin from cartoonbank.com. All
rights reserved.

Informal discussion among colleagues suggests that a significant
percentage of PTSD clients may become more anxious from relaxation
training. In such cases, building or maintaining muscle tension is
preferable to relaxation. Simple body awareness is a reliable measure of
which is best for a particular client. Clients who become calmer with
relaxation can benefit from it. Those who become more anxious when
relaxing may be better off tensing instead. There may be a generalized
positive or negative response to tensing or relaxation throughout the
body. But it is also possible to have a positive experience tensing a
particular muscle and a negative experience tensing another (even the
same muscle on different sides). Every body is built with different
distributions of muscle tone (Bodynamic, 1988-- 1992). Body awareness is
the key to determining when tensing or relaxing a particular muscle
benefits or impedes. It is confusing to think that someone could
actually be more relaxed when more tense, an oxymoron. However, it may
be that individuals with greater muscle tone are better able to tolerate
hyperarousal than those with lesser tone. For instance, a greater degree
of muscle tone increases selfconfidence and reduces feelings of
vulnerability and helplessness.

One consequence of PTSD is body sensations that are very unpleasant.
Those that exacerbate feelings of anxiety and panic abound. They usually
coincide with autonomic nervous system (ANS) hyperarousal. Some clients
describe a peripheral "buzz" just under the skin, as if they had their
finger in an electric socket. These unpleasant sensations go hand in
hand with the sleep disturbance that so many with PTSD suffer. A common
nighttime experience is to feel tired, even sleepy, go to bed and start
to relax only to jolt awake with a racing heart and buzzing sensations
in the limbs. At that point sleep becomes hopeless for many hours.
Muscle tensing has helped many reduce these unpleasant sensations---
even to the point of enabling sleep. The kind of tensing being discussed
here does not include aerobic exercise. That is contraindicated for some
individuals with PTSD and panic attacks, as the elevated heart and
respiration rates can be trauma triggers in themselves. Rather, it is
slow, focused, muscle-building exercise that is beneficial in these
circumstances. For this kind of muscle building to be effective, it must
be done with body awareness---with attention to body sensations
generally and to the muscles being exercised specifically (Bodynamic,
1988--1992). Also, the exercise must stop at the point of mild tiredness
in the muscle, while it is still a pleasant experience. Doing
repetitions "till you feel the burn" is not helpful for building muscle
tone that aids emotional containment. Exercises that enhance sensations
of calm, solidity, and increased presence are beneficial. Any that bring
anxiety, nausea, disorientation, etc., are not. The idea is to build a
positive experience of being in the body by developing musculature that
can better contain hyperarousal and the full range of the emotions. A
further goal is to build a positive experience of being in the body so
that the desire to reside in the body and continue the exercise
develops. In that way it becomes self-rewarding. Joanie was intimately
aware of her need for muscle tension. She had been vulnerable and
impulsive as a young adult, prone to drifting from project to project.
She had trouble keeping a job and was subject to periodic bursts of
anger as well as a general level of anxiety. Moving to a country where
bicycle riding was a major form of transportation turned out to be a
blessing for her. As she got used to riding great distances, her legs
became

stronger and stronger, and, amazingly, she grew more and more
stable---all this before she ever considered psychotherapy. She was very
aware of the role increased muscle tone in her thighs had in her
newfound ability to maintain her focus and contain her emotions.
However, when she was ill or visiting family in another country and
unable to ride for a while, her previous instability would creep back. A
simple toning exercise to begin with is push-ups. They build tone in the
backs of the arms (triceps), the chest (pectorals), and the back
(trapezius and rhomboids). They can also be done at home with no special
equipment. It is easiest to begin standing a few feet from a wall,
leaning into it and pushing away. Gradually one can move lower on the
wall until there is enough strength to push off from stairs or the
floor. Leg lifts in many directions (quadriceps, tensor fascia lata,
hamstrings, and gluteals) also need no special equipment. Cheap free
weights, milk cartons, or books can be used for strengthening the front
of the upper arms (biceps). In addition to increasing general emotional
stability, muscle tensing is used by some as an emergency measure when
anxiety threatens to escalate into overwhelming anxiety or panic. Below
are a few postures that can be used to tense specific muscles. Most
people will find at least one of them an aid to on-the-spot containment.
Of course, any postures that increase anxiety should not be used.

Tensing Peripheral Muscles---Holding Together Important: Any tensing
should be done only until the muscle feels slightly tired. Release of
the tensing must be done slowly. This is not progressive muscle
relaxation. The idea here is to try to maintain a little of the
contraction/tension. Try one exercise and evaluate with body awareness
before going on to the next. If tensing causes any adverse reaction
(nausea, spacyness, anxiety, etc.), you can usually neutralize that
reaction by gently stretching the same muscle---making an opposite
movement (Bodynamic, 1988--1992).

• Side of Legs: Stand with feet a little less than shoulder-width apart,
knees relaxed (neither locked, nor bent). Press knees out directly to
the side so that you can feel tension along the sides of the legs from
knee to hip (Bodynamic, 1988--1992). • Left arm: Sit or stand with arms
crossed right over left. The right hand should be covering the left
elbow. First, the right hand provides resistance as the left arm lifts
directly away from the body. You should feel tension in the
forward-directed part of the upper arm from shoulder to elbow. Next, the
right hand provides resistance to the back of the elbow as the left arm
pushes directly left. You should feel tension in the left-directed part
of the upper arm from shoulder to elbow (Robyn Bohen, personal
communication, 1991). • Right arm: Sit or stand with arms crossed left
over right. The left hand should be covering the right elbow. First, the
left hand provides resistance as the right arm lifts directly away from
the body. You should feel tension in the forward-directed part of the
upper arm from shoulder to elbow. Next, the left hand provides
resistance to the back of the elbow as the right arm pushes directly
right. You should feel tension in the right-directed part of the upper
arm from shoulder to elbow (Robyn Bohen, personal communication, 1991).
• Thighs: Sitting in a chair, place both feet flat on the floor. Press
weight onto your feet just until you feel tension build in your thighs.
Muscle tensing became the foundation of therapy with one client: Theresa
was in her mid thirties when she began seeing me. She suffered from PTSD
and borderline personality disorder. She was not very functional and was
unable to work. She had difficulty setting goals---she was either empty
of ideas or full of pipe dreams. Early in my work with Theresa she
expressed the desire to someday be able to hold a steady job, get
married,

and raise a family. I affirmed her desire but commented that we couldn't
achieve it that day. "What," I asked, "is one thing you can do today
that is a small step toward those goals?" After considering this she
surprised me by saying, "I need backbone" She meant it both figuratively
and literally. Upon closer inquiry, I found out that she felt very weak
in her back and could not, in fact, feel the support of her spine. That
day we began strengthening Theresa's spinal muscles through slow
exercise, using body awareness. I would have her slump in her usual
posture, then slowly straighten up, becoming taller. We kept the pace
slow, so that she could keep up with the change in muscle tension and
monitor other body sensations. I was particularly interested in her
noticing where she was having to tense up to sit up. It was hard work.
She repeated the movement several times---slump, straighten, slump,
straighten. The exercise became homework. In subsequent sessions we
regularly referred to her newly developed spinal tension---her
"backbone." Gradually, it became a dependable support and resource for
her---both literally and figuratively--- as she traversed some of the
difficult themes in her life.

PHYSICAL BOUNDARIES Boundaries are of many kinds. This section will
focus on discussion of interpersonal and concrete boundaries that are
associated with the body.

Interpersonal Boundaries If you have ever "known" someone was standing
behind you before you turned to look, or felt the person you were
talking to was standing too close, you have perceived an interpersonal
boundary. It is not a mysterious or mystical line, but something quite
palpable that is often experienced at various distances. Your
interpersonal boundary circumscribes what you feel to be your personal
space. One interpersonal boundary is that point at which the distance
between you and another turns from comfortable to uncomfortable. Another
kind is what animal behaviorists call critical

distance, the point at which a wild animal turns from cautious alert to
attack. Determining a boundary's distance is not only very individual
but also dependent on the situation. What might be an uncomfortable
distance at a particular time or with a particular person might well be
quite comfortable at another time or with someone else, and vice versa.

Therapeutic Distance Sometimes a problem develops during therapy that
seems to have no origin and no solution. The following consultation
illustrates a problem that has occurred both with seasoned therapists
and with therapists in training. Although a bit extreme, the situation
described here is not unusual. In this instance, the client was becoming
ill---headaches and vomiting---within a few hours after each therapy
session. The therapist and client could not identify a cause, and both
were concerned. I met with therapist and client together. First I was
briefed on the client's personal history and the history of the therapy.
As the therapist worked a lot with the body, I ventured that perhaps the
body work was too provoking and rigorous for the client. No, they did no
body work at all; they just talked. Okay. Well then, might the material
being discussed be too traumatic, too much for the client, too
provocative? No, they were only discussing issues from the client's
daily life. Since the problem was not in the content or method, I became
curious about the physical arrangements. How did they usually sit
together? They showed me by placing themselves facing each other in
chairs approximately one meter apart. I asked the client to scan for
body awareness and report any sensations. The client felt a rapid heart
rate, cold sweaty hands, and slight nausea. I suggested that the client
move back and see what happened. He felt a slight relief. I encouraged
him to find a distance and a placement that further reduced the
discomforting symptoms. He moved back further and to the side. There was
more relief, but the client was still a bit uncomfortable. The client
continued to experiment in this way. Finally, a placement of chairs
about three meters apart, turned diagonally so they were no longer
facing

each other, gave a lot of relief---all signs of sympathetic arousal,
were replaced by signs of parasympathetic arousal. The client did not
become ill after that consultation. Both client and therapist continued
to pay close attention to their sitting position in subsequent sessions,
and the client had no further problem with illness following therapy
sessions. Two Exercises to Explore Boundaries\* While the following
exercises will be familiar to many, they are worth including for those
who have not encountered them before. The first interpersonal boundary
exercise is done in pairs. One partner slowly walks toward the other.
The stationary partner keeps track of her own body sensations and says
"stop" when she begins to feel uncomfortable. It is a good idea to
repeat the exercise several times with the stationary partner standing
at different angles to the moving partner---face, right and left
shoulder, back toward the walking partner. It is important that the
stationary partner talks about what she senses in her body and feelings.
This exercise illustrates the difficulty many have feeling their
boundary and being able to say "no" or "stop." Sometimes the stationary
partners body and emotional state never change, so she never says "stop"
and the moving partner ends up walking into her. When this happens it is
usually because the starting distance was already inside of the
stationary partner's interpersonal boundary. It is not possible for the
stationary partner to feel her boundary when the moving partner is
already past it at the start point. If this happens, try repeating the
exercise from a greater start distance. This is also true for people in
their daily lives. It is not possible to feel where your "stop" or "no"
point is if you have already crossed it. So if a client

reports that the distance between the two of you is okay, consider if
the client is actually comfortable or if she can't feel her boundary
because you are already too close. When in doubt, have either of you
move a little and see what happens. You can always move back to where
you started. An example: As we began our second session, Thomas looked
like he was holding his breath. I inquired about our placement. He said
it was fine, but still did not breathe. I suggested I move back a little
just to see what happened and he agreed. When I did he immediately
exhaled and breathed easier. He also noticed the change. We proceeded
with the session from that distance. The second interpersonal boundary
exercise involves the use of yarn (or string or rope) to help visualize
one's boundary. The client in individual therapy or in a group therapy
takes a length of yarn and uses it to draw a circle around himself at
the radius he perceives his comfort distance to be. It is good to have
the client talk about the experience while he is doing it, including how
it feels in his body to make his boundary concrete. Then, with the
client's permission, the therapist can roam about the room moving in and
out of the client's boundary (as we actually do with others all the
time). The client is asked to track his somatic and emotional responses,
expressing what is happening while the therapist walks. He should notice
when he feels an unmolested space, and when he feels intruded on. He
should also feel free to adjust his boundary at any time. A point worthy
of note: The wider the radius of the boundary, the more easily it is
invaded and the more frequent and intense the client's feelings of
intrusion. Eventually, the client can be taught to redraw his boundary
(actually with the yarn, as well as figuratively). When the client is
ready, an additional intervention can be useful: With the client's
permission the therapist comes to a pause just inside the client's yarn
and does not move. The client will usually feel uncomfortable, sometimes
angry. The therapist

then helps the client to figure out that if he draws his boundary in a
tighter circle around him, the therapist will no longer be intruding
inside of his boundary. Often this gives a client a feeling of mastery
over his personal space that he can take out into his daily life in
business, social, and personal contacts, on public transportation, in
restaurants, etc.

Concrete Boundary at the Skin Level The expression "thin skinned" is apt
in describing many with PTSD. Traumatic events often intrude past the
skin, either physically or psychologically. A 3-year-old friend of mine,
Lane, had suffered plenty of medical trauma. She greatly enjoyed the
company of one child at a time, but was unable to tolerate the
stimulation of multiple children. At an annual family gathering she
clung desperately to one or the other of her parents. Though she was
usually secure with their comfort, this time it was not enough for her
as the excitement generated by several children increased. I was touched
by her plight and carefully approached her as she held fast to her
mother, visibly shaken. I took my hand and began to gently, but firmly,
rub the surface of her back. As I did this I said, "Here's Lane. Can you
feel Lane here?" She began to calm and relax. Her whimpering ceased. As
long as I kept my hand at her back, reminding her of where her physical
body was, and where it stopped, she could maintain her composure.
Whenever I withdrew my hand, her upset would again increase, even if I
continued the verbal reminders. Her mother and I were both fascinated at
the dramatic change when I marked her boundary, and disturbed that she
couldn't maintain it in the absence of my hand. Later that week Lane's
mother and I discussed strategies for increasing her sense of physical
boundary. We invented games they could play together. One involved their
placing hands, arms, legs, or feet together and mom instructing Lane to
shift the focus of the sensations at the surface of her skin: "Feel
Mommy,

now feel Lane." As such exercises helped Lane to have a more secure
sense of the edges of her body, her tolerance of child uproar improved.
Thickening Helen's Skin Helen was in her mid-twenties when she sought
therapy following a childhood marred by sexual and physical abuse.
Needless to say, she had many problems and was very "thin skinned." A
city dweller without a car, she was often plagued with anxiety when
confronted with public transportation. It wasn't the travel itself that
was intimidating, but the risk of inadvertent physical contact. Her fear
of casual touch was evident even in the therapy situation. She needed to
be very careful as she entered and left my room lest we accidentally
brushed shoulders. She made me promise I would never give her an
affectionate pat on the shoulder on her way out the door. I'd never had
a client so fearful of even bumping shoulders with someone. As my first
principle is attending to the safety of the client both in and outside
of the session, I proposed that we figure out a way to help her feel in
control of casual touch---to give her some tools to avoid it, stop it,
and keep it from feeling like it invaded beneath her skin. We both knew
that bumping into people was sometimes inevitable on buses, trains, and
subways. First Helen worked on building muscle tone to thicken and
toughen the cushioning under her skin. Highly motivated, she lifted
weights, did pushups and sit-ups and walked daily for several months.
Next we constructed a program whereby she could learn to move away from
an unwanted touch or move the hand or shoulder of another away from her.
She was convinced she needed to become proficient at this and was
willing to brave some discomfort to achieve it. In this instance I made
an exception to my rule of not touching trauma clients, as the program
we created necessitated brief touch. Helen insisted that the potential
gains outweighed the risks. (An option would have been to encourage her
to try the same exercises with a trusted friend, or have her bring a
friend to the therapy. That would bypass the therapist-client touch
issue. However, Helen had no friends at the time we embarked on this
task---she was too afraid of being touched to have any)

Helen chose the initial task I would demonstrate first; then she would
try herself We stood, facing each other at arm's length, and when she
was ready, she would place her hand on my shoulder. Then I would twist
my trunk away from her hand and step back out of reach, causing her hand
to fall to her side. When it was Helen's turn, she would tell me when
she was ready for me to place my hand on her shoulder. She would then
try a similar twist with a back step until my arm fell at my side. Next
we tried standing shoulder to shoulder. I instructed her first to just
try stepping to the side away from my shoulder. Once she had that down I
suggested she stay where she was and just pull her shoulders in toward
the center of her body, narrowing her shoulder width, so that the
distance between our shoulders increased. This may seem very simplistic,
but for Helen it was very hard work. She had a lot of anxiety at first,
but as her facility grew she became calmer and more confident. Our third
exercise involved standing facing at arm's length again. Helen would ask
me to place my hand on her shoulder; then she would remove it more
directly. One way was to just push it with the opposite hand; another
was to rotate the arm on the same side in a circle, gently batting my
arm away. We discussed the importance of doing this calmly, even if she
were angry. The idea was to stop someone from touching her, not to
provoke a conflict. We drilled these exercises again and again over many
weeks. As Helen's facility grew, her "skin" seemed to toughen and
thicken and with that her confidence to venture out in the world
increased. She also became more trusting of me, as she felt more capable
of stopping me from doing something she didn't want. Eventually she
eased her vigilance. One day she surprised me by asking me to change my
promise. Now she wanted me to casually touch her as she entered and left
my room---a pat on the shoulder or the like. She wanted to see how it
felt and decide herself if she would accept the touch or move away from
it.

Establishing a Sense of Boundary at the Skin Level

Trauma and PTSD are often the result of events that were in one way or
another physically invasive: assault, rape, car accidents, surgery,
torture, beatings, etc. Often it is loss of the sense of bodily
integrity that accelerates a trauma process out of control.
Reestablishing the sense of boundary at the skin level will often reduce
hyperarousal and increase the feeling of control over one's own body. To
increase the sense of bodily integrity, I often suggest that a client
physically feel his/her periphery/boundary---the skin. This can be done
in several ways: 1. Have your client use his own hands to rub firmly
(not too light, not too hard) over his entire surface. Make sure the
rubbing stays on the surface---skin (clothes over skin)---and does not
become a gripping or massaging of muscles. If your client doesn't like
touching himself, he can use a wall or door (often a cold wall is great)
to rub against a pillow or towel to make the contact. Remember,
especially, the back and the sides of the arms and legs. 2. Some clients
will feel too provoked even touching their own skin or being observed
doing it. In that case it might work to have them sense their skin
through sensing the objects they are in contact with. Have the person
feel where his buttocks meet the chair, his feet meet the inside of his
shoes, the palms of his hands rest on his thighs, etc. 3. As the client
does one of these, it is sometimes also useful to have him saying to
himself, "This is me," "This is where I stop," etc.

Visual Boundaries For some clients, just having the therapist look at
them is an intrusion. Reactions can be strong. Often intense feelings of
shame or embarrassment underlie this difficulty. In such cases it can be
a fairly simple matter for the therapist to turn her gaze away Clients
with this difficulty will be greatly relieved when the therapist looks
away. It takes some getting used to for the therapist who is accustomed
to relying on visual cues, but the potential benefit to the client
should help the therapist to tolerate her discomfort.

THE QUESTION OF CLIENT-THERAPIST TOUCH There is no denying the universal
need for touch and human contact. This is no less true for the
traumatized---perhaps more so. However, there can be complications when
the need for touch is met in the therapeutic situation. Both
transference and countertransference can be provoked to an uncontainable
degree. For more stable clients (Type I and Type IIA), the hazards may
be minimized, but with Type IIB clients therapist touch is too risky to
be advisable. For example, it is not unusual for the touching therapist
to become perceived as a perpetrator to the physically or sexually
abused client. Needless to say, this is not helpful to the therapeutic
process. Here is an example of learning the hard way: Kurt had been both
abused and neglected in his developmental years. He demanded a lot of my
time and attention. I encouraged Kurt to increase his body awareness and
learn his interpersonal boundaries, but he was skeptical. During several
sessions he complained of needing to be held. He was sure that was what
he needed from me. He became angry when I hesitated. He finally insisted
that we just try it and see how it went. Going against my better
judgment, I relented. He wanted me to put my arms around him as we sat
side by side on the couch. Instead of experiencing the relieving contact
he envisioned, his anxiety climbed. He couldn't relax and became
frustrated with himself, and then with me. He felt that I must have been
doing something wrong because he was feeling so scared. Kurt was not
able to connect his rising fear at being held now with his earlier
history of abuse; I became perceived as the perpetrator. It was not
possible to resolve the conflict during subsequent sessions and he
eventually left therapy with me. A better strategy for helping the
traumatized client to get her needs for touch met is to teach her how to
meet those needs among her closest family and friends or in a group
therapy situation. For a client to be able to ask for, receive, and
utilize touch among her network, she must have developed the ability to
perceive and respect her own boundaries.

As a consequence of years of incest, Blair was confused about her
boundaries. She knew she needed contact and often went beyond what was
comfortable for her to get it. She was often promiscuous in an effort to
get physical contact. In the past she had suffered several bouts of
sexually transmitted diseases. It was a confusing dilemma for her: If
she respected her interpersonal boundary she was afraid she would never
again be touched. She knew no compromise. After helping her to increase
her body awareness, I suggested that she run an experiment at home. She
agreed. I advised that she choose a friend, male or female, with whom
she could experiment with her touch boundaries. We discussed the pros
and cons of several choices; Blair settled on two people she would ask.
When one friend agreed, I coached Blair in the experiment. Blair would
monitor her body awareness throughout and record the changes for us to
discuss at the next session. The experiment involved Blair's finding out
what kind of touch her friend could give while Blair maintained a normal
heart rate and breathing---that is, did not become anxious. At first
Blair thought the experiment was a bit ludicrous. She was so used to
being touched that she was skeptical that she needed such caution. But
she found out differently. When she focused on her sensations, she
discovered that she did indeed become anxious when she was held around
her whole body. It was the first time she realized that her promiscuous
behavior necessitated cutting off from her body sensations. Through
pursuing the experiment, she further discovered that hand holding was
completely comfortable. In the ensuing weeks, Blair paid more attention
to her body awareness when she was being touched. In the therapy
sessions, we looked at her discoveries and she received further coaching
on how to ask for the kind of touch she wanted and how to say no to
touch she didn't want.

MITIGATING SESSION CLOSURE Every trauma therapist knows that ending a
single trauma therapy session can sometimes be difficult; as discussed
previously, trauma processes can easily accelerate. When timing of a
session does not fit within the usual

therapeutic time frame, it can be difficult for both therapist and
client. Most of the principles and techniques discussed in this and the
preceding two chapters can be used as aids to easing the problem of
session closure. They can be applied both to pace the session and to end
it. Equipping the client to apply the brakes gives an advantage to both
client and therapist. For the client, the safety of the therapeutic
process is increased as he gains confidence in his ability to
control---turn on and turn off---his traumatic memories. Courage to
confront difficult issues usually increases when the client knows he can
come out of it any time. When client and therapist are well practiced in
braking before traumatic material is addressed, acceleration can be
stopped at any time. Further, keeping the client's arousal at a low
level throughout the therapy session assures that the process will not
get out of control in the first place. Familiarity with the client's
resources will help the therapist keep the client from processes where
he does not have the tools to stop. Of course, there will be times when
judgment slips and the session will need to be extended a few minutes
for the purpose of putting on the brakes, but this will not occur often
if the preparation is adequate. Sometimes the best strategy to timing
session closure is to end early. It can be useful to be on the look-out
for "stopping places" (as with Gail's session at the end of the previous
chapter)---an integration, an "aha!," a spontaneous reduction in
arousal. There are often several within a single session. It is usually
better to send the client home after a briefer session where he reached
a significant integration or relief than to continue the session to the
end of the allotted time when he may be uncomfortable or in a muddle.
The time left after stopping specific trauma work can also be well used
to address integration of trauma therapy into the client's daily life.
In the next chapter, application of body awareness and other somatic
tools will be discussed in relationship to facilitating the addressing
of traumatic memories. \* The history of these exercises is curious as
there are several organizations that claim to have originated each.
Either the original inspiration for them has been long forgotten, or
those groups have coincidentally developed similar exercises at around
the same time.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER EIGHT

Somatic Memory Becomes Personal History

Regardless of the techniques or modalities employed, the goals of trauma
therapy should be: 1.

To unite implicit and explicit memories into a comprehensive narrative
of the events and aftermath of the traumatic incident. This includes
making sense of body sensations and behaviors within that context.

2.  To eliminate symptoms of ANS hyperarousal in connection with those
    memories.
3.  To relegate the traumatic event to the past: "It is over. That was a
    long time ago. I survived." Since the mid-1980s several treatment
    models for working with trauma have emerged. In fact, within the
    field a feeling of competition has arisen. The prevailing
    expectation is for one therapy model to emerge as the therapy for
    trauma. This attitude is cause for concern, because it does a

disservice to our clients. Each available therapy helps some clients,
and each of them also fails at times. Every modality has strengths as
well as weaknesses. Just as there is no one medication to treat anxiety
or depression, there is no one-size-fits-all trauma therapy. In fact,
sometimes it is the therapeutic relationship, not any technique or
model, that is the primary force for healing trauma. All of the trauma
treatment modalities, though, have two things in common: They are all
highly structured, and they are all highly directive. Each method
involves a precise protocol that must be followed to reach resolution of
traumatic memories. This requires that the therapist be directive,
steering the protocol rather than following the client's process. It
appears that this commonality is no accident. Those working with
trauma---from divergent disciplines---demonstrate agreement that working
with trauma requires structure and direction. This makes sense as
following the client's process without intervention usually results in
either avoidance of traumatic memories or becoming overwhelmed by them.
Though efficacy studies can help point the way to suitable models, they
can also be misleading. First of all, most such studies are based on
Type I trauma clients. In addition, studies conducted by the proponents
of one method primarily report positive results, whereas those conducted
by opponents report negative results. Perhaps a better basis for judging
the success or failure of a method might be to trust the client's body
awareness and symptom profile: "Has this helped you? Are you calmer,
more contained, better functioning? Okay, let's continue." "This isn't
helping? You feel worse, more unstable, less able to handle your daily
life? Okay, let's try something else." As previously stated, the safest
trauma therapy comprises several models, so the therapy can be adapted
to the specific needs of the client. Regardless of the therapy methods
that are being employed, the topics presented in this chapter will be
fundamental to improving the quality and outcome of trauma therapy.

BEWARE THE WRONG ROAD

Memory is malleable and subject to influence. Continuous as well as
recovered memories can be highly accurate, and they can also have
inaccuracies. A good illustration of the vulnerability of memory is
provided by a friend's son who broke his arm at the age of 8. The boy,
now 12, remembers most of the incident accurately: falling from the
tree, breaking the arm, the trip to the hospital, having the arm set by
a doctor. However, there is one integral detail that he misremembers. In
the boy's memory it is his mother who held him as the broken bone was
set. Actually, it was his father. The implications of this kind of
memory distortion are profound. A continuous or recovered memory of an
incidence of abuse could, for example, be generally true, while the
perpetrator, or age, or place, etc., could be remembered inaccurately.
This is not to say that all recovered memories should be suspect; it is
also possible for them to be highly accurate, as has been shown in
studies and reports by Andrews (1997), Duggal and Sroufe (1998), and
Williams (1995). The uncertain nature of memory forces the trauma
therapist into a difficult position. Clients present memories of trauma
that have been continuous; they also present memories that have been
recalled as a part of therapy, outside of therapy, and even prior to
therapy Memories can also be recalled whether or not you or the client
are attempting to recover them. No matter how the memories occur, the
problem remains. How does one evaluate the accuracy of a memory? When
there are corroborative records, witnesses, or evidence, the veracity of
memory can be determined. When there is no corroboration, accuracy may
be suspect. It may not be possible to determine the correctness of a
"memory." A therapeutic dilemma occurs when either the therapist and/or
the client feels a need to credit an unsubstantiated memory as "true" or
"false." Onno Van der Hart and Ellert Nijenhuis (1999) call this
"reflexive belief" and caution against its practice as the risk of false
negatives or false positives is high. Whichever attribution, true or
false, is applied, it will greatly influence the direction of the
therapy and the client's life. The only route under such circumstances
is to continue the work but restrain the judgment. That can be difficult
to bear for both client and therapist. But not to do so risks making a
mistake with dire consequences.

Risks Along the Wrong Road It is easy to get led down the wrong road.
When that happens, the client can suffer greatly. Decompensation can
even occur. Of course, it is not always possible to tell if
decompensation is the result of the impact of a recovered traumatic
memory or destabilization from seeking the memory of a trauma that is
not there. When in doubt, signs of hyperarousal in the autonomic nervous
system as well as other symptoms, are good indicators. An example: Brad
came to therapy depressed, anxious, and suicidal. He was pale, his
breathing quick and shallow. This, he reported, was not his normal mode.
He became increasingly decompensated while seeing another
psychotherapist whom he had engaged after developing feelings of having
been raped as a child. The therapist had been working with him to
recover memories of a possible childhood rape. When Brad became
seriously suicidal, he realized something was wrong and went looking for
another therapist. Brad's childhood had been troubled. He was arrested a
couple of times as a juvenile and had spent several months in detention.
This background became pertinent in accessing Brad's current state.
Approximately nine months prior to his engaging the other
psychotherapist, Brad's house had been burglarized and ransacked while
he was out one evening with his family; the burglar had set off a silent
alarm. Brad arrived home to find his house crawling with police. The
previous therapist had not paid attention to that disturbing, recent
incident at all, but had headed straight for the felt, but unknown rape.
Brad proceeded to decompensate more and more as they looked further for
childhood memories to explain the feeling of rape. After I took Brad's
history I said to him, "You may or may not have been raped as a child.
There is no way to know as you do not remember and there are no records.
However, the fact of the recent burglary and subsequent police intrusion
is enough to account for your symptoms, your feelings of having been
raped. Many people would describe their reaction to such an intrusion as
feeling as if I have been raped.' If you factor in your

juvenile arrest record, I can imagine that both the burglary and the
police intrusion were very shocking for you." Upon hearing my
evaluation, Brad visibly calmed. Healthy color crept into his cheeks.
His respiration deepened and slowed. The decrease in arousal was
palpable in the room; Brad could feel it distinctly in his body. His
suicidal ideation disappeared. Within the week he was emotionally
contained and back to a normal level of functioning. In subsequent
sessions, we addressed those more recent events. Unfortunately, this is
not an isolated example. One way to avoid this kind of therapeutic error
is to take a careful history and always ask, "What brings you into
therapy now?" If the answer is something like "a suspicion" of early
abuse or other forms of trauma, always ask further, "What brought that
up now?" or "What triggered that now?" If the client isn't sure, careful
questioning about stressful events within the last few months to a year
may lead to a triggering incident that needs to be addressed first.
Focusing on the current event that brought a client to therapy in the
first place is one way to avoid going down the wrong road.

Getting All the Information An excellent example of avoiding a wrong
road by getting all the pertinent information is provided by Donald
Nathanson in the first chapter of Shame and Pride (1992). Nathanson used
common sense that saved his client a lot of money and a lot of anguish.
He describes a former patient who returned for therapy confounded that
he had lost his capacity for dealing with his anxiety something his
previous therapy had emphasized. His current high level of anxiety was
impervious to all of the tools he had gained. He was "afraid of
everything." At the first interview, among other informationgathering,
Nathanson wisely questioned the patients "nasal speech" and found out he
had been suffering a cold. It turned out that the client was taking
medication that contained pseudoephedrine, a kind of synthetic
adrenaline. Such medications mimic the body's reaction to stress---
heightened sympathetic arousal. It quickly became clear to Nathanson
that

this patients symptoms were caused by the medication, not by anxiety
Relieving the anxiety symptoms then became easy---just change the
medication. Imagine what would have happened to Nathanson's patient if
this doctor had not been so wise. They would have begun to look for a
psychological cause for his anxiety, digging and digging. The results
could have been disastrous as well as costly. Such mistakes are easily
made when either a therapist or client acts on preconceived predictions
and leaps to psychological causes for somatic symptoms. Severe problems
can occur when the preconceived leap is to trauma. Other physical
conditions can mimic psychological problems. For example, consider the
hormonal changes due to aging. Perimenopause is the term now being
applied to the extended period of hormonal and menstrual changes that
lead up to the menopause, the complete cessation of menstruation.
Perimenopause can begin as many as ten years before actual menopause.
During that time hormones may fluctuate erratically and create numerous
physical and psychological symptoms (Begley 1999), including ones that
mimic anxiety. Dorothy, 48, would awaken suddenly in the night feeling
very warm, her heart racing. Influenced by a friend who was in therapy
and a self-help book she had read, she began to wonder if she had been
molested as a child and was starting to have disturbing dreams. She was
very upset. I suspected her symptoms might be consistent with
perimenopausal changes. She was not waking with a sweaty hot flash, but
something similar. Because she still had regular periods, she had not
considered that her symptoms could be hormone related. I suggested that
she keep a log of the pattern of the nighttime incidents and referred
her to her gynecologist for hormone tests. Both the tests and the log
confirmed that these incidents occurred cyclically, when estrogen levels
were the lowest. Her anxiety over possible molestation disappeared. One
further caution: The effects of early medical trauma can be mistaken for
effects of physical and sexual abuse. Medical intervention that involves
genital or anal areas---surgery, examinations, treatment of vaginal or

bladder infections, rectal thermometers, suppositories, and enemas---can
be traumatic for some children. As adults, the somatic symptoms can
mimic those of sexual abuse. It is important to consider possible
medical trauma when evaluating adults with unconfirmed suspicions of
child physical or sexual abuse. It is critical to consider more than the
client's belief or the therapists intuition of the cause of symptoms.
Careful and comprehensive historytaking, as well as a generous dose of
common sense, will go a long way to prevent potentially damaging
excursions down the wrong road.

SEPARATING PAST FROM PRESENT Ultimately, the main goal of trauma therapy
is to relegate the trauma to its rightful place in the client's past.
For that, explicit memory processes must be engaged to secure the
context of the event in time and space. Usually separation of past and
present is an automatic result of any good trauma therapy; it does not
usually need to be addressed head-on. The following example is an
exception. It is included here to emphasize the importance of
recognizing a trauma is over, past, done, and survived. In this unusual
instance, that message sank in with only one intervention. It is not
likely to happen in the normal course of trauma therapy, though it is
what we are striving for. Usually anxious in a group, Dorte became
panicked during a workshop exercise (racing heart, dry mouth, cold
sweat). Through simple attention to body awareness, a memory emerged. As
a child Dorte had been trapped by a group of other youngsters who
taunted and restrained her. She had been very frightened. She kept
repeating to me, "I couldn't get away, I couldn't get away." Each time
she repeated the phrase her hyperarousal increased both to my
observation and by Dorte's report. In an attempt to circumvent this
rise, I commented, "But you did get away. I know you got away." Her
symptoms continued and she became confused. I asked her if she would
like to know how I knew she got away. She nodded vigorously, yes, she
did. Pointing to the place where she was sitting I responded simply, "I
know you

got away because you are here." "Oh!" she replied---and I could almost
see the light bulb go on over her head. She comprehended immediately
that she could not be sitting in front of me if she had not, indeed,
gotten away. Her symptoms of panic disappeared simultaneously with that
insight and did not return. She was still not wild about being in
groups, but her extreme anxiety decreased considerably following that
intervention. Separating past from present can also be accomplished on a
body level. Sometimes an intervention as simple as encouraging a client
to move a finger or an arm or just get up and walk while working with a
traumatic memory will help to reinforce the here-and-now reality that
the trauma is no longer occurring: I could not move then, but I can move
now.

WORKING WITH THE AFTERMATH OF THE TRAUMA FIRST It is a mistake to
consider a single traumatic incident as a solitary event. Every
traumatic event is comprised of three distinct stages, any one of which
can increase or decrease the ultimate impact of trauma. The three stages
are: (1) circumstances leading up to the traumatic incident, (2) the
traumatic incident itself, and (3) the circumstances following the
incident, both short-term (minutes and hours) and long-term (days,
weeks, months). before the trauma → the actual traumatic event → after
the trauma The time following a traumatic event is critical. The quality
of contact and help the victim receives can greatly influence the
outcome. It is for this reason that it is often advisable to resolve the
issues following a traumatic incident first, before attempting to
address the incident itself. Sometimes what occurs after the incident is
more emotionally devastating than the incident itself. Imagine, for
example, the potential outcomes for the trauma victims in the following
scenarios:

1. Two women with corresponding backgrounds and personalities are
similarly injured in the same type of car accident. As husband arrives
at the hospital visibly shaken, worried about his wife's condition. He
greets her warmly and with obvious concern. B's husband arrives at the
hospital angry. He is worried about the condition of the new, expensive
car. He greets his wife with accusation. 2. Two war veterans also with
corresponding backgrounds and personalities are from the same combat
unit. They are both discharged following injuries received during the
same offensive. In his community A is welcomed home as a hero. Everyone
is concerned about his injuries. He is given help to reestablish himself
B, on the other hand, is greeted by his friends with contempt for his
violent acts. His family is impatient that his recovery seems slow. He
is not given help to reestablish himself in his community It does not
take a research study to speculate that, all other variables being
equal, the As in the above scenarios are likely to fare better than the
Bs. Just as a tidal wave sometimes follows an earthquake, the aftermath
of trauma can wreak even greater damage. Regardless of the treatment
method, choosing which part of a traumatic incident is to be addressed
first can be critical to the course and outcome of the therapy.
Approaching direct work with traumatic memories is always difficult.
When started from the beginning of the event, the load can be
insurmountable:

before the trauma → the actual traumatic event + after the trauma Start
at the beginning, and there is all of it to face.

One of the wisdoms of addressing the circumstances that came after the
trauma first is that it reduces the load considerably when addressing
the actual incident. Afterward, when approaching the actual event, there
is only that to contend with:

before the trauma → the actual traumatic event → after the trauma
Moreover, when you start at the end, the client gets to face the worst
of the traumatic event secure in the knowledge that it did actually end,
and she has survived. The following case, illustrates these points:
Ruth\* is a Western European woman in her mid-thirties who at 19 was
raped during a student vacation in a Middle Eastern country. She works
as a social worker for immigrants and often comes in contact with
refugees from the Middle East. She sought therapy after noticing that
over the previous few months she had growing anxiety at work, which was
beginning to interfere with her ability to continue her job. She was
experiencing increasing flashbacks of the rape, difficulty
concentrating, and periodic nightmares. The therapy began with my taking
a careful case history. As we discussed her past and current situation,
it became clear that her current anxiety had been set off after she had
been threatened by one of her Middle Eastern clients several months
earlier. She hadn't thought much about it at the time, but could now see
the connection. She was a Type I client with no other incidence of
sexual assault or other trauma in her history. We discussed Ruth's
situation at work and she agreed that for the time being she would not
work with potentially violent clients---she was already receiving
support for this from her colleagues. Early in therapy Ruth outlined the
circumstances surrounding the rape. She had been traveling with a group
of friends, but had chosen to go off by herself one day with a polite
young Arab, Abdul, who offered to show her the city. No one thought much
about it. Abdul was very knowledgeable and showed her many places she
wouldn't have otherwise seen. Toward the end of the day they encountered
one of Abdul's friends and went back to Abdul's apartment. As night
fell, she was told by Abdul that he would have sex with

her but would not allow his friend to because Abdul was "in love" with
her. She protested and asked to be taken back to her hotel. Abdul
threatened that if she didn't allow him, both of them would have sex
with her. Ruth then went dead in her body. The next morning Abdul showed
her back to her hotel, stopping to buy her breakfast on the way. When
they arrived, her friends expressed concern about where she had been,
but Ruth was so embarrassed and ashamed about what had happened that she
told them she had spent the night dancing. Once home, a vaginal
infection forced Ruth to seek medical treatment. A gynecologist was the
first person she told about the rape. His response was cold and
clinical, with an edge of sexual interest that increased her feeling of
shame. Eventually she told one of the friends she had traveled with. She
remembered feeling ashamed and fearing she would be judged. Her friend,
however, was very compassionate, terribly sorry for what had happened.
Ruth felt relieved to have finally told someone. Over several sessions
early in the therapy we decided to take a look at the situation
immediately following the actual rape. Here the connections to her
inability to act against the offender or seek help gradually became
clear. When Ruth and Abdul left his apartment the next morning, Ruth
felt she had to be nice to him. She didn't know where she was or how to
get to her hotel. She couldn't speak the language. She felt dependent on
Abdul to get her back to safety---dependent for safety on the man who
had raped her! So she let him hold her right hand. As she remembered,
she could feel the tension in that hand and the impulse to draw it away.
As Ruth and Abdul approached her friends, she had an urge to scream out,
"Call the police! He raped me!" but stifled it by tensing in her throat;
she feared the reaction of the crowd. As Ruth had a Middle Eastern
girlfriend in her current life, I suggested that she ask her about the
cultural attitudes involved here. Ruth received a lot of insight from
her friend and realized that a Middle Eastern crowd would have
considered Ruth, a young European woman accusing a local man of rape, to
be a whore. At best they would have ignored her; at worst they would
have accused her or beat her. The police, the friend was sure, would not
have taken the situation seriously. They might even have arrested

Ruth, instead. This cultural insight was critical in alleviating Ruth's
guilt for not having sought help or retribution. Upon returning to her
memories, I had Ruth sense what she had to do in her body to make
herself hold the rapist's hand and not cry out: it was a difficult feat.
She had to tense her arm while relaxing her hand, tense her throat, not
run, etc. At the same time I encouraged her to consider how smart she
had been---how she had likely saved herself additional harm, shame, and
anguish by controlling herself in these ways. Now Ruth became angry at
the rapist and how he had set her up. Previously she had always been
angry only at herself. She was ready to separate her responsibility from
his, realizing that it was he who was in the wrong. (She knew---and we
still needed to work on---that there was something amiss in her judgment
that she walked into the situation. But she realized at this point that
the responsibility for the rape itself clearly was Abdul's.) Ruth had
clearly said "No!" to his sexual advances. Then, for the first time
since the incident, Ruth remembered that Abdul had attempted to strangle
her when she resisted. This was an important step. It was crucial to
assign guilt. Many trauma survivors are all too ready to take all blame,
and many therapists are too quick to place all blame on the offender.
For the client to reclaim his or her power and sanity, the truth of
guilt must be illuminated. A rapist is responsible for a rape. Period.
And the victim of rape must be willing to look at how he or she came
into the situation---not to feel guilty, but so that he or she can
prevent the same from happening in the future. Ruth expressed her anger
and cried that it was not fair that Abdul got off free and she had
suffered all these years. I suggested that she allow herself a fantasy
of what she would have liked to have happen. She was very quick and
clear: he should have been caught, tried, and castrated. "Men who can't
contain their sexual hormones shouldn't be allowed to have them." She
was sure she didn't want him killed and didn't want him to suffer pain,
just be deprived of the hormones that she saw as the cause of what he
did to her. Ruth now felt different. For the first time since the rape
she didn't feel ashamed for having been raped. Instead she felt angry at
the rapist.

This was the pivotal turn in Ruth's therapy. The rest was much easier.
When she worked with the rape itself, Ruth was not plagued with shame
and doubts about who was in the wrong. And when she approached looking
at how she got herself into that situation, the shame of the rape itself
was separated from her guilt for not having been more cautious.

BRIDGING THE IMPLICIT AND THE EXPLICIT When PTSD splits mind and body,
implicitly remembered images, emotions, somatic sensations, and
behaviors become disengaged from explicitly stored facts and meanings
about the traumatic event(s)---whether they are consciously remembered
or not. Healing trauma requires a linking of all aspects of a traumatic
event. The implicit and the explicit must be bridged in order to create
a cohesive narration of those events, as well as to place them in their
proper slot in the client's past. Making sense of implicitly encoded
sensations, emotions, and behaviors in the context of the traumatic
memory is a crucial part of this process. The tools for creating this
bridge are to be found in both psychotherapy and body-psychotherapy. It
is necessary to address what occurs in the body, and it is equally
necessary to use words to make sense of and describe the experience. The
bottom line is that clients need to be helped to think and feel
concurrently--- that is, to be able to sense their sensations, emotions,
and behaviors while formulating coherent conclusions about the
relationship between those and the images and thoughts that accompany
them. Finally, a cohesive narrative of the traumatic incident will take
form and the event will come to occupy its proper place in the client's
past. The two therapy sessions presented below illustrate the
integration that is possible with trauma therapy when both
dimensions---mind and body---are included. As before, therapists are
encouraged to think about which elements might enhance their own ways of
working.

Gail, Part II

Gail's first therapy session to resolve an earlier car accident was
described at the end of Chapter 6. What follows is the transcript of a
subsequent session. T: What do you want to work on today? G: Someone
recently asked me how I got the scars on my arm and it made me feel
light headed and nauseous. I got a very clear image of the end of the
accident, when the car stopped rolling and I looked down and saw that my
left arm was broken. T: What are you feeling in your body as you talk
about that now? G: Slightly anxious here (she points toward her belly)
and a funny feeling in my jaw, a slight shaking. T: How's our distance?
(I remembered her tendency to dissociate.) G: (She smiles.) It's fine.
T: Tell me what you remember about your anchor. (It is important to
recheck the anchor at each session. Sometimes it will need to he changed
or altered.) G: It's at a place near my friends house in a beautifully
forested valley with a crystal-clear shallow river; you can see the
rocks in the bottom. There's a particular granite rock I like to sit on.
T: What are you feeling in your body right now? G: My stomach is looser
and my shoulders have dropped, my hands are dry. (Parasympathetic signs
mean the nervous system is relaxed; it is safe to proceed.) T: Then
let's get to it. Okay? G: Okay. T: Where do you want to start? (Giving
the client control.) G: I want to tell you what happened when the car
stopped moving. It was then I first realized I was still here, still
alive. I looked down and saw that my forearm was bent

\[broken\], and I straightened it. It was as if I could not bear it
being bent like that. T: What are you feeling as you talk about this? G:
Nothing, no feeling, but somewhere in me I know it was really scary. T:
What is that like to know it was scary but not feel it? (Gail has
dissociated her fear. I want to know how she regards the incongruence. A
client should not he pushed to feel dissociated feelings.) G: It's
weird. I don't like it. I want to put those two things together. T:
Which two things? G: Feeling scared about my arm. T: Don't assume that
it needs to be BIG scary. (Gail is afraid to feel her fear and I do not
want her to imagine it any bigger than it is. Sometimes emotions are
dissociated because of the fear they will be overwhelming. Trauma
clients usually expect dramatic expressions of emotion. The fact is that
sometimes they are very subtle.) T: What do you feel in your body right
now? G: I feel my shoulder more. T: It looks like you are moving. Are
you? G: I'm twisting to the right. T: Do you want to follow that? See if
you can stay behind the impulse. Just follow it. (She twists more to her
right.) What happens when you do that? G: I remember wanting to throw my
arms around my boyfriend and feel him there, but he was unconscious.
(She begins to speak faster, and her voice tone rises.) Then this
policeman came to my window and I yelled, "Get me out of here!" I was
afraid the car would explode. And ... T: Wait. Slow down. Tell me what
you are feeling right now. (She's starting to he swept away by her
narrative. We have to apply the brakes, to prevent overwhelm or
retraumatization.) G: I feel kind of shaky, teary. T: Do you know what
the emotion is?

(At this point I do not want her to sink into the emotion. She's too
dubious for that. I want her to know what it is before she feels it
strongly so it will be more familiar, and hopefully more digestible.) G:
Frightened. And a bit like, I can't think of the word, like something
has to be taken care of right now---urgent. T: How does that feel in
your body? G: Shaky. And I have an impulse to get up, to move. (Many
feelings and sensations are being remembered at once.) T: Follow the
impulse. G: I don't feel like I can. What I want to do is tell you how
the policeman wouldn't let me do that. He wasn't letting me get up and
out. He was doing all the right things. He said, "Hang on. Can you feel
your feet? Can you feel your legs? Do you have any pain in your back?"
But I kept saying, "I just want to get out of here. I'm okay. Get me out
of here!" But he was making me go through all these things. T: Do you
know why he was doing that? (Reality checking.) G: He wanted to make
sure I didn't have a back injury. But I knew I didn't. I'd already
checked that, myself. I'd done that bit!! I'd already done that and I
just wanted to get out of there. T: What are you feeling now? G: Angry.
I want to say, "Shut up! I know it is safe to move me, get me out of
here." T: Do you remember and/or know how long it was from the time he
got to you till he helped you out of the car. (Another reality check. At
the time it probably felt like an eternity.) G: I don't think it was
very long. T: What are you feeling in your body now? G: A bit calmer. I
feel a slight trembling in my legs. (Trembling often accompanies a
release of fear, but it is not time to focus on it yet as she is not
very connected with it.) T: What is happening with your hands and arms?

G: (She looks down.) My right hand is holding my left arm. That's what I
did then: I braced my broken arm. (Visual cues and kinesthetic nerves
help the body to remember a posture central to Gail's memory of the
trauma.) T: How does that feel? G: I can feel something in my throat,
but I don't know what it is. T: How's the distance between you and me?
G: It's fine. T: Does it feel okay to go on? I'm aware I'm not taking
you to the anchor, but it seems this level of arousal is tolerable for
you. (Checking to see if she is dissociating. A lot is going on and she
does not seem very hyperaroused. It is usually the case that when
emotions are integrated, hyperarousal is reduced, but it's a good idea
to check.) G: Yes, that's fine. T: What are you aware of in your arms?
G: I don't want to take my right arm away from my left \[broken\] arm.
T: You don't seem to look at your left arm. Is that right? G: Yes. I
don't want to, but there's something there. T: You don't have to. G:
It's okay, I will. T: Don't do it yet. When you do, I suggest you just
take a little peek at a time. Take just one peek and see what happens.
(Taking a small, controlled bite.) G: (She glances quickly.) T: What
happened? G: I felt a shiver go through my body. T: All the way through?
G: Yeah. It feels like: oohhhh, it was horrible. (The shivering
increases.) T: Let that trembling happen.

(There is more connection to the fear now, and more chance for
integration.) G: I feel kind of sick. T: See if it's okay to stay with
the trembling and sick feeling a minute or so. (She does and the
trembling subsides.) T: How are you feeling? G: Calmer, but still a bit
sick. T: Don't you think that's a normal reaction? When someone sees a
broken limb in an unnatural position, you get a bit of a sick feeling.
G: Oh, yeah! It looked awful. Uuuh. (More shaking.) T: How does the
shaking feel? G: It feels quite good actually. (She is integrating this
memory: images, sensations, and feelings.) T: Don't make it more or
less, just let it do its thing. What happens to the sick feeling when
you shake like that? Does it get more or less? G: It gets less. T: How's
our distance? G: Okay T: The same? G: Only a slight pulling back.
(Slight dissociation. Time to put on the brakes and use the anchor.) T:
Let's take a little break. G: (Laughs with relief.) T: What kind of
trees are in your place? G: Oak. T: Is oak the kind of tree that has
those little helicopters that fall spinning? G: No, that's maple. Oaks
have acorns! T: Oh, yeah, that's right. (We both laugh.) (Laughter is a
great remedy for hyperaousal and dissociation.) T: Are you usually there
when leaves are on the trees, or not? G: I've been there with both.

T: All seasons? Have you seen the leaves turn colors, too? G: Yes. T:
What are you aware of in your body? G: Relief. Less tension. T: Do you
ever go barefoot in the stream? (Associating various sensations
connected to the anchor.) G: Oh, yeah! All the time. Well, not all the
time. Even in the winter just to get my toes wet. T: How does that feel?
G: It's incredibly cleansing. And very cold. But it really can clean out
anything. (She sighs deeply.) T: Can you feel yourself breathing? G:
Yes. T: Do you want to stay there for a while, or is it time to go back?
G: Stay a little while. I feel a rock under me. (The client takes
control.) T: What else? G: I can hear the sound of the water running
around me. T: Have you ever shown your rock to a friend? G: Not this
one. Other ones, yes. But this one is too special to me. Now I'm ready
to go back. (The more the client is in control, the more courage she
gathers to face the frightening past.) T: When you think of your arm,
what do you feel in your body? G: I feel myself tilt to the right and
pull back from seeing it. T: Can you describe that further? G: Yeah.
It's weird. It feels like if I leaned to the left, I'd get very
emotional. T: And when you lean to the right? G: There I feel nothing,
like when I thought, "I'm not going to let anyone see me like that," and
I straightened my arm. And I was "okay" from then on.

T: And when you moved your arm in that state, what did it feel like? G:
Nothing. No pain. No feeling. Entirely numb. T: So you partially
dissociated to accomplish an important task. (Recognizing the resource
in the defense.) G: Yes. I was afraid the bone would rip through my skin
if it was left like that when I was moved. But the doctors didn't like
that I had done it. T: You were doing everything you could do to protect
yourself. To accomplish that you had to make some kind of internal
split, which looks to be off to your right. G: Yes, and back. It's
definitely back. T: To your right and back. Can you feel yourself in
that place now? G: Sort of, but I haven't moved completely into it. I'm
hovering in the middle. T: I'm quite aware of your hands. Are you aware
of anything with your hands? G: They're shaking. T: They? G: Well,
actually my left one is shaking and my right one is not. T: Exactly. G:
It's like the left one is holding the fear. T: And the right? G: It's
like the right one is more steady, "I can handle this." (The right and
left hands are representing the right and left split that is occurring
between feeling and numbing.) T: I'm going to suggest that you put your
awareness in both hands at the same time. Can you do that? G: Yes. T:
Good. Keep your awareness in both while moving them closer together,
very slowly (The movement symbolizes integration of the feeling and the
numb parts of her.)

G: (Trembles as she does this.) T: Do you feel your shaking? G: Yes.
(She slowly continues.) T: What's happening? G: I feel angry. There's
something about me taking care of myself and others not taking care of
me. Like that I straightened my arm and made myself okay. T: What's
happening in your eyes? G: I'm getting tearful, sad. T: Do you know why?
(Can she make sense of her sensations and feelings---think while she is
feeling?) G: It wasn't that they didn't take care of me. I wouldn't let
them take care of me. I kept telling everybody I was okay. T: What was
the truth? G: Of what I did or how I felt? T: Of how you felt. G: I felt
really scared. (She starts to cry and her voice gets softer and rises an
octave.) The car went out of control and rolled over and over ... (She's
integrating the image of the accident with the dissociated emotion.) T:
... and you were really scared ... G: ... and I was really scared. It
was like it turned over in slow motion so it seemed like it took hours,
and I didn't know where it was going to land. T: ... and you were really
scared ... (Encouraging her to stay connected to the fear while she is
remembering. A big step in healing of trauma takes place when the client
feels safe enough, now, to feel the previously dissociated fear.) G: ...
and I was really scared. I was really scared! T: Do you feel that right
now? G: Yeah. (She trembles.) T: I can see it. Just let the trembling
happen.

(With more connection to the fear, the trembling will be more effective
in releasing it.) G: And ... T: Slow down. See if it is okay to stay
with the feeling in your body a bit longer. (G trembles a bit more.) G:
I can feel I'm beginning to get angry now. I want to tell you about it.
What was most unhelpful is what the policeman said. He came over and the
first thing out of his mouth was (G's voice becomes stronger), "Wow,
when I arrived and saw this car, I thought I was just going to be
picking up pieces!" And (she gets even louder with tears in her voice) I
DIDN'T NEED TO HEAR THAT! T: That scared you more. G: Yes! I really,
really didn't need to hear that! T: See if you can stay connected to the
anger and at the same time feel how much his words scared you. G:
No. I'm not going to feel how much that scared me. T: Okay. What are you
feeling in your body right now? G: Solid on my seat. A little gone away
though. T: Do you know why? G: I think because I don't want to feel that
fear. T: Did you ever tell anyone how scared you were? G: No, I was
"okay." I told everyone how lucky I was that I survived. I never told
anyone I was scared. T: Could you tell anyone, now? G: That might be
hard. Maybe my best friend. T: Can you imagine telling her? G: I know I
could tell her, but I don't know if I could feel anything. T: Would you
like to try? G: Yes. T: Do you know why I am suggesting this? (It is not
a guessing game. I want to know if she is thinking and able to follow my
motivation. I will tell her if she does not know.) G: Because I haven't
had any contact or support about it. T: Exactly. It seems you've been
much alone with that fear.

G: Yes, I have. T: Okay, are you game? G: Yes, I'd like to. T: So, in
your mind, imagine being together with your friend. Where would you two
be? G: In my kitchen. Just imagining it, I can feel I'm shaking a
little. T: Just let that happen. (She does and also cries for a while.
Then the tears and shaking subside.) What do you want to tell your
friend? G: (With a lot of emotion) I was so scared. I thought I was
going to die. Then this stupid policeman comes and tells me he thought I
was dead! I got so angry. What a stupid thing to say! T: You didn't die,
but you were very scared. G: That seems like a good thing to mention!
(Laughs) And I didn't! I didn't die. I actually wasn't even that hurt.
T: But, you were scared you were going to die. G: Physically, I wasn't
very hurt. But, boy, I was scared I was going to die! T: What are you
feeling in your body? G: Really awake. More calm. And my heart's stopped
racing. T: Do you think you could really tell your friend? G: Yes.
Actually, I want to. I think I'll call her when I get home. (Making a
bridge between therapy and the client's daily life is very important. If
the therapy is not relevant to current functioning then it is not worth
much.) T: How are you feeling in your body now? G: Quite calm, actually.
T: If it's okay, I'd like you to try looking at your left arm again. (G
looks at her arm.) What happens? (Checking to see how much has been
integrated and relieved.) G: I feel a bit sad seeing those scars, but
I'm not feeling sick or scared. T: Do you know what the sadness is
about?

G: I'm just sorry my arm was hurt and I didn't tell anyone I was scared.
T: I can well understand that. Does this feel like a good place to stop?
G: Yes it does. Commencing with a traumatic trigger, the scars on her
arm, Gail was able to recognize and integrate the most frightening
events of the car accident. Gradually, she made sense of somatic
sensations, emotions, and movements in the context of the visual and
auditory memory images that occurred. One of the most important insights
was the acknowledgment of how alone she was and has been with the
frightening memories of that accident. Talking with her best friend
about it will initiate a new behavior in Gail's current life. Hopefully,
the next time she is scared she'll be able to tell someone. By the end
of the session, Gail was able to return to the original stimulus---
looking at her arm---with absolutely no hyperarousal.

CHARLIE AND THE DOG, THE FINAL EPISODE This case was introduced in
Chapter 1 and was used to weave a thread through the Theory section. In
Chapter 6 it was used to illustrate how simple body awareness could calm
a seriously hyperaroused state. Charlie and the Dog will now be
concluded as an example of the importance of linking the implicit to the
explicit. Here both reality checking and attention to somatic impulses
assist in changing the reaction to a traumatic trigger. When Charlie
could sense his body (and this had helped him to calm
substantially---all signs of sympathetic activation were decreasing
except his dry mouth), he was ready to think. I asked him, "Is Ruff
anything like the dog that attacked you?" Startled, he answered, "I
don't know, I never looked at Ruff." This was amazing to everyone in the
group, as Charlie had been around Ruff several times over the preceding
two years. However, Charlie had managed to avoid Ruff completely He
became quite anxious

just at the thought of looking at Ruff. I encouraged him by suggesting
that he take just a very quick peek through his fingers (as a shy child
might do). He did it very fast---with the speed of a camera
shutter---just long enough to snap a visual image of Ruff. At that point
Charlie exclaimed with great surprise, "My goodness! Ruff doesn't look
anything like that dog who attacked me!" With that realization he calmed
down considerably, the stiffness melting from his body and sympathetic
excitation further decreased. It was a very dramatic response. Both he
and I waited and watched the melting happen, checking body awareness
from time to time. When the stiffness had fully melted, his legs
gradually became restless---it was easy to see the little tick-like
movements that developed in his thighs and shins. I brought his
attention to the movements, what Levine (1992) would call intentional
movements (slight muscle contractions that may indicate a behavioral
intention that has not been fulfilled) and I encouraged him to sense
them from the inside (through the interoceptive, kinesthetic nerves). I
suspected the movements would develop further if we were patient, and
they did. After a couple more minutes Charlie felt the impulse to curl
his legs away from where Ruff had been sitting. He did that, and
remarked, rather pleased, "I can move like this if Ruff comes back. Then
she couldn't put her head on my knee." Charlie then found he had a
further impulse to get up and walk a couple of meters away, which he did
saying, "I could also walk away if Ruff comes back." (As obvious as that
might seem, in Charlie's hyperaroused state, there had been no such
option.) At this point I checked Charlie's body awareness again; all
signs of hyperarousal were gone. Later in the workshop Charlie had the
opportunity to exercise his new tools as Ruff did, indeed, come again to
sit by him---twice. The first time Charlie was able to turn away from
Ruff without being triggered into flashback, though he reported that he
was a bit anxious. By the second time, Charlie just curled his legs away
from Ruff, who settled herself nearby. This time Charlie felt no anxiety
whatsoever. We never addressed the details of Charlie's trauma of being
attacked by a dog. Instead we facilitated body awareness, reality
testing, and the development of new behavioral resources. 1 met Charlie
some time after that workshop and he reported to me that he no longer
froze or broke into a cold sweat when seeing dogs behind windows or even
meeting them on the street, though he maintained a

high level of caution with the type of dog that had attacked him. A few
years later I saw Charlie again and he proudly told me that he and his
family had adopted a dog and welcomed it into their home. It was the
frosting on his sweet victory. The implicit memories represented by
Charlie's stiff tonic immobility, dry mouth, accelerated heart rate, and
the sensation of Ruff's head on his thigh were integrated with his
factual, explicit memory ("I was attacked by a dog"). Explicit processes
were engaged to identify here-and-now reality as separate from the past
("Ruff doesn't look anything like the dog who attacked me"). New
behaviors (curling the legs to one side, getting up and walking away)
were also encoded in both implicit memory (through practice) and
explicit memory (through describing and making sense of both old and new
behaviors). The body remembers traumatic events through the encoding in
the brain of sensations, movements, and emotions that are associated
with trauma. Healing PTS and PTSD necessitates attention to what is
happening in the body as well as the interpretations being made in the
mind. Language bridges the mind/body gap, linking explicit and implicit
memories. Somatic memory becomes personal history when the impact of
traumatic events are so weakened that the events can finally be placed
in their proper point in the client's past.

THE FAR SIDE © 1990 FARWORKS, INC. Used by permission. All rights
reserved.

- This case example is extracted and condensed from a previously
  published article (Rothschild, 1996/7, 1997).

OceanofPDF.com

References

American Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (3rd ed.). Washington DC: Author. American
Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington DC: Author. Andrews, B. (1997).
Forms of memory recovery among adults in therapy: Preliminary results
from an in-depth survey. In J. D. Read & D. S. Lindsay (Eds.),
Recollections of trauma: Scientific evidence and clinical practice
(pp. 455--460). New York: Plenum. Azar, B. (1998). Why can't this man
feel whether or not he's standing up? APA Monitor, 29(6), 18--20.
Bandler, R., & Grinder, J. (1979). Frogs into princes. Moab, UT: Real
People. Bauer, M., Priebe, S., & Graf, K. J. (1994). Psychological and
endocrine abnormalities in refugees from East Germany, part II: Serum
levels of Cortisol, prolactin, luteinizing hormone, follicle stimulating
hormone and testosterone. Psychiatry Research, 51, 75--85. Begley, S.
(1999, Spring/Summer). Understanding perimenopause. Newsweek, Special
Issue, 30--33. Bloch, G. (1985). Body and self: Elements of human
biology, behavior and health. Los Altos: William Kaufmann.

Bodynamic Institute Training Program, 1988--1992, Copenhagen, Denmark:
Author. Bremner, J. D., Randall, P. K., Scott, T. M., Bronen, R. A.,
Seibyl, J. P., Southwick, S. M., Delaney, R. C, McCarthy, G., Charney,
D. S., & Innis, R. B. (1997). Magnetic resonance imaging-based
measurement of hippocampal volume in posttraumatic stress disorder
related to childhood physical and sexual abuse: a preliminary report.
Biological Psychiatry, 41(1), 23--32. Bremner, J. D., Southwick, S.,
Brett, E., Fontana, A., Rosenheck, R., & Charney, D. S. (1992).
Dissociation and posttraumatic stress disorder in Vietnam combat
veterans. American Journal of Psychiatry, 149, 328--332. Breslau, N.,
Davis, G. C, Andreski, P., & Peterson, E. (1991). Traumatic events and
posttraumatic stress disorder in an urban population of young adults.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 48(3), 216--222. Breslau, N., Davis, G.
C, Andreski, P., & Peterson, E. (1991). Traumatic events and
posttraumatic stress disorder in an urban population of young adults.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 48(3), 216--222. Brett, E. A. (1996).
The classification of posttraumatic stress disorder. In B. A. van der
Kolk, A. C. McFarlane, & L. Weisaeth (Eds.), Traumatic stress
(pp. 117--128). New York: Guilford. Claparede, E. (1951). Recognition
and "me-ness." In D. Rapaport (Ed.), Organization and pathology of
thought (pp. 58--75). New York: Columbia University Press. (Original
work published 1911) Classen, C., Koopman, C, & Spiegel, D. (1993).
Trauma and dissociation. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 57(2),
178--194. Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes⑥ error. New York: Putnam.
Darwin, C. (1872/1965). The expression of the emotions in man and
animals. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. (Original work published
1872) De Bellis, M. D., Keshavan, M. S., Clark, D. B., Casey, B. J.,
Giedd, J. N., Boring, A. M., Frustaci, K., & Ryan, N. D. (1999).
Developmental traumatology, part II: Brain development. Biological
Psychiatry, 45(10), 1271--1284.

Duggal, S., & Sroufe, L. A. (1998). Recovered memory of childhood sexual
trauma: A documented case from a longitudinal study. Journal of
Traumatic Stress, 11(2), 301--321. Eich, J. E. (1980). The cue-dependent
nature of state-dependent retrieval. Memory and Cognition, 8(2),
157--173. Elliott, D. M. (1997). Traumatic events: Prevalence and
delayed recall in the general population. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 65(8), 811--820. Ferenczi, S. (1949). Confusion of
tongues between the adult and the child. International Journal of
Psychoanalysis, 30, 225--230. (Paper originally read at the 12th
International Psychoanalytical Congress, Wiesbaden, September 1932)
Gallup, G. G., & Maser, J. D. (1977). Tonic immobility: Evolutionary
underpinnings of human catalepsy and catatonia. In M. E. P. Seligman &
J. D. Maser (Eds.), Psychopathology: Experimental models (pp. 334--357).
San Francisco: W. H. Freeman. Grafton, S. (1990). "G" is for gumshoe.
New York: Ballantine. Goulding, M. M., & Goulding, R. L. (1997).
Changing lives through redecision therapy (Rev. ed.). New York: Grove.
Gunnar, M. R., & Barr, Ronald G. (1998). Stress, early brain
development, and behavior. Infants and Young Children, 11(1), 1--14.
Heide, F. J., & Borkovec, T. D. (1984). Relaxation-induced anxiety:
Mechanisms and theoretical implications. Behavioral Research and
Therapy, 22(1), 1--12. Heide, F. J., & Borkovec, T. D. (1983).
Relaxation-induced anxiety: Paradoxical anxiety enhancement due to
relaxation training. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
51(2), 171--182. Herman, J. L. (1992). Trauma and recovery. New York:
Basic. Hovdestad, W. E., & Kristiansen, C. M. (1996). Mind meets body:
On the nature of recovered memories of trauma. Women and Therapy, 19(1),
31--45. International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies. (1998).
Childhood trauma remembered: A report on the current scientific
knowledge base and its applications. Northbrook, IL: Author. Jacobsen,
R., & Edinger, J. D. (1982). Side effects of relaxation treatment.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 13(7), 952--953.

Janet, P. (1887). L'Anesthésie systematisée et la dissociation des
phénomemés psychologiques \[Systematized anesthesia and the
psychological phenomenon of dissociation\]. Revue Philosophique, 23(1),
449--472. Jørgensen, S. (1992). Bodynamic analytic work with
shock/posttraumatic stress. Energy and Character, 23(2), 30--46. Kulka,
R. A., Schlenger, W. E., Fairbank, J. A., Hough, R. L., Jordan, B. K.,
Marmar, C. R., & Weiss, D. S., (1990). Trauma and the Vietnam war
generation: Report of findings from the National Vietnam Veterans
Readjustment Study. New York: Brunner/Mazel. LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The
emotional brain. New York: Simon & Schuster. Lehrer, P. M., & Woolfolk,
R. L. (1993). Specific effects of stress management techniques. In P. M.
Lehrer & R. L. Woolfolk (Eds.), Principles and practice of stress
management (pp. 481--520). New York: Guilford. Levine, P. (1992). The
body as healer: Transforming trauma and anxiety. Lyons, CO: Author.
Levine, P. (1997). Waking the tiger. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic.
Lindy, J. D., Green, B. L., & Grace, M. (1992). Somatic reenactment in
the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychotherapy and
Psychosomatics, 57, 180--186. Loewenstein, R. J. (1993). Dissociation,
development and the psychobiology of trauma, Journal of the American
Academy of Psychoanalysis, 21(4), 581--603. Malt, U. F., & Weisaeth, L.
(1989). Disaster psychiatry and traumatic stress studies in Norway. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavia, 355(Suppl.), 7--12. Marmar, C. R., Weiss, D.
S., Metzler, T. J., & Delucchi, K. (1996). Characteristics of emergency
services personnel related to peritraumatic dissociations during
critical incident exposure. American Journal of Psychiatry, I 53
(Festschrift suppl.), 94--102. Nadel, L. (1994). Multiple memory
systems: What and why, an update. In D. L. Schacter & E. Tulving (Eds.),
Memory systems (pp. 39--63). Cambridge: MIT Press. Nadel, L., & Jacobs,
W. J. (1996). The role of the hippocampus in PTSD, panic, and phobia. In
N. Kato (Ed.), Hippocampus: Functions and clinical

relevance (pp. 455--463). Amsterdam: Elsevier. Nadel, L., & Zola-Morgan,
S. (1984). Infantile amnesia. In M. Moscovitch (Ed.), Infantile memory
(pp. 145--172). New York: Plenum. Napier, N. (1996). Recreating your
self: Increasing self-esteem through imaging and self-hypnosis. New
York: Norton. Nathanson, D. L. (1992). Shame and pride: Affect, sex, and
the birth of the self. New York: Norton. Pavlov, I. P. (1960).
Conditioned reflexes. New York: Dover. (Original work published 1927)
Penfield, W., & Perot, P. (1963). The brains record of auditory and
visual experience. Brain, 86, 595--696. Perls, F. (1942). Ego, hunger
and aggression. Durban, South Africa: Knox. Perls, F. (1969). In and out
of the garbage pail. Moab, UT: Real People. Perry, B. D., Pollard, R.
A., Blakley, T. L., Baker, W. L., & Vigilante, D. (1995). Childhood
trauma, the neurobiology of adaptation, and "usedependent" development
of the brain: How "states" become "traits." Infant Mental Health
Journal, 16(4), 271--291. Rauch, S. L., Shin, L. M, Wahlen, P. J. H., &
Pitman, R. K. (1998). Neuroimaging and the neuroanatomy of posttraumatic
stress disorder. CNS Spectrums, 3(7) (Supple. 2), 31--41. Reus, V. I.,
Weingartner, H., & Post, R. M. (1979). Clinical implications of
state-dependent learning. American Journal of Psychiatry, 136(7), 927--
931. Rothschild, B. (1993). A shock primer for the bodypsychotherapist.
Energy and Character, 24(1), 33--38. Rothschild, B. (1995a). Defining
shock and trauma in bodypsychotherapy. Energy and Character, 26(2),
61--65. Rothschild, B. (1995b). Defense, resource and choice.
Presentation at The 5th European Congress of Body-Psychotherapy,
Carry-Le Rouet, France. Rothschild, B. (1996/97). An annotated trauma
case history: Somatic trauma therapy, part I. Somatics, 11(1), 48--53.
Rothschild, B. (1997). An annotated trauma case history: Somatic trauma
therapy, part II. Somatics, 11(2), 44--49.

Rothschild, B. (1999). Making trauma therapy safe. Self and Society,
27(2), 17--23. Sapolsky, R. (1994). Why zebras don't get ulcers. New
York: W. H. Freeman. Schacter, D. (1996). Searching for memory. New
York: Basic. Schore, A. (1994). Affect regulation and the origin of the
self. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Schore, A. (1996). The
experience-dependent maturation of a regulatory system in the orbital
prefrontal cortex and the origin of developmental psychopathology.
Development and Psychopathology, 8, 59--87. Schuff, N., Marmar, C. R.,
Weiss, D. S., Neylan, T., Schoenfeld, F. B., Fein, G., & Weiner, M. W.
(1997). Reduced hippocampal volume and nacetyl aspartate in
posttraumatic stress disorder. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 821, 516--520. Scott, M. J., & Stradling, S. G. (1994).
Post-traumatic stress disorder without the trauma. British Journal of
Clinical Psychology 33(1), 71--74. Selye, H. (1984). The stress of life.
New York: McGraw-Hill. Siegel, D. J. (1996). Cognition, memory and
dissociation. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America,
5(2), 509--536. Siegel, D. J. (1999). The developing mind. New York:
Guilford. Skinner, B. F. (1961). Teaching machines. Scientific American,
205(5), 90--107. Squire, L. R. (1987). Memory and brain, New York:
Oxford University Press. Stevens, J. O. (1971). Awareness: experiencing.
Moab, UT: Real People.

Exploring,

experimenting,

Suarez, S. D., & Gallup, G. G. (1979). Tonic immobility as a response to
rape in humans: A theoretical note. Psychological Record, 29, 315--320.
Tavris, C. (1998, June 21). A widening gulf splits lab and couch. The
New York Times. Terr, L. (1994). Unchained memories. New York: Basic.
van der Hart, O., & Friedman, B. (1989). A readers guide to Pierre Janet
on dissociation: A neglected intellectual heritage. Dissociation, 2(1),
3--16.

van der Hart, O., & Nijenhuis, E. R. S. (1999). Bearing witness to
uncorroborated trauma: The clinician's development of reflective belief.
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 30(1), 37--44. van der
Hart, O. & Steele, K. (1997). Relieving or reliving childhood trauma? A
commentary on Miltenburg and Singer. Theory and Psychology, 9(4),
533--540. van der Kolk, B. A. (1987). Psychological trauma. Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric. van der Kolk, B. A. (1994). The body keeps the
score. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 1, 253--265. van der Kolk, B. A.
(1998, November). Neurobiology, attachment and trauma. Presentation at
the annual meeting of the International Society for Traumatic Stress
Studies, Washington, D.C. van der Kolk, B. A., Brown, P., & van der
Hart, O. (1989). Pierre Janet on post-traumatic stress. Journal of
Traumatic Stress, 2(4), 365--377. van der Kolk, B. A., McFarlane, A. C.,
& Weisaeth, L. (1996). (Eds.). Traumatic stress. New York: Guilford.
Wahlberg, L., van der Kolk, B. A., Brett, E., & Marmar, C. R. (1996,
November). PTSD: Anxiety disorder or dissociative disorder? Symposium
conducted at the annual meeting of the International Society for
Traumatic Stress Studies, San Francisco. Williams, L. M. (1995).
Recovered memories of abuse in women with documented child sexual
victimization histories. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 8(4), 649--673.
Wolpe, J. (1969). The practice of behavior therapy. New York: Pergamon.
Yehuda, R., Southwick, S. M., Nussbaum, G., Wahby, V, Giller, E. L. Jr.,
& Mason, J. W. (1990). Low urinary Cortisol excretion in patients with
posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
178, 366--369.

Yehuda R., Kahana, B., Binder-Brynes, K., Southwick, S., Zemelman, S.,
Mason, J. W., & Giller, E. L., (1995). Low urinary Cortisol excretion in
Holocaust survivors with posttraumatic stress disorder. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 152, 982--986. Yehuda, R., Teicher, M. H., Levengood, R.,
Trestman, R., & Siever, L. J. (1996). Cortisol regulation in
posttraumatic stress disorder and major depression: A chronobiological
analysis. Biological Psychiatry, 40, 79--88.

OceanofPDF.com

Index

abreaction defined integrating versus disintegrating acute stress
disorder, dissociation as a symptom of adrenal gland activation in
response to threat adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), release in
response to stress aerobic exercises affect and attachment, Tony (case)
as the biological aspect of emotion and pain regulation positive,
problems with tolerance for regulation of, learning in interaction
between infant and caretaker affect theory aftermath of trauma, working
with first Ruth (case) alcohol, influence on memory alexithymic clients
altered state, in trauma, see also dissociation; split awareness
American Psychiatric Association amnesia infantile

amygdala functioning in stress involvement in memory storage processing
of emotionally charged events in role in the flashback process signaling
of alarm by anchor the body as establishing, Gail, Part I (case) when
nothing works for pacing therapy for reducing hyperarousal safe place as
using Gail, Part I (case) Gail, Part II (case) Andrews, B. anger
positive side of, and disadvantages of as self-protection anxiety
applying dual awareness in attacks of function of applying the brakes,
defined arousal mediation by the autonomic nervous system of the
parasympathetic nervous system in therapy in therapy, checking see also
autonomic nervous system; hyperarousal; parasympathetic nervous system
attachment and affect/pain regulation, Tony (case) basis of, in
interactions with caretakers infant effect on brain development

and mediation of stress later in life attunement, defined autonomic
nervous system (ANS) arousal in therapy as a danger assessing arousal
mediated by functions of, in trauma gauging hyperarousal of reducing in
therapy sessions as a symptom of posttraumatic stress disorder impulses
for visceral muscle contraction in monitoring, to pace therapy
posttraumatic stress disorder as persistent increased arousal of
relationship with the limbic system and survival awareness of the body
consciousness outside of split dissociation as forms of see also body
awareness; dual awareness Awareness: Exploring, Experimenting,
Experiencing (Stevens) Azar, B. Baker, W. L. balance, between the
parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems Bandler, R. Barr, Ronald
G. Bauer, M. Begley, S. behavioral flashbacks Binder-Byrnes, K. Blakley,
T. L.

Bloch, G. body as an anchor as brake, a young woman (case) as a resource
body awareness as a brake in therapy defined and flashbacks, Carl (case)
using, Angie (case) Bodynamic Institute Training Program
body-psychotherapy Bohen, R. bonding effect on brain development
right-brain mediation of see also attachment borderline personality
disorder Boring, A. M. Borkovec, T. D. boundaries client, and touch in
therapy exercises to explore interpersonal Thomas (case) skin Helen
(case) Lane (case) therapeutic distance visual brain development of
factors affecting and memory mutual connection and and trauma

divisions of flashback and mature, and trauma multiple systems of memory
in emotional, theory of brain stem braking and accelerating braking tool
anchor as body awareness as in a therapy session, Gail, Part I (case)
Bremner, J. D. Brett, E. A. bridges building between daily life and
therapy, Gail, Part II (case) between explicit and implicit memory,
Gail, Part II (case) in language Broca's area Brown, P. caretaker,
primary aid in learning to regulate stimulation critical phases for
interaction with case history, seeking resources in case illustrations
Alex, using resources Angie, using body awareness Arnold, identifying
resources Blair, touch and the therapeutic relationship Bob, gauging and
pacing hyperarousal in therapy Brad, dangers of the wrong road Carla,
kinesthetic memory Carl, flashbacks and body awareness client and
therapist consultation, flashback-halting protocol

therapeutic distance Cynthia, a friend as a resource Daniel, behavioral
resources Donna, somatic memory Dorothy, dangers of the wrong road
Dorte, separating past from present Frank, therapeutic relationship
Fred, advantage of teaching theory to clients Gail, Part I using brakes
in a therapy session Gail, Part II, bridging explicit and implicit
memory Grette, pacing therapy Helen, thickening the skin through
exercises in therapy hostage, flashback-halting protocol Joanie, muscle
tension as resource Karen, memory recall Kurt, danger of
client-therapist touching Lane, skin boundaries Marcy, flashback Marie,
flashback mid-thirties woman, state-dependent recall Rodney, safety:
removing triggers Roger, flashback Ruth, working with the aftermath of
trauma first Sarah, protocol for identifying triggers Scott, advantage
of teaching theory to clients therapeutic distance Theresa, muscle
tensing as resource Thomas, interpersonal boundaries Tom, somatic memory
as a resource Tony, attachment and affect/pain regulation a young woman,
the body as brake see also Charlie and the Dog Casey, B. J. catharsis,
defined central nervous system, organization of

cerebral cortex flexibility of as the locus of memory somatosensory area
of Charlie and the Dog bridging the explicit and implicit the final
episode illustration of intentional movements Part I Part II,
state-dependent recall Part III, body awareness reality checking and
attention to somatic impulses SIBAM description of Charney, D. S.
Claparede, E. Clark, D. B. Classen, C. classical conditioning, see
conditioning cognitive judgment, emotion and cognitive memory
communication through the nervous system network of the nervous system
complex posttraumatic stress disorder conditioned response (CR) tonic
immobility as conditioned stimulus (CS) conditioning and agoraphobia
basis of triggers in mechanisms underlying source classical to a
traumatic incident memory in the absence of memory operant

and stress inoculation consciousness, levels of contraindications to
aerobic exercise, in posttraumatic stress disorder to body awareness
development coping strategies in repeated trauma teaching in therapy in
trauma from chronic stress during development corticotropin-releasing
hormone (CRH), in the response to threat cortisol adrenal release of, in
trauma production of, and anxiety secretion of in posttraumatic stress
disorder in trauma, effect on memory current event, focusing on, to
avoid error Damasio, A. R. somatic marker theory danger constant sense
of, in posttraumatic stress disorder inherent in therapy for trauma
Darwin, C., cross-cultural survey of emotion De Bellis, M. D.
declarative memory, see also explicit memory decompensation risk of in
therapy defense mechanisms, positive aspects of defensive behavior
learning response to a remembered threat Delaney, R. C. Delucchi, K.
depersonalization

destabilization, from seeking memory of a trauma presumed to be there de
Tours, Moreau Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 3rd
Edition (DSM-III), 4th Edition (DSM-IV), dissociation avoiding in
therapy pacing for and the body from fear peritraumatic, and development
of posttraumatic stress disorder positive side of, and disadvantages of
and posttraumatic stress disorder as a survival mechanism traumatic
dissociation model (Sensation, Image, Behavior, Affect, and Meaning
model) dissociative identity disorder distance, therapeutic between
client and therapist (case) diverting activities, in therapy drugs,
influence on memory dual awareness applying to panic and anxiety attacks
basis of flashback-halting protocol developing, in therapy as a
flashback-halting protocol Duggal, S. Edinger, J. D. efficacy studies,
for evaluating treatment models Ego, Hunger and Aggression (Perls) Eich,
J. E. emotion and the body body awareness as a basis for identifying

and cognitive judgment integrating vs. disintegrating expression of
somatic basis of and trauma encoding memory of information of
interaction with the therapist environment, unsafe and/or traumatizing
epinephrine effects on the body mobilization for fight or flight by as a
neurotransmitter evaluation, for therapy, categorizing traumatized
clients experiencing self acknowledging the split from the observing
self, in versus the observing self, in posttraumatic stress disorder
explicit memory bridging to implicit memory composition of integration
with implicit memory linking with implicit memory exteroceptive system
cues triggering flashbacks false memory fear dissociation from in
posttraumatic stress disorder protective function of feeling, as the
conscious experience of emotion Fein, G. Ferenczi, S. fight, flight, and
freeze responses to hyperarousal operant conditioning of successful
choice among somatic nervous system's role in

see also freezing response flashback-halting protocol, client and
therapist consultation (case) flashbacks applying dual awareness to and
body awareness, Carl (case) hostage (case) Marcy (case) Marie (case)
mechanism of protocol for halting client and therapist (case) teaching
in therapy Roger (case) as a symptom of posttraumatic stress disorder
terror in in therapy traumatic Fontana, A. forgetting versus traumatic
dissociation freezing response and posttraumatic stress disorder in
response to traumatic threat as a survival mechanism see also
dissociation; tonic immobility Friedman, B. Frustaci, K. functional
resources Gallup, G. G. gauge the body as sensation as Giedd, J. N.
Giller, Jr., E. L. goals, of trauma therapy

Goulding, M. M. Goulding, R. L. Grace, M. Graf, K. J. Grafton, S. Green,
B. L. grief and healing release of Grinder, J. guilt from freezing in
response to trauma in rape and tonic immobility Gunnar, M. R. healing
trauma grief as a sign of linking all aspects of a traumatic event for
spiritual resources for Heide, F. J. Herman, J. L. hippocampus function
in processing the context of events role in memory suppressed activity
during trauma suppressed activity in response to stress Holocaust
survivors differences among, in resources for resilience evidence for
posttraumatic stress disorder in homeostasis, restoration of horror,
processing in the amygdala Hovdestad, W. E. hyperarousal checking for,
in therapy due to flashbacks

gauging gauging and pacing in therapy, Bob (case) in posttraumatic
stress disorder reducing with an anchor in therapy and reflexes of
fight, flight, and freeze traumatic, of the autonomic nervous system see
also arousal; autonomic nervous system hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) axis role in the biology of terror hypothalamus activation of the
sympathetic nervous system role in arousal identity disorder, see
dissociative identity disorder implicit memory bridging to explicit
memory composition of eliciting in flashbacks integrating with explicit
memory interaction with the therapist encoded in linking with explicit
memory recording of movement in role of the senses in kinesthetic In and
Out of the Garbage Pail (Perls) individual differences of needs in
therapy for trauma respecting in therapy induced relaxation, trauma
reaction precipitated by infant, newborn, stimulus regulation by mother
information encoding as memory sensory, processing of transmission from
the brain to the body Innis, R. B. integration

Charlie and the Dog, the final episode of emotional expression of
explicit memory with implicit memory Gail, Part II (case) intentional
movements assessing in therapy Charlie and the Dog, example of internal
sense defined internal stimuli, focus on, in posttraumatic stress
disorder International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies
interoceptive sensory system cues triggering flashbacks interpersonal
boundaries interpersonal relationships client's, impact of trauma on
social network as a resource interpersonal resources Jacobs, W. J.
Jacobsen, R. Janet, P. Jørgensen, S. Kahana, B. Keshavan, M. S.
kinesthetic memory Carla (case) kinesthetic nerves, interoceptive
kinesthetic sense controlling the accuracy of movement defined
interoceptive memory of movement Koopman, C. Kristiansen, C. M.

language meanings of "feel," necessary for bridging the mind/body gap to
make sense of emotional and sensory experiences in therapy, LeDoux, J.
E. Lehrer, P. M. Levengood, R. Levine, P. limbic system functions of
maturing of relationship with the autonomic nervous system role in
posttraumatic stress disorder "survival center," Lindy, J. D. linking of
all aspects of a traumatic event, for healing explicit memory with
implicit memory see also bridges; integration Loewenstein, R. J. love
relationship, mature, as a healing bond lysergic acid diethylamide
(LSD), flashbacks after use of McCarthy, G. McFarlane, A. C. Malt, U. F.
markers, see somatic markers Marmar, C. R. Maser, J. D. Mason, J. W.
medical intervention, mistaking for physical and sexual abuse memory
cognitive development of, and the brain function of

kinesthetic long-term malleability of recall, Karen (case) reflexive
belief in retrieval of roles of the hippocampus and amygdala in
short-term storage of see also encoding memory; explicit memory;
implicit memory; somatic memory; triggers Metzler, T. J. misattunement
in therapy mitigating session closure monitoring, of the autonomic
nervous system to pace therapy in therapy movement, perception of, in
the proprioceptive system muscle(s) contraction versus non-contraction
of control of visceral and skeletal positive function of tension in
tensing peripheral muscles as resource, Theresa (case) tension versus
relaxation as resource, Joanie (case) toning Nadel, L. Napier, N.
narrative, trauma, pacing of Nathanson, D. L. nerves, proprioceptive
nervous system

communication through effect of rational thoughts on, Charlie and the
Dog see also autonomic nervous system; parasympathetic nervous system;
sensory nervous system; somatic nervous system; sympathetic nervous
system neuro-linguistic programming, concept of anchors Neylan, T.
nightmares, flashback-halting protocol for Nijenhuis, E. R. S.
nondeclarative memory nontouch norepinephrine effects on the body
mobilization for fight or flight by as a neurotransmitter Nussbaum, G.
oasis, as a braking tool observing self split from the experiencing self
operant conditioning, effect on fight, flight, and freeze responses
pacing therapy Grette (case) see also braking and accelerating; safety
pain regulation, and attachment, Tony (case) parasympathetic nervous
system (PNS) arousal of Pavlov, I. P. Penfield, W. perception, splitting
by posttraumatic stress disorder performance anxiety, in developing body
awareness Perls, F. Perot, P. Perry, B. D. personal history, somatic
memory as

physical resources Pitman, R. K. pituitary gland, release of
adrenocorticotropic hormone by Pollard, R. A. Post, R. M. posttraumatic
stress (PTS) clients who fall between the cracks defined posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) complex as a condition of memory gone awry
defined overview symptomatology of predictions, preconceived present,
separating from the past, Dorte (case) Priebe, S. prolonged duress
stress disorder (PDSD), defined proprioceptive nerves, postural,
feedback from proprioceptive system interoceptive perception of movement
in transmission of sensations accompanying emotion by protective
function, of fear, see also survival value pseudoephedrine, reaction to,
mimicking anxiety psychological resources psychological symptoms
attributed to stress in early development psychotherapy versus
body-psychotherapy implications for attachment relationships in maturity
and trauma rape Ruth (case) shame in

and traumatic triggers Rauch, S. L. reality testing bridging and
explicit memory (case) Gail, Part I (case) Gail, Part II (case) of
transferential misattunement using brakes in a therapy session (case)
reattunement, defined recall state-dependent see also forgetting; memory
recording of movement, in implicit memory recovered memories the wrong
road reflexive belief, in memories regulation, of emotional responses,
learning in infancy relationship, therapeutic trust as a requirement in
for Type IIB clients remembered threat, defensive response to
resilience, developing in therapy for chronic stress during development
resource/resources behavioral, Daniel (case) the body as classes of
friend as, Cynthia (case) identifying, Arnold (case) muscle tensing as,
Theresa (case) muscle tension as, Joanie (case) somatic memory as, Tom
(case) using, Alex (case) responsibility clarifying in therapy, Gail,
Part I (case) in rape, assigning correctly retraumatization

avoiding by dual awareness in therapy avoiding retrieval, memory Reus,
V. I. Rosenbeck, R. Rothschild, B. Ryan, N. D. safe place as an anchor
reinforcing with body awareness safety foundations of, in trauma therapy
removing triggers, Rodney (case) in the therapeutic relationship in
therapy Sapolsky, R. scale, of arousal to hyperarousal Schacter, D.
Schoenfeld, F. B. Schore, S. Schuff, N. Scott, M. J. self-forgiveness
Selye, H. sensations, safe, distinguishing sensory nervous system cues
from, and body awareness exteroceptive sensory cues interoceptive
kinesthetic sense sensory cues vestibular sense see also proprioceptive
system sensory stimulus, in utero

session closure, mitigating sexual dysfunction, in posttraumatic stress
disorder shame as disappointment in the self from freezing in response
to threat positive side of in rape in sexual abuse from tonic immobility
and visual boundaries Shame and Pride (Nathanson) shaping behavior, with
operant conditioning Shin, L. M. SIBAM dissociation model Siegel, D. J.
Siever, L. J. skin level boundaries establishing Skinner, B. F. skin
tone, observing in therapy sleep disturbances, in posttraumatic stress
disorder socialization in the relationship between caretaker and child
and the survival value of shame somatic disturbance, in posttraumatic
stress disorder somatic interventions, for trauma therapy somatic
markers new, in successful therapy theory of somatic memory body
awareness as a step toward interpreting Donna (case) as personal history
reliability of as a resource Tom (case)

sensations for making sense of and the senses understanding somatic
nervous system (SomNS) movements caused by, using to facilitate recall
somatic symptoms Southwick, S. M. Spiegel, D. spiritual resources split
awareness, forms of, see also dissociation Squire, L. R. Sroufe, L. A.
state-dependent recall Steele, K. Stevens, J. O. stimulus,
exteroceptive, example storage, of memory Stradling, S. G. stress
defined medications that mimic body response in traumatic, defined
stress inoculation Suarez, S. D. Subjective Units of Disturbance Scale
(SUDS) survival/survival responses of affects automatic and the nervous
system see also protective function of fear sympathetic nervous system
(SNS) activation by the hypothalamus arousal of autonomic nervous system
symptomatology, of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) synapse role in
communication

synaptic patterns, building in self-defense training Tavris, C Teicher,
M. H. Terr, L. terror biology of processing in the amygdala from visual
flashbacks thalamus, information transmission through theory advantage
of teaching to clients Fred (case) Scott (case) of trauma affect
therapeutic relationship Frank (case) touch and, Blair (case) see
relationship, therapeutic therapist directive, models requiring fear of,
during a flashback interaction with, encoding in implicit memory
limitations of observations by perception of, as a perpetrator of abuse
visually handicapped, asking for help from clients therapy
decompensation in ease of inserting anchors in evaluation and assessment
in respecting individuality in trust issues in using traumatic triggers
in, time, separating past from present Tomkins, S., affect theory

tonic immobility Charlie and the Dog conditioned defined response of the
parasympathetic nervous system see also freezing response touch/touching
client-therapist interaction danger of client-therapist, Kurt (case) and
not touching and working with the body Transactional Analysis (Goulding
& Goulding) transference, in building resources for coping with trauma
transferential misattunement, reality testing of trauma behavior shaped
through consequences of and emotion expression of unremembered freeze
response to the threat of hallucinatory repetition of the experience of
physically invasive, reestablishing boundaries after and psychotherapy
recall of and sensory memory theory of triggers of memories of trauma
therapy facilitating using the body as resource safety in, foundations
of somatic techniques for therapeutic relationship in working with
aftermath first traumatic stress, defined traumatic triggers and
classical conditioning

identifying in therapy using in therapy see also triggers trauma victims
categories of, using for assessment Type IIB, conflict in therapy
treatment models, efficacy studies for evaluating Trestman, R. triggers
aerobic exercise and classical conditioning external, for hyperarousal
for flashbacks protocol for identifying Sarah (case) removing, Rodney
(case) sensory cues for state-dependent recall trust betrayal of,
experience of Type IIB clients issues in therapy in a therapeutic
relationship Type I clients Type II clients Type IIB clients building
trust with risk of conflict with van der Hart, O. van der Kolk, B. A.
vestibular sense interoceptive Vigilante, D. visceral muscle
contraction, impulses for, autonomic nervous system (ANS) visual
boundaries voluntary movement, response to the somatic nervous system

Wahby, V. Wahlberg, L. Wahlen, R J. Weiner, M. W. Weingartner, H.
Weisaeth, L. Weiss, D. S. when nothing works, in therapy Williams, L. M.
withdrawal, positive side of, and disadvantages of Wolpe, J. Woolfolk,
R. L. wrong road, dangers of in therapy Brad (case) Dorothy (case)
Yehuda, R. yoga, roots of body awareness in Zemelman, S. Zola-Morgan, S.

OceanofPDF.com

page 26: I Remember It Well from GIGI. Words by Alan Jay Lerner. Music
by Frederick Loewe. Copyright © 1957, 1958 by Chappell & Co. Copyright
Renewed. International Copyright Secured. All Rights Reserved. Piet Hein
Grooks © Rhyme and Reason (p. 37), Timing Toast (p. 77), A Toast
(p. 100) are reproduced with kind permission from Piet Hein a/s, DK-5500
Middelfart, Denmark. The author welcomes correspondence from readers.
She may be reached at: Babette Rothschild P.O. Box 241778 Los Angeles,
California 90024 Telephone: 310-281-9646 Fax: 310-281-9729 E-mail:
babette@trauma.cc Web site: www.trauma.cc Copyright © 2000 by Babette
Rothschild All rights reserved Printed in the United States of America
First Edition For information about permission to reproduce selections
from this book, write to Permissions, W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500
Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10110 Library of Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication Data Rothschild, Babette The body remembers:
the psychophysiology of trauma and trauma treatment / Babette
Rothschild. p. cm. --- (Norton professional book) Includes
bibliographical references and index. ISBN 978-0-393-06868-9 (e-book) 1.
Post-traumatic stress disorder---Psychological aspects. 2. Mind and body
therapies. 3. Posttraumatic stress disorder---Physiological aspects. I.
Title. II. Series. RC489.M53 R68 2000 616.85'21---dc21 00-062520 W. W.
Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110
www.wwnorton.com W. W. Norton & Company, Ltd., 10 Coptic Street, London
WC1A 1PU

OceanofPDF.com


