Also by Judith S. Beck Cognitive Therapy for Challenging Problems: What
to Do When the Basics Don't Work

COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY BASICS AND BEYOND THIRD EDITION

Judith S. Beck Foreword by Aaron T. Beck

THE GUILFORD PRESS New York London

EPUB Edition ISBN: 9781462544233; Kindle Edition ISBN: 9781462544219
Copyright © 2021 Judith S. Beck Published by The Guilford Press A
Division of Guilford Publications, Inc. 370 Seventh Avenue, Suite 1200,
New York, NY 10001 www.guilford.com All rights reserved No part of this
book may be reproduced, translated, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, microfilming, recording, or otherwise, without written
permission from the publisher. Last digit is print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3
2 1 The author has checked with sources believed to be reliable in her
effort to provide information that is complete and generally in accord
with the standards of practice that are accepted at the time of
publication. However, in view of the possibility of human error or
changes in behavioral, mental health, or medical sciences, neither the
author, nor the editors and publisher, nor any other party who has been
involved in the preparation or publication of this work warrants that
the information contained herein is in every respect accurate or
complete, and they are not responsible for any errors or omissions or
the results obtained from the use of such information. Readers are
encouraged to confirm the information contained in this book with other
sources. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names: Beck,
Judith S., author. Title: Cognitive behavior therapy : basics and beyond
/ Judith S. Beck. Description: Third edition. \| New York : The Guilford
Press, \[2021\] \| Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2020006172 \| ISBN 9781462544196 (cloth) Subjects:
LCSH: Cognitive therapy. Classification: LCC RC489.C63 B43 2021 \| DDC
616.89/1425---dc23 LC record available at
https://lccn.loc.gov/2020006172

To my father, Aaron T. Beck, and the wonderful staff of the Beck
Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Judith S. Beck, PhD, is President of the Beck Institute for Cognitive
Behavior Therapy (www.beckinstitute.org), a nonprofit organization that
provides state-of-the-art training and certification in CBT to
individuals and organizations, offers online courses on a variety of CBT
topics, conducts research, and serves as a leading global resource in
CBT. She is also Clinical Professor of Psychology in Psychiatry at the
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine. Dr. Beck has
written over 100 articles and chapters as well as several books for
professionals and general readers, including Cognitive Therapy for
Challenging Problems: What to Do When the Basics Don't Work. She has
made hundreds of presentations around the world on topics related to
CBT, is codeveloper of the Beck Youth Inventories and the Personality
Belief Questionnaire, and has won numerous awards for her contributions
to the field. She also continues to treat clients at the Beck
Institute's in-house clinic in suburban Philadelphia.

FOREWORD

delighted that this third edition of Cognitive Behavior Therapy: Basics
Iam and Beyond is being published. The field of cognitive behavior
therapy (CBT) has grown by leaps and bounds in the past decade alone.
One factor that makes this new edition so valuable is its adaptation of
techniques from a wide variety of psychotherapies into treatment, in the
context of the cognitive model. You'll find important interventions from
acceptance and commitment therapy, dialectical behavior therapy,
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy, and others. Equally important,
though, is its emphasis on a recovery or strengths-based orientation as
part of the foundation of CBT. A single depressed client is followed
throughout the book, along with opportunities to stream the videos of
therapy sessions and download worksheets. A second, more complex client
is also portrayed throughout the book to illustrate variations of
treatment when difficulties arise. When I first developed cognitive
therapy in the 1960s and 1970s, I focused the conceptualization and
treatment of individuals on their problems, negative cognitions, and
dysfunctional coping strategies. By the mid-1980s, I could claim that
cognitive therapy had attained the status of a "system of
psychotherapy." It consisted of (1) a theory of personality and
psychopathology with solid empirical findings to support its basic
postulates; (2) a model of psychotherapy with sets of principles and
strategies that blended with the theory of psychopathology; and (3)
solid empirical findings based on clinical outcome studies to support
the efficacy of this approach.

Now, at the start of the third decade of the third millennium, we have
developed a different focus in conceptualization and treatment. While
negative aspects of individuals' experiences are still important, it is
at least equally important to conceptualize individuals' aspirations,
values, goals, strengths, and resources, and to incorporate these
positive characteristics in helping them to take specific steps that are
linked to what is most important to them. It's also critical to
anticipate obstacles to taking these steps, to use basic CBT skills
(such as cognitive restructuring, problem solving, and skills training)
to overcome the obstacles, and to help individuals draw positive
conclusions about what their experiences say about them. This third
edition of the basic text in the field offers readers fresh insights
into 21st-century CBT and will be important for those who are already
proficient in traditional CBT as well as students new to the field.
Given the tremendous amount of new research and expansion of ideas that
continue to move the field in exciting new directions, I applaud the
efforts to expand this volume to incorporate some of the different ways
of conceptualizing and treating our clients. The applications of CBT to
a host of psychological and medical disorders extend far beyond anything
I could have imagined when I treated my first few depressed and anxious
clients with cognitive therapy. The formidable array of different
applications of CBT is based on fundamental principles outlined in this
volume. This book was written by Dr. Judith Beck, one of the foremost
second-generation CBT educators, who, as a teenager, was one of the
first to listen to me expound on my new theory. It will help aspiring
therapists to learn the cutting-edge nuts and bolts of this therapy.
Even CBT therapists who are skilled at delivering traditional CBT should
find this book quite helpful in adopting a strengths-based approach,
sharpening their conceptualization skills, expanding their repertoire of
therapeutic techniques, planning more effective treatment, and
troubleshooting difficulties in therapy. Of course, no book can
substitute for supervision in CBT. But this book is an important volume
and can enrich the supervision experience. Dr. Judith Beck is eminently
qualified to offer this guide to CBT. For the past 35 years, she has
conducted many hundreds of workshops and trainings in CBT all over the
world as well as online, supervised both beginners and experienced
therapists, helped develop treatment protocols for various disorders,
and participated actively in CBT research. With such a

background to draw on, she has written a book with a rich lode of
information to apply this therapy, the earlier editions of which have
been the leading CBT texts in most graduate psychology, psychiatry,
social work, and counseling programs. The practice of CBT is not simple.
Too many mental health professionals call themselves CBT therapists but
lack even the most basic conceptual and treatment skills. The purpose of
Dr. Judith Beck's book is to educate, to teach, and to train both the
novice and the experienced therapist in CBT, and she has succeeded
admirably in this mission. AARON T. BECK, MD

PREFACE

excited to introduce this third edition of Cognitive Behavior Therapy:
I'm Basics and Beyond to you. Before beginning this revision, I asked
for feedback on the second edition from health and mental health
practitioners all over the world. What would they like to see improved?
What worked and what didn't? The responses I received were excellent and
really helped me conceptualize the changes and additions I chose to
make. This edition incorporates the feedback I received from many
readers and reflects the most recent research and current directions for
the field of cognitive behavior therapy (CBT). Readers consistently
commented that they wanted to see a more complex client to serve as the
key example throughout the book. "Abe," the client illustration in this
edition, is more severely depressed than "Sally," the client who
appeared throughout the second edition. In addition to depression, Abe
also struggles with moderate anxiety and complicating problems including
unemployment and a recent divorce. I have also included a second client
example, "Maria," who has borderline personality traits. I've included
links so you can watch videos of full and partial therapy sessions with
Abe and you can download worksheets. Another important change is that
I've revised much of the material to include both our traditional
orientation and also a recovery orientation. Recovery-oriented cognitive
therapy (CT-R) is a cutting-edge evidencebased treatment for individuals
diagnosed with severe mental illness, including schizophrenia, many of
whom have been hospitalized for

decades. CT-R was developed, and is currently being researched, by my
father, Dr. Aaron T. Beck, and his research/training group, which is now
part of the Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy. Our other
clinician/educators and I have been adapting this approach for use with
our nonhospitalized clients who experience a wide range of psychiatric
disorders, psychological problems, and medical conditions with
psychological components. The recovery orientation focuses on
identifying clients' values and aspirations (and the meaning of their
aspirations) and helping them create a sense of purpose and empowerment
in their lives by taking steps each week in pursuit of their goals. We
also focus on helping clients reach positive conclusions about
themselves, others, and their future as a result of taking these
positive actions, and we identify and reinforce their positive
qualities, skills, and resources. We emphasize experiencing positive
emotion both in and out of sessions. We expect that the recovery
movement will play a large role in shaping the future of CBT, and
psychotherapy in general, in the coming years and decades. Finally, I
have written this edition in a more reader-friendly style. When I teach
workshops at the Beck Institute in Philadelphia, or online courses, I
often include anecdotes from my own clinical practice. I also encourage
participants to take part in interactive activities, where I ask them to
roleplay with another participant, respond to questions, and present
their own challenging cases for feedback and discussion. Most
participants find these interactive components to be very meaningful and
inspiring. In this edition of the book, I not only use a more personal
approach in my writing but also have included clinical tips from my own
practice, reflection questions, and suggested activities to help readers
engage with the material. I hope you enjoy reading this book as much as
I enjoyed writing it. I always say that learning CBT is a lifelong
endeavor. No matter where you are on your journey, I hope this book
inspires you to learn more about CBT.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

the age of 98, Aaron Beck, my father, is still teaching me about
Atcognitive behavior therapy (CBT). Most recently, he and our colleagues
at the Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy, in suburban
Philadelphia, have developed, and are researching, recovery-oriented
cognitive therapy (CT-R) for individuals diagnosed with serious mental
health conditions. I have been applying CT-R to the clients I treat in
our outpatient clinic with great results. I'm very excited about this
new development in the field, with its emphasis on motivating clients
through identifying their aspirations and values, meaning and purpose;
focusing on their strengths and resources; helping them overcome
obstacles to working toward their aspirations each week; and drawing
positive conclusions about their experiences and themselves. I am
grateful to my father and to our CTR team, headed by Paul Grant and
Ellen Inverso, for inspiring the recovery orientation I have included in
this book. I am equally fortunate to interact with our team of excellent
clinicians, Rob Hindman, Norman Cotterell, Fran Broder, and Allen
Miller. They treat clients, teach at our workshops, supervise therapists
(from beginners to experts), and participate in program development. I
learn so much by discussing my clients with them every week at our case
conferences. They and Brianna Bliss helped improve this manuscript. I am
also grateful to Lisa Pote who has transformed the Beck Institute into a
worldwide training and resource center, and Kitty Moore of The Guilford
Press, who has been my friend and editor for nearly 25 years. And

great thanks to my husband, Richard Busis, who provided daily
encouragement and final edits to the manuscript. And a last note of
overwhelming gratitude to my most excellent and wonderful assistant,
Sarah Fleming, who helped in immeasurable ways in getting this book to
press. Thank you all.

CONTENTS

Cover Also by Judith S. Beck Title Page Copyright Page Dedication About
the Author Foreword Preface Acknowledgments 1. Introduction to Cognitive
Behavior Therapy 2. Overview of Treatment 3. Cognitive Conceptualization
4. The Therapeutic Relationship 5. The Evaluation Session 6. The First
Therapy Session 7. Activity Scheduling

8. Action Plans 9. Treatment Planning 10. Structuring Sessions 11.
Problems in Structuring Sessions 12. Identifying Automatic Thoughts 13.
Emotions 14. Evaluating Automatic Thoughts 15. Responding to Automatic
Thoughts 16. Integrating Mindfulness into CBT 17. Introduction to
Beliefs 18. Modifying Beliefs 19. Additional Techniques 20. Imagery 21.
Termination and Relapse Prevention 22. Problems in Therapy APPENDIX A.
CBT Resources APPENDIX B. Beck Institute Case Write-Up: Summary and
Conceptualization APPENDIX C. Steps in the AWARE Technique APPENDIX D.
Restructuring the Meaning of Early Memories through Experiential
Techniques References Index About Guilford Press Discover Related
Guilford Books

Blank worksheets and other resources are available at
beckinstitute.org/CBTresources.

1

INTRODUCTION TO COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY

is a 55-year-old divorced man of European heritage who became
Abeseverely depressed over 2 years ago, following very significant 1

difficulties at work and in his marriage. By the time I started treating
him, he was fairly isolated and inactive, spending most of his time in
his apartment, watching television and surfing the net, and occasionally
playing video games. Abe and I met for a total of 18 sessions over 8
months, using both a traditional cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) and a
recovery-oriented cognitive therapy (CT-R) conceptualization and
corresponding interventions. You'll read more about the recovery
orientation in this chapter and throughout the book. First, I conducted
a diagnostic evaluation. In the next session, our first treatment
session, I gave Abe information about his diagnosis, the theory of CBT,
the process of therapy, and my proposed treatment plan. I asked about
his aspirations (how he wanted his life to be) and values (what was
really important to him) and then we set goals. Abe wanted to have a
better life, to be productive and helpful to others, and to be
optimistic, resilient, and in control. More specifically, it was
important to him to manage better at home, find a job, improve the
relationships with his ex-wife and children, reconnect with friends,
start going to church again, and get in shape. We discussed how he could
become more active in the coming week and agreed on an Action Plan
(therapy "homework"). Then I elicited Abe's reaction to the session.

The major part of each subsequent session focused on helping Abe
identify his goals for the session, decide what steps he wanted to take
in the coming week, create solutions to potential obstacles, reduce
negative mood, and increase positive mood. We often did problem solving
and skill building, especially skills related to changing his depressed
thinking and behavior. I not only used various interventions with Abe
but also taught him how to use these skills himself, to build resilience
and prevent relapse. The structure and techniques we used were essential
as was the development of a good therapeutic relationship. You'll be
learning much more about Abe and his treatment throughout this book.
You'll also follow Maria2 throughout this book. Maria is 37 years old.
She has recurrent severe depression and traits of borderline personality
disorder. Her treatment was much more complex and lasted a good deal
longer. Maria saw herself as helpless, inferior, unlovable, and
emotionally vulnerable. She viewed others as potentially critical,
uncaring, and likely to hurt her. These beliefs were often triggered
during our sessions. Initially she was quite suspicious of me, on guard
lest I harm her in some way. It was much more difficult to establish a
strong therapeutic relationship with Maria. Her intense hopelessness and
anxiety about therapy and about me interfered with her fully engaging in
treatment for quite a while. While Abe's treatment exemplifies a
standard approach, I had to adapt treatment considerably for Maria. In
the rest of this chapter, you'll find answers to the following
questions: What is CBT? What is the theory behind CBT? What does
research tell us about its effectiveness? How was it developed? What is
CT-R? What does a typical cognitive intervention look like? How can you
become an effective CBT therapist? How can you best use this book?

WHAT IS CBT? Aaron Beck developed a form of psychotherapy in the 1960s
and 1970s that he originally named "cognitive therapy," a term that is
often used synonymously with "cognitive behavior therapy" (CBT) by much
of our field. Beck devised a structured, short-term, present-oriented
psychotherapy for depression (Beck, 1964). Since that time, he and
others around the world have successfully adapted this therapy to a
surprisingly diverse set of populations with a wide range of disorders
and problems, in many settings and formats. These adaptations have
changed the focus, techniques, and length of treatment, but the
theoretical assumptions themselves have remained constant. In all forms
of CBT that are derived from Beck's model, clinicians base treatment on
a cognitive formulation: the maladaptive beliefs, behavioral strategies,
and maintaining factors that characterize a specific disorder (Alford &
Beck, 1997). You will also base treatment on your conceptualization, or
understanding, of individual clients and their specific underlying
beliefs and patterns of behavior. One of Abe's underlying negative
beliefs was "I'm a failure," and he engaged in extensive behavioral
avoidance so his (perceived) incompetence, or failure, wouldn't be
apparent. But his avoidance ironically strengthened his belief of
failure. Originally trained as a psychoanalyst, Beck drew on multiple
sources when he developed this form of psychotherapy, including early
philosophers, such as Epictetus, and theorists, such as Karen Horney,
Alfred Adler, George Kelly, Albert Ellis, Richard Lazarus, Albert
Bandura, and many others. Beck's work, in turn, has been expanded by a
host of researchers and theorists, too numerous to recount here, in the
United States and abroad. Historical overviews of the field provide a
rich description of how the different streams of CBT originated and grew
(Arnkoff & Glass, 1992; Beck, 2005; Dobson & Dozois, 2009; Thoma et al.,
2015). Some forms of CBT share characteristics of Beck's therapy, but
their formulations and emphases in treatment vary to some degree. These
include rational emotional behavior therapy (Ellis, 1962), dialectical
behavior therapy (Linehan, 1993), problem-solving therapy (D'Zurilla &
Nezu, 2006), acceptance and commitment therapy (Hayes et al., 1999),
exposure therapy (Foa & Rothbaum, 1998), cognitive processing therapy
(Resick &

Schnicke, 1993), cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy
(McCullough, 1999), behavioral activation (Lewinsohn et al., 1980;
Martell et al., 2001), cognitive behavior modification (Meichenbaum,
1977), and others. The form of CBT derived from Beck's model often
incorporates techniques from all these therapies, as well as other
evidence-based psychotherapies, within a cognitive framework. As time
goes on, it will be useful for you to learn more about other
evidence-based interventions. But it would be overwhelming to do so in
any depth while you are still learning CBT. I would encourage you to
master the basics of CBT first and then learn additional techniques to
implement within the framework of a cognitive conceptualization. CBT has
been adapted for clients with diverse levels of education and income as
well as a variety of cultures and ages, from young children to older
adults. It is now used in hospitals and clinics, schools, vocational
programs, prisons, and many other settings. It is used in group, couple,
and family formats. While the treatment described in this book focuses
on individual 45- to 50-minute sessions with outpatients, therapeutic
interactions can be briefer. Full sessions are inappropriate for some
clients, such as individuals who are hospitalized for treatment of
severe schizophrenia. And many different health care and allied health
care providers use CBT techniques, without conducting full therapy
sessions, within brief medical or rehabilitation appointments or
medication checks. Paraprofessionals and peer specialists, too, use
appropriately adapted CBT techniques.

THE CBT THEORETICAL MODEL In a nutshell, the cognitive model proposes
that dysfunctional thinking (which influences the client's mood and
behavior) is common to all psychological disturbances. When people learn
to evaluate their thinking in a more realistic and adaptive way, they
experience a decrease in negative emotion and maladaptive behavior. For
example, if you were quite depressed and had difficulty concentrating
and paying your bills, you might have an automatic thought, an idea (in
words or images) that just seemed to pop up in your mind: "I can't do
anything right." This thought then leads to

a particular reaction: You might feel sad (emotion) and retreat to bed
(behavior). In traditional CBT, your therapist would likely help you
examine the validity of this thought, and you might conclude that you
had overgeneralized and, in fact, you still do many things well, despite
your depression. Looking at your experience from this new perspective
would probably decrease your dysphoria and you might engage in more
functional behavior (start paying bills). In a recovery-oriented
approach, your therapist would help you evaluate your automatic
thoughts. But the focus would be less on cognitions that have already
arisen and more on cognitions that are likely to arise in the coming
week that could interfere with your taking steps to achieve a specific
goal. Cognitions (both adaptive and maladaptive) occur at three levels.
Automatic thoughts (e.g., "I'm too tired to do anything") are at the
most superficial level. You also have intermediate beliefs, such as
underlying assumptions (e.g., "If I try to initiate relationships, I'll
get rejected"). At the deepest level are your core beliefs about
yourself, others, and the world (e.g., "I'm helpless"; "Other people
will hurt me"; "The world is dangerous"). For lasting improvement in
clients' mood and behavior, you will work at all three levels. Modifying
both automatic thoughts and underlying dysfunctional beliefs produces
enduring change. For example, let's say you continually underestimate
your abilities. If so, you might have a core belief of incompetence.
Modifying this general belief (i.e., seeing yourself in a more realistic
light) can alter your perception of specific situations that you
encounter daily. You will no longer have as many thoughts with the theme
of incompetence. Instead, in specific situations where you make
mistakes, you will probably think, "I'm not good at this \[specific
task\]." In addition, it's important in a recovery orientation to
cultivate realistically positive automatic thoughts (e.g., "I can do a
lot of things well") and intermediate and core beliefs (e.g., "If I
persevere, I can probably learn what I need to" and "I have strengths
and weaknesses like everyone else").

CBT RESEARCH

CBT has been extensively tested since the first outcome study was
published in 1977 (Rush et al., 1977). At this point, more than 2,000
outcome studies have demonstrated the efficacy of CBT for a wide range
of psychiatric disorders, psychological problems, and medical problems
with psychological components. Many studies have also shown that CBT
helps prevent or reduce the severity of future episodes. A study by von
Brachel and colleagues (2019), for example, showed that outpatients with
a range of psychiatric disorders who were treated with CBT in routine
care continued to improve between 5 and 20 years after the end of
therapy, more so than those who received medical treatment. (For
meta-analyses and reviews of CBT, see Butler et al., 2006; Carpenter et
al., 2018; Chambless & Ollendick, 2001; Dobson et al., 2008; Dutra et
al., 2008; Fairburn et al., 2015; Hanrahan et al., 2013; Hofmann et al.,
2012; Hollon et al., 2014; Linardon et al., 2017; Magill & Ray, 2009;
Matusiewicz et al., 2010; MayoWilson et al., 2014; Öst et al., 2015; and
Wuthrich & Rapee, 2013. (For lists of conditions for which CBT has been
shown to be effective, see
www.div12.org/psychological-treatments/treatments and
www.nice.org.uk/about/what-we-do/our-programmes/nice-guidance/niceguidelines.
For research on CT-R, see Beck et al., in press; Grant et al., 2012,
2017.)

THE DEVELOPMENT OF BECK'S CBT In the late 1950s, Dr. Beck was a
certified psychoanalyst; his clients freeassociated on a couch while he
made interpretations. Beck recognized that the concepts of
psychoanalysis needed to be experimentally validated if this school of
psychotherapy were to be taken seriously by scientists. In the early
1960s, Beck decided to test the psychoanalytic concept that depression
is the result of hostility turned inward toward the self. He
investigated the dreams of depressed clients, which, he predicted, would
manifest greater themes of hostility than the dreams of psychiatric
clients without depression. To his surprise, he ultimately found that
the dreams of depressed clients contained fewer themes of hostility and
far greater themes of defectiveness, deprivation, and loss. He
recognized that these themes paralleled his clients' thinking when they
were awake. The

results of other studies Beck conducted led him to believe that a
related psychoanalytic idea---that depressed clients have a need to
suffer---might be inaccurate (Beck, 1967). At that point, it was almost
as if a stacked row of dominoes began to fall. If these psychoanalytic
concepts weren't valid, how else could depression be understood? As
Dr. Beck listened to his clients on the couch, he realized that they
occasionally reported two types of thinking: a free-association stream
and a stream of quick, evaluative thoughts, especially about themselves.
One woman, for example, detailed her sexual exploits. At the end of the
session, she spontaneously reported that she had been feeling anxious.
Dr. Beck made an interpretation: "You thought I was criticizing you."
The client disagreed: "No, I was afraid I was boring you." When he
questioned his other depressed clients, Dr. Beck recognized that all of
them experienced "automatic" negative thoughts that were closely tied to
their emotions. He began to help his clients identify, evaluate, and
respond to their unrealistic and maladaptive thinking. When he did so,
they rapidly improved. Dr. Beck then began to teach his psychiatric
residents at the University of Pennsylvania to use this form of
treatment. They, too, found that their clients responded well. The chief
resident, A. John Rush, MD, who became a leading authority in the field
of depression, discussed conducting an outcome trial with Dr. Beck. They
agreed that such a study was necessary to demonstrate the efficacy of
cognitive therapy. Their randomized controlled study of depressed
clients, published in 1977, established that cognitive therapy was as
effective as imipramine, a common antidepressant. This was an astounding
study. It was one of the first times that a talk therapy had been
compared to a medication. In a follow-up study, cognitive therapy was
shown to be much more effective than imipramine in preventing relapse.
Beck and colleagues (1979) published the first cognitive therapy
treatment manual 2 years later. Starting in the late 1970s, Dr. Beck and
his postdoctoral fellows at the University of Pennsylvania began to
study anxiety, substance use, personality disorders, couples' problems,
hostility, bipolar disorder, and other conditions, using the same
process. First, they made clinical observations about the disorder; they
outlined the maintaining factors and key cognitions (thoughts and
underlying beliefs, emotions, and behaviors). Then they tested their
theories, adapted treatment, and undertook randomized controlled trials.
Fast-forward several decades. Dr. Beck and I

and researchers worldwide continue to study, theorize, adapt, and test
treatments for clients who suffer from an ever-growing list of problems.
CBT is now taught in most graduate schools in the United States and in
many other countries. It is the most broadly practiced therapy in the
world (David et al., 2018; Knapp et al., 2015).

RECOVERY-ORIENTED COGNITIVE THERAPY In recent decades, there has been an
innovation in the field of mental health: the recovery movement, which
was started as an alternative approach to the medical model for
individuals diagnosed with a serious mental health condition. Aaron
Beck, our colleagues at the Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior
Therapy, and I are now refining recovery-oriented cognitive therapy
(CT-R) for individuals diagnosed with a wide range of conditions. CT-R,
an adaptation of traditional CBT, maintains the theoretical foundation
of the cognitive model in conceptualizing individuals and planning and
delivering treatment. But it adds an additional emphasis on the
cognitive formulation of clients' adaptive beliefs and behavioral
strategies, and factors that maintain a positive mood. Rather than
emphasizing symptoms and psychopathology, CT-R emphasizes clients'
strengths, personal qualities, skills, and resources. Taking a recovery
orientation, I elicited and conceptualized Abe's aspirations and values
to plan treatment. Family, for example, was very important to Abe, and
despite his deep depression, he was willing to push himself to increase
his interaction with them. We set up many potentially rewarding
activities for Abe to engage in between sessions and helped him draw
positive conclusions about these experiences. We cultivated positive
cognitions and memories and used the therapeutic relationship and a
variety of techniques to strengthen an adaptive core belief about the
self and to experience positive emotion in and out of session. One
difference between traditional CBT and CT-R is the time orientation. In
traditional CBT we tend to talk about problems that arose in the past
week and use CBT techniques to address them. In CT-R, we focus more on
clients' aspirations for the future, their values, and steps they can

take each week toward their goals. The usual CBT techniques are used in
overcoming challenges or obstacles clients will face in taking these
steps.

A TYPICAL COGNITIVE INTERVENTION Below is an excerpt from a therapy
session with Abe. It provides the flavor of a typical CBT intervention.
First, we agree to talk about a goal Abe wants to work on. We discuss
steps he can take and the obstacles that could get in the way. JUDITH:
Okay, did you want to start by talking about your goal to get a job?
ABE: Yeah, I really need the money. JUDITH: What's one step you'd like
to take this coming week? ABE: (Sighs.) I guess I should update my
résumé. JUDITH: That's important. \[starting problem solving\] How will
you go about doing that? ABE: I don't know. I haven't even looked at it
in years. JUDITH: Do you know where it is? ABE: Yeah. But I'm not sure
what to put on it. JUDITH: What are some ways you could figure this out?
ABE: I guess I could go online. But my concentration hasn't been too
good lately. JUDITH: Would you be better off talking to someone who
knows more about résumés than you do? ABE: Yeah. (Thinks.) I could talk
to my son. JUDITH: What would you think about calling him today? Could
anything get in the way? ABE: I don't know. I should be able to figure
out what to do myself, without bothering him. JUDITH: That's an
interesting idea---that you should be able to figure it out. Have you
had a lot of experience looking at other people's résumés? ABE: No, I
don't know that I ever saw one from someone else. JUDITH: How much
bother do you think it would be for your son? ABE: Not that much, I
guess. JUDITH: So, what would be good to remind yourself before you call
him?

ABE: That he's had much more recent experience with résumés than I've
had. That he'd probably be okay with helping me. JUDITH: (Praising Abe.)
That's excellent. Could you call him today? ABE: Tonight would be
better. Abe was easily able to identify and respond to an unhelpful
thought that could have posed an obstacle to taking a step toward
achieving a valued goal. I asked him to imagine that, with his son's
help, he had successfully revised his résumé. Then I asked him how he
felt emotionally in the image and helped him experience some of the
positive feeling right in our session. (Some clients, facing a similar
problem, might require a greater therapeutic effort before they're able
to follow through behaviorally.)

BECOMING AN EFFECTIVE CBT THERAPIST I hope you have an aspiration to
become an excellent therapist and help hundreds or thousands of
individuals in your career. Keeping this aspiration in mind can help you
persevere if you become anxious while reading this book. If you do feel
nervous, remember that the cognitive model proposes you've had some
negative thoughts. You'll be learning tools throughout the book to
address these kinds of unhelpful thoughts. Meanwhile, it helps to think
about a specific reading goal each week and the obstacles you might face
in taking the steps you need to. And make sure your expectations for
yourself are reasonable. I'd like you to know that I wasn't a very good
therapist when I first began doing CBT. How could it have been any
different? I had never done therapy before. So, give yourself a break if
you're just starting out or if you're fairly new to CBT. You're in good
company. Recognize and give yourself credit for each chapter you read.
Also give yourself credit for answering the reflection questions and
doing the practice exercises you'll find at the end of each chapter.
Compare yourself to your peers, not to expert CBT therapists. We often
use analogies and metaphors in CBT (Stott et al., 2010). Here's a common
one we use with clients that you may find useful yourself.

"Do you remember learning how to drive or to play a musical instrument?
At first, did you feel a little awkward? Did you have to pay a great
deal of attention to small details and motions that now come smoothly
and automatically to you? Did you ever feel discouraged? As you
progressed, did the process make more and more sense and feel more and
more comfortable? Did you finally master it to the point where you were
able to perform the task with relative ease and confidence? Most people
have had just such an experience learning a skill in which they are now
proficient." The learning process is the same for the beginning CBT
therapist. Keep your goals small, well defined, and realistic. Compare
your progress to your ability level before you started reading this book
or to the time you first started learning about CBT. Be careful not to
undermine your confidence by contrasting your current level of skill
with your ultimate objective. If you feel anxious about starting to use
CBT with clients, make yourself a "coping card," a physical or virtual
index card on which you have written statements that are important to
remember. You'll be using coping cards or their equivalents with your
clients (because we make sure that anything we want clients to remember
is written down). My psychiatric residents often have unhelpful thoughts
before they see their first outpatients. After a discussion, they create
a card that addresses these thoughts. The card is individualized but
generally says something such as follows: My goal is not to cure this
client today. No one expects me to. My goal is to establish a good
relationship, to inspire hope, to identify what's really important to
the client, and perhaps to figure out a step the client can take this
week toward achieving his or her goals.

Reading a card like this can help you reduce your anxiety so you can
focus on your clients and be more effective. To the untrained observer,
CBT sometimes appears deceptively simple. The cognitive model, the
proposition that one's thoughts influence one's emotions and behavior
(and sometimes physiology), is quite straightforward. Experienced CBT
therapists, however, seamlessly accomplish many tasks at once: building
rapport, socializing and educating the client, collecting data,
conceptualizing the case, working toward clients' goals and overcoming
obstacles, teaching skills, summarizing, and eliciting feedback. As
they're accomplishing these tasks, they sound almost conversational. If
you're new to the field, you will need to be more deliberate and
structured, concentrating on fewer elements at one time. Although the
ultimate goal is to interweave these elements and conduct therapy as
effectively and efficiently as possible, you first need to learn skills
to develop the therapeutic relationship and to conceptualize clients.
You'll also learn the techniques of CBT (and other modalities), all of
which is best done in a step-by-step manner. You can view the
development of expertise as a CBT therapist in four stages. (These
descriptions assume that you are already proficient in basic counseling
skills: listening, empathy, concern, positive regard, and genuineness,
as well as accurate understanding, reflection, and summarizing.) In
Stage 1, you learn basic skills of conceptualizing a case in cognitive
terms based on an intake evaluation and data collected in session. You
learn how to develop a strong therapeutic relationship. You learn how to
structure the session and use your conceptualization of the client and
good common sense to plan treatment, considering your clients' values,
aspirations, and goals. You help clients develop solutions to the
obstacles they face and view their dysfunctional thoughts in a different
way. You learn to use basic cognitive and behavioral techniques and to
teach your clients how to use them. In Stage 2 you become more
proficient at integrating your conceptualization with your knowledge of
techniques. You strengthen your ability to understand the flow of
therapy. You become more easily able to identify critical objectives of
treatment and more skillful at conceptualizing clients, refining your
conceptualization, and using the conceptualization to make
moment-to-moment decisions about interventions. You expand your

repertoire of strategies and become more proficient in selecting,
timing, and implementing appropriate techniques and in strengthening the
therapeutic relationship. In Stage 3 you more automatically integrate
new data into the conceptualization. You refine your ability to make
hypotheses to confirm or revise your view of the client. You vary the
structure and techniques of basic CBT as appropriate, particularly for
clients with personality disorders and other difficult disorders and
problems. You become more skilled at preventing and also repairing
ruptures in the therapeutic alliance. In Stage 4 you continue learning
CBT for the rest of your professional life. I keep learning from every
client I treat. I participate in weekly case conferences, consult on
clinical matters with colleagues and supervisees, and stay current with
CBT research and practice by reading books and articles and regularly
attending conferences. I'm a much better therapist today than I was 5
years ago. And I hope to be a better therapist 5 years from now. I hope
you will adopt a similar attitude about the importance of lifelong
learning. If you already practice in another psychotherapeutic modality
but are new to CBT, you will likely be more effective if you start
implementing it with new clients. If you decide to implement it with
existing clients, it will be important for you to do so collaboratively.
You should describe what you would like to do differently, provide a
rationale, and seek the client's agreement. Most clients agree to such
changes when they are phrased positively, to the client's benefit. When
clients are hesitant, you can suggest a change (such as setting an
agenda) as an "experiment," rather than a commitment, to motivate them
to try it. THERAPIST: I was reading an important book on making therapy
more effective and I thought of you. CLIENT: Oh? THERAPIST: Yes, and I
have some ideas about how you might be able to feel better faster.
\[being collaborative\] Is it okay if I tell you about it? CLIENT: Okay.
THERAPIST: One thing I read was called "setting the agenda." That means
at the beginning of sessions, I'd like to ask you which goals or issues
you want to work on in the session. For example, you might say that
you'd like to work on socializing more or getting more done around the
house.

This will help us figure out how to spend our time in session better.
(pause) How does that sound?

MAKING THE BEST USE OF THIS BOOK This book is intended for students and
clinicians at any stage of experience and skill development who lack
mastery in the fundamental building blocks of cognitive
conceptualization and treatment---or who want to learn how to
incorporate principles of CT-R into treatment. It's critical to master
the basic elements of CBT (and CT-R) so you can understand how and when
to vary standard treatment for individual clients. The chapters of this
book are designed to be read in the order presented. You might be eager
to skip over introductory chapters and jump to the "how-to" chapters.
The sum of CBT, however, is not merely the use of cognitive and
behavioral techniques. Among other attributes, it entails the artful
selection and effective use of many different kinds of interventions
based on your conceptualization of the client. Visit
beckinstitute.org/CBTresources to find videos of Abe's treatment and
downloadable worksheets. You'll find a list of additional CBT resources
in Appendix A. A note about worksheets: You'll need to print out some
worksheets, such as the Thought Record and the Testing Your Thoughts
Worksheet (from Chapter 15), because they contain a great amount of
information. And you may need to print out additional worksheets when
you're first starting to use CBT. But once you become familiar with the
material, it's often preferable to hand draw worksheets as you sit in
the session with a client. Doing this allows you to individualize them
as necessary, and you are more likely to avoid a negative reaction from
clients who don't like formal worksheets. Your growth as a CBT therapist
will be enhanced if you start applying what you learn to yourself. Make
sure to do all the practice exercises. For example, in the practice
exercise at the end of this chapter, you'll be directed to identify your
own automatic thoughts as you read this book. You can note them and
refocus on your reading. Or after identifying them, you could use the
questions on the next page to create a coping card for

yourself. By turning the spotlight on your own thinking, you can boost
your CBT skills, modify your dysfunctional thoughts, and positively
influence your mood (and behavior), making you more receptive to
learning. Other practice exercises ask you to role-play with a peer,
friend, colleague, or family member. If you can't find a role-play
partner, you can write a transcript with an imaginary client. Or you
might do both. The more you practice the vocabulary and concepts of CBT,
the better your treatment will be. Teaching yourself the basic skills of
CBT using yourself as the subject will enhance your ability to teach
your clients these same skills. As an added bonus, when you use skills
that are helpful, you can do some relevant self-disclosure with
clients---which can encourage them to practice the skill too. An online
course also provides you with many opportunities to practice using CBT
skills on yourself; it's one of the best ways to really grasp and
practice this kind of therapy. It's also important for you to know what
this book doesn't cover. Its focus is depression, and important
variations are needed to treat other disorders. It doesn't include how
to adapt treatment for youth or older adults. And it doesn't address the
very important topics of self-harm, substance use, suicidality, or
homicidality. You will need to supplement your learning to be effective
with individuals who vary substantially from our major client example,
Abe.

SUMMARY CBT was developed by Dr. Aaron Beck in the 1960s and 1970s and
has since been demonstrated to be effective in more than 2,000 published
outcome studies. Today, it is considered the "gold standard" of
psychotherapy (David et al., 2018). It's based on the theory that
people's thinking influences their emotions and behavior. By helping
their clients evaluate and change dysfunctional or unhelpful thinking,
CBT therapists can bring about lasting change in mood and behavior. CBT
therapists employ techniques from many different psychotherapeutic
modalities, applied within the context of the cognitive model and of
their individualized conceptualizations of their clients. A recovery
orientation focus has recently

been added to traditional CBT, emphasizing values and aspirations,
drawing positive conclusions from their day-to-day activities, and
experiencing positive emotion in and outside of the therapy session.
REFLECTION QUESTIONS What new ideas have you learned about CBT or CT-R
in this chapter? How could CBT techniques help you? What thoughts could
readers have that would deter them from applying CBT skills to
themselves? What would be good responses to those thoughts?

PRACTICE EXERCISE As of right now, start noticing when your mood has
changed or intensified in a negative direction, you are having bodily
sensations associated with negative emotion (such as your heart beating
fast when you become anxious), and/or you are engaging in unhelpful
behavior or avoiding engaging in helpful behavior. Ask yourself what
emotion you are experiencing, as well as the cardinal question of
cognitive therapy:

"What was just going through my mind?"

This is how you'll teach yourself to identify your own automatic
thoughts. Pay particular attention to automatic thoughts that get in the
way of achieving your goals, especially the ones that interfere with
reading this book and trying techniques with clients. You may recognize
thoughts such as these: "This is too hard." "I may not be able to master
this." "This doesn't feel comfortable to me." "What if I try it and it
doesn't help my client?" Experienced therapists whose primary
orientation has not been CBT may be aware of a different set of
automatic thoughts: "This won't work." "The client won't like it."

"It's too superficial/structured/unempathic/simple."

1

I've changed his name and some identifying characteristics.

2

I've changed her name and some identifying characteristics.

2

OVERVIEW OF TREATMENT

chapter, you'll read about CBT principles of treatment. While CBT Inis
this individualized for each person, there are certain commonalities
that apply to most clients. But don't worry about remembering everything
in this chapter because you'll be exposed to all the concepts at various
points throughout the book. I just want you to have a sense of what CBT
is like. You may want to watch a full therapy session and use the
Principles of Treatment Checklist (you'll find both at
beckinstitute.org/CBTresources) to note which principles below are
illustrated in the video.

PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT 1. CBT treatment plans are based on an
ever-evolving cognitive conceptualization. 2. CBT requires a sound
therapeutic relationship. 3. CBT continually monitors client progress.
4. CBT is culturally adapted and tailors treatment to the individual. 5.
CBT emphasizes the positive. 6. CBT stresses collaboration and active
participation. 7. CBT is aspirational, values based, and goal oriented.
8. CBT initially emphasizes the present. 9. CBT is educative. 10. CBT is
time sensitive. 11. CBT sessions are structured. 12. CBT uses guided
discovery and teaches clients to respond to their dysfunctional
cognitions. 13. CBT includes Action Plans (therapy homework).

14. CBT uses a variety of techniques to change thinking, mood, and
behavior.

Principle 1: CBT treatment plans are based on an ever-evolving cognitive
conceptualization. I base my conceptualization of clients on the data
they provide at the evaluation, informed by the cognitive formulation
(key cognitions, behavioral strategies, and maintaining factors that
characterize their disorder\[s\]). From the beginning, I incorporate
their strengths, positive qualities, and resources into my
conceptualization too. I continue to refine this conceptualization
throughout therapy as I collect additional data, and I use the
conceptualization to plan treatment. My treatment plan for Abe initially
focused on current cognitions and problematic behaviors that interfered
with working toward his goals. We discussed increasing action in line
with Abe's values and aspirations, and he began monitoring his positive
experiences. Toward the middle of therapy, we added a focus on
underlying beliefs that undermined his confidence. At the end of
treatment, we added an emphasis on planning for the future, anticipating
obstacles, and developing a plan to overcome these obstacles. We also
responded to maladaptive cognitions about termination and focused on
cognitions and behaviors that are important for relapse prevention. I
conceptualize Abe's difficulties in three time frames. From the
beginning, I identify current cognitions that are obstacles to his
aspirations ("I'm a failure"; "I can't do anything right"). I also
identify behavioral obstacles that serve to maintain his depression
(isolating himself, inactivity). Second, I identify precipitating
factors that influenced Abe's perceptions at the onset of his
depression. He struggled at work and then lost his job; his wife became
increasingly critical and divorced him. These events led to his belief
that he was incompetent. Third, I hypothesize about the key
developmental events and his enduring patterns of interpreting these
kinds of events that may have predisposed him to depression. As a
preteen, Abe's mother expected him to take on significant
responsibilities at home, for which he was developmentally ill equipped.
Rather than seeing that his overwhelmed mother was expecting too much of
him, he interpreted her criticism as valid. Principle 2: CBT requires a
sound therapeutic relationship. Clients vary in the degree to which they
are initially able to develop a good therapeutic alliance. It wasn't
difficult to establish the relationship with

Abe, though initially he was skeptical that I could help him. Using good
Rogerian counseling skills, asking him for his reaction to the treatment
plan, making collaborative decisions about treatment, providing
rationales for interventions, using self-disclosure, eliciting feedback
during and at the end of sessions, and working hard to achieve (and have
him recognize) progress contributed to our alliance. In general, you
spend enough time developing the therapeutic relationship to engage
clients in working effectively with you as a team. You use the
relationship to provide evidence that clients' negative beliefs,
especially beliefs about the self (and sometimes about others), are
inaccurate and that more positive beliefs are valid. If the alliance is
sound, you can maximize the time you spend helping clients resolve
obstacles they will face in the coming week. Some clients, particularly
those with personality disorders, do require a far greater emphasis on
the therapeutic relationship and advanced strategies to forge a good
working alliance (J. S. Beck, 2005; Beck et al., 2015; Young, 1999).
Principle 3: CBT continually monitors client progress. The earliest CBT
treatment manual, Cognitive Therapy of Depression (Beck et al., 1979),
advised therapists to use weekly symptom checklists and to elicit both
verbal and written feedback from clients at the end of sessions. Various
studies have since demonstrated that routine monitoring improves
outcomes (Boswell et al., 2015; Lambert et al., 2001, 2002; Weck et al.,
2017). Client outcomes are enhanced when both clients and therapists
receive feedback on how clients are progressing. With an increased
emphasis on a recovery orientation, many CBT therapists now also measure
clients' general functioning, progress toward their goals, and sense of
satisfaction, connection, and well-being. Principle 4: CBT is culturally
adapted and tailors treatment to the individual. CBT has traditionally
reflected the values of the dominant culture in the United States.
Clients with different ethnic and cultural backgrounds, though, have
better outcomes when their therapists appreciate the significance of
cultural and ethnic differences, preferences, and practices (Beck, 2016;
Smith et al., 2011; Sue et al., 2009). CBT tends to emphasize
rationality, the scientific method, and individualism. Clients from
other cultures may hold different values and preferences: for example,

emotional reasoning, varying degrees of emotional expression, and
collectivism or interdependence. When clients' cultures are different
from your own, you may need to improve your cultural competency. You
may, in fact, be largely unaware of your own cultural biases. You may
also be unaware of the extent of cultural bias some clients experience
in their community, especially if they are not part of the majority
culture. Such biases and prejudice may play a significant role in your
clients' difficulties. Your clients may differ from you in many ways, in
addition to culture. These include age, religious or spiritual
orientation, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, disability, gender, sexual
identity, and sexual orientation (Iwamasa & Hays, 2019). Make sure to
educate yourself about your clients' characteristics and anticipate how
these differences might be relevant to treatment. Hays (2009) describes
strategies to make CBT culturally responsive, including assessing the
client's and family's needs, emphasizing culturally respectful behavior,
identifying culturally related strengths and supports, and validating
clients' experiences of oppression. Of course, you still need to
conceptualize the individual client and refrain from assuming that
you'll need to vary treatment for a given individual. Principle 5: CBT
emphasizes the positive. Recent research demonstrates the importance of
emphasizing positive emotion and cognition in treating depression (see,
e.g., Chaves et al., 2019). You help clients actively work toward
cultivating positive moods and thinking. It is also very important to
inspire hope. Abe was like most depressed clients. He tended to focus on
the negative. When he was in the depressive mode, he automatically
(i.e., without conscious awareness) and selectively attended to negative
experiences. He also misread neutral experiences as negative at times.
In addition, he often discounted or failed to recognize more positive
experiences. His difficulty in processing positive data in a
straightforward manner led him to develop a distorted sense of himself.
To counteract this feature of depression, you continually help clients
attend to the positive. I want Abe to start engaging in experiences in
which he concludes he is a resourceful person who can solve problems,
overcome obstacles, and lead a satisfying life.

Principle 6: CBT stresses collaboration and active participation. Both
therapists and clients are active. I encourage Abe to view therapy as
teamwork; together we decide what to work on each session, how often we
should meet, and what Abe can do between sessions. At first, I'm more
active in suggesting a direction for therapy sessions and for some
Action Plans (therapy homework). As Abe becomes less depressed and more
socialized to treatment, I encourage him to become increasingly active
in the session: deciding which steps to take toward his goals, problem
solving potential obstacles, evaluating his dysfunctional cognitions,
summarizing important points, and devising Action Plans. Principle 7:
CBT is aspirational, values based, and goal oriented. In your initial
session with clients, you should ask them about their values (what is
really important to them in life), their aspirations (how they want to
be, how they want their life to be), and their specific goals for
treatment (what they want to accomplish as a result of therapy). Being
responsible, competent, productive, and helpful to others were important
values for Abe. He aspired to have a better life, to regain his sense of
optimism and wellbeing, and to feel in control. His specific goals
included being a better father and grandfather and getting a good job.
But thoughts such as "I'm such a failure" and "I'll never get a job"
were obstacles. They had contributed to his avoiding steps he needed to
take to reach his goals. Principle 8: CBT initially emphasizes the
present. The treatment of most clients involves a strong focus on the
skills they need to improve their mood (and their lives). Clients who
use these skills consistently (during and after treatment) have better
outcomes than those who don't, even in the face of significant stressful
life events (Vittengl et al., 2019). When Abe viewed distressing
situations more realistically, solved problems, and worked toward his
goals, he felt less depressed. His mood became more positive as he
focused his attention on what was going well in his life and what
admirable qualities those experiences indicated about him as a person.
You shift the focus to the past in three circumstances: 1. When the
client expresses a strong desire to do so, 2. When work directed toward
current problems and future aspirations produces insufficient change, or
3. When you judge that it's important for you and clients to understand
how and when their key dysfunctional ideas and behavioral coping
strategies originated and became maintained.

Afterward, you'll discuss what your clients now understand about the
past and how they can make use of their new understanding in the coming
week. For example, midway through treatment, Abe and I briefly discussed
some childhood events to help him identify a belief he learned as a
child: "If I ask for help, people will see how incompetent I am." I
helped Abe evaluate the validity of this belief in both the past and the
present. Doing so led him, in part, to develop a more functional, more
reasonable belief. If he had had a personality disorder, I may have
spent proportionally more time discussing his developmental history and
childhood origin of beliefs and coping behaviors. Principle 9: CBT is
educative. A major goal of treatment is to make the process of therapy
understandable. Abe felt more comfortable once he knew what to expect
from treatment, when he clearly understood what I wanted him to do, when
he felt as if he and I were a team, and when he had a concrete idea of
how therapy would proceed, both within a session and over the course of
treatment. In our first session, I educated Abe about the nature and
course of his disorder, the process of CBT, the structure of sessions,
and the cognitive model. I provided him with additional psychoeducation
in future sessions, presenting my ongoing and refined conceptualization
and asking him for feedback. I used diagrams throughout treatment to
help Abe understand why he sometimes had distorted thoughts and
maladaptive reactions. (See Boisvert & Ahmed \[2018\] for many kinds of
diagrams that are helpful in educating clients.) Throughout treatment,
after using various techniques, I taught Abe how to use the techniques
himself, so he could learn to be his own therapist. At each session, I
encouraged Abe to record the most important ideas he had learned so he
could review his new understandings daily. Abe also occasionally
reviewed these notes after termination, when he found himself slipping
back into old patterns of thinking and behavior. Principle 10: CBT is
time sensitive. We used to say that CBT was a short-term therapy. Many
straightforward clients with depression and anxiety disorders require
between 6 and 16 sessions. But the treatment for some conditions needs
to be much longer. We try to make treatment as short term as possible
while still fulfilling our objectives: to help clients recover from
their disorder(s); work toward fulfilling their aspirations, values, and

goals; resolve their most pressing issues; promote satisfaction and
enjoyment in life; and learn skills to promote resilience and avoid
relapse. Abe initially had weekly therapy sessions. (Had his depression
been more severe or had he been suicidal, I may have arranged more
frequent sessions.) After 2½ months, Abe was feeling somewhat better and
was able to use his skills between sessions. So, we collaboratively
decided to experiment with every other week and then monthly sessions.
Even after termination, we planned periodic "booster" sessions every 3
months for a year. Some clients need considerably more treatment over a
longer period of time. Sometimes these clients have chaotic lives or
face ongoing severe challenges such as poverty or violence. Some have
chronic or treatmentresistant disorders. Others have personality
disorders, entrenched substance use, bipolar disorder, eating disorders,
or schizophrenia. A year or even two of therapy may be insufficient.
Even after termination, they may need periodic sessions or additional
(usually shorter) courses of treatment. Principle 11: CBT sessions are
structured. CBT therapists aim to conduct therapy as efficiently as
possible to help clients feel better as quickly as possible. Adhering to
a standard format (as well as teaching the therapeutic techniques to
clients) facilitates these objectives. You will tend to use this format
in every session (unless your client objects, in which case you may need
to negotiate the structure initially). I start planning Abe's treatment
before he enters my office. I quickly review his chart, especially his
goals for treatment and Action Plans (including therapy notes) from the
previous session(s). My overarching therapeutic goal is to improve Abe's
mood during the session and to create an Action Plan so he can feel
better and behave more functionally during the week. What I do in any
given session is influenced by Abe's goals and issues, my
conceptualization, the strength of our therapeutic relationship, Abe's
preferences, and the stage of treatment. Your goal in the first part of
a therapy session is to reestablish the therapeutic alliance, review the
Action Plan, and collect data so you and the client can collaboratively
set and prioritize the agenda. In the second part of the session, you
and the client discuss the issues or goals on the agenda. These kinds of
discussions and interventions naturally lead to Action Plans. In the
final part of the session, you or the client summarizes the session.

You make sure the Action Plan is reasonable and then elicit and respond
to clients' feedback. While experienced CBT therapists may deviate from
this format at times, novice therapists are usually more effective when
they follow the specified structure. Principle 12: CBT uses guided
discovery and teaches clients to respond to their dysfunctional
cognitions. In the context of discussing a problem or goal, you ask
clients questions to help them identify their dysfunctional thinking (by
asking what was going through their mind), evaluate the validity and
utility of their thoughts (using a number of techniques), and devise a
plan of action. With Abe, I use gentle Socratic questioning, which helps
foster his sense that I am truly interested in collaborative empiricism,
that is, helping him determine the accuracy and utility of his ideas
through a careful review of the evidence. Note that we refrain from
challenging cognitions (by stating or trying to convince clients that
their thoughts or beliefs aren't valid); rather, we help clients through
cognitive restructuring, a process of assessing and responding to
maladaptive thinking. In other sessions, I ask Abe about the meaning of
his thoughts to uncover underlying beliefs he holds about himself, his
world, and other people. Through questioning, I also guide him in
evaluating the validity and functionality of his beliefs. And from the
beginning of treatment, I help Abe fortify positive beliefs about
himself by teaching him to give himself credit and guiding him to draw
positive conclusions about the steps he has taken toward his goals.
Depending on the kind of cognition you've agreed to address, you might
substitute or add additional techniques to those above. When automatic
thoughts are part of a dysfunctional thought process such as rumination,
obsession, or continual self-criticism, you might help clients accept
their thoughts nonjudgmentally and allow them to come and go on their
own. To change cognitions at the emotional or gut level, you might use
imagery, tell a story, offer analogies and metaphors, employ
experiential techniques, do role-playing, or suggest behavioral
experiments. Principle 13: CBT includes Action Plans (therapy homework).
An important aim of treatment is to help clients feel better by the end
of the session and to set them up to have a better week. Action Plans
usually consist of

identifying and evaluating automatic thoughts that are obstacles to
clients' goals, implementing solutions to problems and obstacles that
could arise in the coming week, and/or practicing behavioral skills
learned in session.

Clients tend to forget much of what occurs in therapy sessions, and when
they do, they tend to have poorer outcomes (Lee et al., 2020). So here's
our rule of thumb: Anything we want clients to remember is recorded.

You or your client should write down therapy notes and Action Plans,
either on paper or in the client's phone or tablet. Or you can record
therapy notes on a cell phone by using an app. Here's an example of a
therapy note that Abe and I collaboratively composed: If I start to
think that I can't sit down and pay bills, remind myself:

I'm only going to do it for 10 minutes. It may be difficult but probably
won't be impossible. The first minute or two will probably be the
hardest and then it's likely to get easier. I should focus on the
positive feeling I will get from accomplishing something I haven't been
able to do.

Action Plans naturally flow from the discussion of each goal or issue on
the agenda. You'll need to craft them carefully with clients, based on
the nature of the issue, your conceptualization of what will help most,
practical considerations (such as time, energy, and opportunity), and
client variables

(e.g., level of motivation and concentration, and preferences). A
frequent mistake of therapists is suggesting Action Plans that are much
too difficult. Principle 14: CBT uses a variety of techniques to change
thinking, mood, and behavior. In fact, we adapt strategies from many
psychotherapeutic modalities within the context of the cognitive
framework. For example, depending on my conceptualization of a client, I
may use techniques from acceptance and commitment therapy, behavior
therapy, compassion-focused psychotherapy, dialectical behavior therapy,
Gestalt therapy, interpersonal psychotherapy, meta-cognitive therapy,
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy, person-centered psychotherapy,
psychodynamic psychotherapy, schema therapy, solution-based therapy,
well-being therapy, or others. While you're still learning CBT, it will
be difficult for you to incorporate a wider variety of interventions
than the ones you'll read about in this book. I would encourage you to
master the basics of CBT first and then learn additional techniques to
implement within the framework of a cognitive conceptualization. As you
progress as a CBT clinician, it will be worthwhile to study these and
other evidence-based treatments.

SUMMARY The basic principles described in this chapter apply to most
clients. Guided by your cognitive conceptualization of each client, you
will vary the techniques you use to tailor treatment to the individual.
CBT treatment takes into account individuals' cultures, family history,
and other important characteristics; the nature of their difficulties;
their goals and aspirations; their ability to form a strong therapeutic
bond; their motivation to change; their previous experience with
therapy; and their preferences. The foundation of treatment is always a
solid therapeutic relationship. REFLECTION QUESTIONS Which of the 14
principles of treatment did you already know were important elements of
CBT? Which were new? Did any of them surprise you?

PRACTICE EXERCISES Review the principles of treatment. Describe in your
own words why each is important. Then think about what else you'd like
to know about each principle and compose a relevant question. Consider
watching an entire therapy session. Use the Principles of Treatment
Checklist (beckinstitute.org/CBTresources) to note which principles are
demonstrated in the video.

3

COGNITIVE CONCEPTUALIZATION

conceptualization is the cornerstone of CBT. You'll be Acognitive
learning more about the various elements and the process of
conceptualization throughout this book. In this chapter, you'll find the
answers to the following questions: What is a cognitive
conceptualization? How do you initiate the process of conceptualization?
How do automatic thoughts help you understand clients' reactions? What
are core beliefs and intermediate beliefs? What is a more complex
cognitive model? What is Abe's conceptualization? How do you complete a
Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram?

INTRODUCTION TO COGNITIVE CONCEPTUALIZATION Your conceptualization
provides the framework for treatment. It helps you

understand clients, their strengths and weaknesses, their aspirations
and challenges; recognize how it is that clients developed a
psychological disorder with dysfunctional thinking and maladaptive
behavior; strengthen the therapeutic relationship; plan treatment within
and across sessions; select appropriate interventions and adapt
treatment as needed; and overcome stuck points.

An organic, evolving formulation helps you plan for efficient and
effective therapy (Kuyken et al., 2009; Needleman, 1999; Persons, 2008;
Tarrier, 2006). You begin to construct the conceptualization during your
first contact with a client and refine it at every subsequent contact.
It's important to understand the cognitive formulation for the client's
diagnosis(es), the typical cognitions, behavioral strategies, and
maintaining factors. But then you need to see whether the formulation
fits your specific client. You continually collect data, summarize what
you've heard, check out your hypotheses with the client, and modify your
conceptualization as needed. For example, I didn't know in the first few
sessions that Maria had a belief of worthlessness. It wasn't until she
had a shouting match with her mother and sister that this belief came to
light. You confirm, disconfirm, or modify your hypotheses as clients
present new information. You continually ask yourself, "Is the new data
I've just learned part of a pattern I've already identified---or is it
something new?" If new, make a note to check in future sessions to see
if these data are part of another pattern. You share your
conceptualization and ask the client whether it "rings true" or "seems
right." If your conceptualization is accurate, the client invariably
says something like "Yes, I think that's right." If you're wrong, the
client usually says, "No, it's not exactly like that. It's more like
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_." Eliciting the client's feedback strengthens the
alliance and allows you to more accurately conceptualize and conduct
effective treatment. In fact, sharing your conceptualization can itself
be therapeutic (Ezzamel et al., 2015; Johnstone et al., 2011). Abe felt
better when I suggested that he really had only one problem: seeing
himself as incompetent and a failure.

"I think you believe this so strongly that you avoid doing things that
seem hard. And when you're depressed, almost everything seems hard.
(pause) Do you think I could be right?" It's important to put yourself
in your clients' shoes, to develop empathy for what they are
experiencing, to understand how they are feeling, and to perceive the
world through their eyes. Clients' perceptions, thoughts, emotions, and
behavior should make sense given their interpretation of past and
current experiences, their strengths and vulnerabilities, their values
and personal attributes, their biology, and their genetics and
epigenetics. Your conceptualization also helps you understand and build
on your clients' positive attributes and skills. Helping clients become
more aware of their strengths and resources can lead to better
functioning and improved mood and resilience (Kuyken et al., 2009). It
also helps you understand how and why obstacles to achieving their goals
have arisen and been maintained.

INITIATING THE PROCESS OF CONCEPTUALIZATION There are many questions you
should keep in mind throughout treatment to develop and refine your
conceptualization. See Chapter 5 for a description of the evaluation
session, in which you'll start to collect a great deal of information:
clients' identifying information; chief complaint, major symptoms,
mental status, and diagnosis; current psychiatric medications and
concurrent treatment; significant relationships; best lifetime
functioning; and various aspects of their history. You'll continue to
gather data throughout treatment.

AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS HELP EXPLAIN CLIENTS' REACTIONS

CBT is based on the cognitive model, which hypothesizes that people's
emotions, behaviors, and physiology are influenced by their perception
of events (both external, such as failing a test, and internal, such as
distressing physical symptoms). Situation/event ↓ Automatic thoughts ↓
Reaction (emotional, behavioral, physiological)

It's not a situation in and of itself that determines what people feel
and do but rather how individuals construe a situation (Beck, 1964;
Ellis, 1962). Imagine, for example, a situation in which several people
are reading a basic text on CBT. They have quite different emotional and
behavioral responses to the same situation, based on what is going
through their minds as they read. Reader A thinks, "This really makes
sense. Finally, a book that will really teach me to be a good
therapist!" Reader A feels mildly excited and keeps reading. Reader B,
on the other hand, thinks, "This approach is too simplistic. It will
never work." Reader B feels disappointed and closes the book. Reader C
has the following thoughts: "This book isn't what I expected. What a
waste of money." Reader C is disgusted and discards the book altogether.
Reader D thinks, "I really need to learn all this. What if I don't
understand it? What if I never get good at it?" Reader D feels anxious
and keeps reading the same few pages over and over. Reader E has
different thoughts: "This is just too hard. I'm so dumb. I'll never
master this. I'll never make it as a therapist." Reader E feels sad and
turns on the television.

The way people feel emotionally and the way they behave are associated
with how they interpret and think about a situation. The situation
itself does not directly determine how they feel or what they do.

PEOPLE'S REACTIONS ALWAYS MAKE SENSE ONCE WE KNOW WHAT THEY'RE THINKING.

You will be particularly interested in the level of thinking that may
operate simultaneously with a more obvious, surface level of thinking.
As you're reading this text, you may notice these two levels. Part of
your mind is focusing on the information in the text; that is, you are
trying to understand and integrate factual information. At another
level, however, you may be having some quick, evaluative thoughts about
the situation. These cognitions are called automatic thoughts and are
not the result of deliberation or reasoning. Rather, these thoughts seem
to spring up spontaneously; they are often quite rapid and brief. You
may barely be aware of these thoughts; you are far more likely to be
aware of the emotion or behavior that follows. Even if you are aware of
your thoughts, you most likely accept them uncritically, believing they
are true. You don't even think of questioning them. You can learn,
however, to identify your automatic thoughts by attending to your shifts
in affect, behavior, and/or physiology. Ask yourself, "What was just
going through my mind?" when you begin to feel dysphoric, you feel
inclined to behave in a dysfunctional way (or to avoid behaving in an
adaptive way), and/or you notice changes in your body or mind that
distress you (e.g., shortness of breath or racing thoughts).

Having identified your automatic thoughts, you can, and probably already
do to some extent, evaluate the validity of your thinking. For example,
when I have a lot do, I sometimes have the automatic thought "I'll never
get it all finished." But I do an automatic reality check, recalling
past experiences and reminding myself, "It's okay. You know you always
get done what you need to." When people find their interpretation of a
situation is erroneous and correct it, they probably discover that their
mood improves, they behave in a more functional way, and/or their
physiological arousal decreases. In

cognitive terms, when dysfunctional thoughts are subjected to objective
reflection, one's emotions, behavior, and physiological reaction
generally change. But where do automatic thoughts spring from? What
makes one person interpret a situation differently from another person?
Why may the same person interpret an identical event differently at one
time from another? The answer has more to do with enduring cognitive
phenomena: beliefs. THE THEMES IN PEOPLE'S AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS ALWAYS
MAKE SENSE ONCE WE UNDERSTAND THEIR BELIEFS.

BELIEFS Beginning in childhood, people develop certain ideas about
themselves, other people, and their world. Their most central or core
beliefs are enduring understandings so fundamental and deep that they
often do not articulate them, even to themselves. Individuals regard
these ideas as absolute truths---just the way things "are" (Beck, 1987).
Well-adjusted individuals primarily hold realistically positive beliefs
much of the time. But we all have latent negative beliefs that can
become partially or fully activated in the presence of thematically
related vulnerabilities or stressors.

Adaptive Beliefs Many clients, like Abe, had been predominantly
psychologically healthy before the onset of their disorder; they were
reasonably effective, had basically good relationships, and lived in
environments that were mostly safe. If so, they most likely developed
flexible, helpful, reality-based beliefs about themselves, their worlds,
other people, and the future (Figure 3.1). They probably saw themselves
as reasonably effective, likeable, and worthwhile. They had accurate and
nuanced views about other people, seeing many of them as basically
benign or neutral and only some as potentially hurtful (but they most
likely believed they could reasonably protect themselves). They saw
their world realistically too as composed of a

mixture of predictability and unpredictability, safety and danger (but
believed they could cope with most things that came their way). They
perceived their future as having positive, neutral, and negative
experiences (believing they could cope with misfortune---sometimes with
the help of other people---and that they would be okay in the end).
EFFECTIVE CORE BELIEFS "I am reasonably competent, effective, in
control, successful, and useful." "I can reasonably do most things,
protect myself, and take care of myself." "I have strengths and
weaknesses \[in terms of effectiveness, productivity, achievement\]." "I
have relative freedom." "I mostly measure up to other people." LOVABLE
CORE BELIEFS "I am reasonably lovable, likeable, desirable, attractive,
wanted, and cared for." "I am okay, and my differences don't impair my
relationships." "I am good enough \[to be loved by others\]." "I am
unlikely to be abandoned or rejected or end up alone." WORTHY CORE
BELIEFS "I am reasonably worthwhile, acceptable, moral, good, and
benign." FIGURE 3.1. Adaptive (positive) core beliefs about the self.
Copyright © 2018 CBT Worksheet Packet. Beck Institute for Cognitive
Behavior Therapy, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

The latent negative counterparts to these beliefs might temporarily
surface when these clients negatively interpret a setback related to
their effectiveness, an interpersonal problem, or an action they took
that was contrary to their moral code. But they probably reverted back
to their more reality-based core beliefs after a short period of
time---that is, unless they developed an acute disorder. When this
happens, they may need treatment to help them reestablish their
primarily adaptive beliefs. The situation is different for other
clients, though, especially those with personality disorders, like
Maria. Their positive, adaptive beliefs may have been fairly weak or
actually nonexistent when they were growing up and on into adulthood,
and they usually need treatment to help them develop and strengthen
adaptive beliefs. Note that some clients hold overly positive beliefs,
especially if they're manic or hypomanic. They may see themselves,
others, the world, and/or

the future in an unrealistically positive light. When these beliefs are
dysfunctional, they may need help in viewing their experiences more
realistically, which is in a negative direction.

Dysfunctional Negative Beliefs People who have a history of being less
psychologically healthy, or who live in more dangerous physical or
interpersonal environments, tend to function more poorly; they may have
troubled relationships, and they may hold core beliefs that are more
negative. These beliefs may or may not have been realistic and/or
helpful when they first developed. In the presence of an acute episode,
however, these beliefs tend to be extreme, unrealistic, and highly
maladaptive. Negative core beliefs about the self tend to fall into
three categories (Figure 3.2): helplessness (being ineffective---in
getting things done, self-protection, and/or measuring up to others);
unlovability (having personal qualities resulting in an inability to get
or maintain love and intimacy from others); and worthlessness (being an
immoral sinner or dangerous to others).

HELPLESS CORE BELIEFS "I am ineffective in getting things done." "I'm
incompetent, ineffective, helpless, useless, and needy; I can't cope."
"I am ineffective in protecting myself." "I am powerless, weak,
vulnerable, trapped, out of control, and likely to get hurt." "I am
ineffective compared to others." "I am inferior, a failure, a loser,
defective, useless." "I'm not good enough \[in terms of achievement\]; I
don't measure up." UNLOVABLE CORE BELIEFS "I am unlovable, unlikeable,
undesirable, unattractive, boring, unimportant, and unwanted." "\[I
won't be accepted or loved by others because\] I am different, a nerd,
bad, defective, not good enough, have nothing to offer, and there's
something wrong with me." "I am bound to be rejected, abandoned, and
alone." WORTHLESS CORE BELIEFS "I am immoral, morally bad, a sinner,
worthless, and unacceptable."

"I am dangerous, toxic, crazy, and evil." "I don't deserve to live."
FIGURE 3.2. Dysfunctional core beliefs about the self.

Clients may hold beliefs in one, two, or all three of these categories,
and they may hold more than one belief in a given category.

Case Example Reader E, who thought she was too unintelligent to master
this text, frequently has a similar concern when she has to engage in a
new task (e.g., renting a car, figuring out how to put together a
bookcase, or applying for a bank loan). She seems to have the core
belief "I'm incompetent." This belief may operate only when she is in a
depressed state; it may be active some or much of the time; or it may be
fairly dormant. When this core belief is active, Reader E interprets
situations through the lens of this belief, even though the
interpretation may, on a rational basis, be patently invalid. Reader E
tends to selectively focus on information that confirms her core belief,
disregarding or discounting information to the contrary. For example,
Reader E did not consider that other intelligent, competent people might
not fully understand the material in their first reading. Nor did she
entertain the possibility that the author had not presented the material
well. She didn't recognize that her difficulty in comprehension could be
due to a lack of concentration, rather than a lack of brainpower. She
forgot that she often had difficulty initially when presented with a
body of new information but later had a good track record of mastery.
Because her incompetence belief was activated, she automatically
interpreted the situation in a highly negative, self-critical manner. In
this way, her belief is maintained, even though it's inaccurate and
dysfunctional. It is important to note that she's not purposely trying
to process information in this way; it occurs automatically. Figure 3.3
illustrates this distorted way of processing information. The circle
with a rectangular opening represents Reader E's schema. In Piagetian
terms, the schema is a hypothesized mental structure that organizes
information. Within this schema is Reader E's core belief: "I'm
incompetent." When Reader E is exposed to a relevant experience, this
schema becomes active, and the data, contained in negative rectangles,
are

immediately processed as confirming her core belief---which makes the
belief stronger.

FIGURE 3.3. Information processing diagram. This diagram demonstrates
how negative data are immediately processed, strengthening the core
belief, while positive data are discounted (changed into negative data)
or unnoticed.

But a different process occurs when Reader E encounters an experience in
which she does well. Positive data are encoded in the equivalent of
positive triangles, which cannot fit into the schema. Her mind
automatically discounts the data. ("Yes, the session with my client went
well, but that's

because she was so eager to please me.") These interpretations, in
essence, change the shape of the data from positive triangles to
negative rectangles. Now the data fit into the schema and, as a result,
strengthen the negative core belief. There are also positive data that
Reader E just doesn't notice. She doesn't negate some evidence of
competence, such as paying her bills on time or helping a friend with a
problem. But had she failed to take these actions, she probably would
have interpreted her inaction as supporting her dysfunctional core
belief. Though she doesn't discount the positive data, she doesn't seem
to notice or process the positive data as being relevant to her core
belief; this kind of data bounces off the schema. Over time, Reader E's
core belief of incompetence becomes stronger and stronger. Abe, too, has
a core belief of incompetence. Fortunately, when Abe is not depressed, a
different schema (which contains the core belief "I'm reasonably
competent") is active most of the time, and his belief "I'm incompetent"
is latent. But when he's depressed, the incompetence schema
predominates. One important objective of treatment is to help Abe view
his experiences (both positive and negative) in a more realistic and
adaptive way.

INTERMEDIATE BELIEFS: ATTITUDES, RULES, AND ASSUMPTIONS Core beliefs are
the most fundamental level of belief; when clients are depressed, these
beliefs tend to be negative, extreme, global, rigid, and
overgeneralized. Automatic thoughts, the actual words or images that go
through a person's mind, are situation specific and may be considered
the most superficial level of cognition. Intermediate beliefs exist
between the two. Core beliefs influence the development of this
intermediate class of beliefs, which consists of (often unarticulated)
attitudes, rules, and assumptions. Note that many attitudes indicate
clients' values. Reader E, for example, had the following intermediate
beliefs: Attitude: "It's terrible to fail." Rule: "I should give up if a
challenge seems too great."

Assumptions: "If I try to do something difficult, I'll fail. If I avoid
doing it, I'll be okay." These beliefs influence her view of a
situation, which in turn influences how she thinks, feels, and behaves.
The relationship of these intermediate beliefs to core beliefs and
automatic thoughts is depicted below. Core beliefs ↓ Intermediate
beliefs (rules, attitudes, assumptions) ↓ Automatic thoughts

How do core beliefs and intermediate beliefs arise? People try to make
sense of their environment from their early developmental stages. They
need to organize their experience in a coherent way to function
adaptively (Rosen, 1988). Their interactions with the world and other
people, influenced by their genetic predisposition, lead to certain
understandings: their beliefs, which may vary in their accuracy and
functionality. Of particular significance to the CBT therapist is that
dysfunctional beliefs can be unlearned, and more reality-based and
functional new beliefs can be developed and strengthened through
treatment. The quickest way to help clients feel better and behave more
adaptively is to help them identify and strengthen their more positive
adaptive beliefs and to modify their inaccurate beliefs. Once this is
accomplished, clients tend to interpret current and future situations or
problems in a more constructive way. In most cases we can work both
directly and indirectly on positive beliefs from the beginning of
treatment. But we usually need to work indirectly on negative core
beliefs at first and more directly later on. Even the identification of
negative core beliefs can trigger significant negative affect that can
lead clients to feel unsafe.

A MORE COMPLEX COGNITIVE MODEL The hierarchy of cognition, as it has
been explained to this point, can be illustrated as follows: Core
beliefs ↓ Intermediate beliefs (rules, attitudes, assumptions) ↓
Situation ↓ Automatic thoughts ↓ Reaction (emotional, behavioral,
physiological)

It's important to note that the sequence of the perception of situations
leading to automatic thoughts that then influence people's reactions is
an oversimplification at times. Thinking, mood, behavior, and physiology
can affect one another. Core beliefs ↓ Intermediate beliefs (rules,
attitudes, assumptions) ↓ Trigger Situation ↓ Automatic thoughts ⤢

⤡

Emotional ↔ Behavioral

There are also many different kinds of internal and external triggering
situations about which clients have automatic thoughts: Discrete events
(such as failing to get a job offer) A stream of thoughts (such as
thinking about being unemployed) A memory (such as getting fired from a
job) An image (such as the disapproving face of a boss) An emotion (such
as noticing how intense one's dysphoria is) A behavior (such as staying
in bed) A physiological or mental experience (such as noticing one's
rapid heartbeat or slowed-down thinking)

Individuals may experience a complex sequence of events with many
different triggering situations, automatic thoughts, and reactions. (See
Chapter 12, pp. 217--218, for an example of an extended cognitive
model.)

CONCEPTUALIZATION OF ABE At intake, it's clear that Abe is suffering
from persistent sadness, anxiety, and loneliness. I diagnose him with
major depression, severe, with anxious distress. I ask some specific
questions to help me develop an initial conceptualization. For example,
I ask Abe when he generally feels the worst---which situations and/or
times of day. He tells me that he pretty much feels the same all day
long, but perhaps a little worse in the evenings. Then I ask him how he
felt the previous evening. When Abe confirms that he was as depressed as
usual, I ask, "What was going through your mind?" Right from the
beginning, I obtain a sample of important automatic thoughts. Abe
reports that he often thinks, "There's so much I should be doing but I'm
so tired. If I even try \[to do things like cleaning up the apartment\],
I'll just do a bad job" and "I feel so down. Nothing will make me feel
better." He also reports an image, a mental picture that had flashed

through his mind. He saw himself, sometime in the indeterminate future,
sitting in the dark, feeling utterly hopeless and helpless. I also look
for factors that maintain Abe's depression. Avoidance is a major
problem. He avoids cleaning up his apartment, doing errands, socializing
with friends, looking for a new job, and asking others for help.
Therefore, he lacks experiences that could have given him a sense of
mastery, pleasure, or connection. His negative thinking leads to his
being inactive and passive. His inactivity and passivity reinforce his
sense of being helpless and out of control. As a child, Abe tried to
make sense of himself, others, and his world, learning from, for
example, his experiences, interactions with others, and direct
observation. His perceptions were also undoubtedly influenced by his
genetic inheritance. Early experiences within the family laid the
groundwork for his core belief of competence and incompetence. Abe was
the oldest of three boys. When he was 11, his father left the family and
never returned. His mother, a single parent, worked two jobs and relied
heavily on him. Once his father left, she often asked Abe to do things
that were quite difficult---for example, keeping the house clean, doing
the laundry, and taking care of his younger brothers. Abe had a strong
value of being a good son, accomplishing what was asked of him and
helping others. He expected himself to be able to do everything his
mother asked, but he was often not up to the task. He had thoughts such
as "I should be doing this \[task\] better"; "I should be helping Mom
more"; and "I should be able to make them \[his brothers\] behave." On
the few occasions when he asked his mother what he should do to control
his brothers' behavior better, she said irritably, "Figure it out for
yourself." Not all youth in this kind of situation perceive themselves
as lacking. Some youth, for example, blame their mothers for expecting
too much. Abe's mother did, in fact, expect too much of him, for his age
and developmental level. She criticized him when she came home and saw
his brothers "running wild" or found the kitchen messy. At these times,
she became upset and told Abe, "You can't do anything right. You're
letting me down." Abe thought what she said was true, and he felt
distressed. He then often retreated to his room and ruminated over his
shortcomings.

Abe's Core Beliefs

Over time, Abe's belief that he was reasonably competent began to erode,
in the specific context of his home life. He began to notice what he
considered to be his failures. Even when he saw he was doing a good job,
he tended to discount his accomplishments. "I cleaned up the kitchen,
but the living room is still messy"; "I got them \[brothers\] to do
their homework, but I couldn't make them stop fighting." No wonder Abe
began to feel incompetent. The result of putting too much weight on his
perceived weaknesses and discounting or failing to notice his strengths
led to the development of his core belief: "I'm incompetent." Abe's
negative belief was fairly circumscribed to "failures" at home. He
received average grades at school, as did his friends. His teachers and
mother generally seemed satisfied with his performance, so he was
satisfied too. He was an above-average athlete and received praise and
support from his coaches. So Abe saw himself as reasonably competent in
the context of school and sports. He also saw himself as reasonably
likeable and worthwhile. Abe's beliefs about his world and other people
were, for the most part, realistically positive and adaptive. He
generally believed that many people were benign---or would be benign as
long as he performed well. He saw his world as relatively safe.
Influenced by his father's abandonment of the family, he saw the world
as potentially unpredictable, but he also thought he'd be able to cope
with most circumstances. He viewed his future as unknown but potentially
pretty good. Abe was at his best when he finished high school, became
employed, and moved into an apartment with a friend. During this time,
his adaptive core beliefs were mostly active. He did well on the job,
socialized often with good friends, exercised and kept himself in good
shape, and started saving money for the future. He was honest,
forthright, responsible, and a hard worker. He was pleasant to be
around, often helping family and friends without being asked. He married
at age 23, a year after meeting his wife. Although she tended to
criticize him, he nevertheless saw himself as basically competent,
worthwhile, and likeable. But he had an underlying vulnerability of
viewing himself as incompetent when he didn't live up to his
self-imposed high expectations. This vulnerability developed primarily
as a result of negative interactions with his mother when he was a
youth. Abe became more stressed once his children were born, and he
sometimes criticized himself for not spending enough time with them. His

wife was stressed too and became more critical of him. But he didn't
become depressed at this point. He continued to function well as long as
he perceived that he was performing at a high level at work and at home.
His related belief was "If I perform highly, it means I'm okay." A
problem arose when he perceived himself as functioning at a lower level,
associated with his belief "If I don't perform highly, it shows I'm
incompetent." It wasn't until he put a very negative meaning on his
difficulties at work and on the dissolution of his marriage that his
previously latent negative core beliefs became strongly activated. In
addition, he saw himself as helpless and out of control (which he
described as related to incompetence/failure).

Abe's Intermediate Beliefs and Values Abe's intermediate beliefs were
somewhat more amenable to modification than his core beliefs. These
attitudes (such as "It's important to work hard, be productive, be
responsible, be reliable, be considerate to others, honor commitments,
do the right thing, and give back to others") reflected his values and
his behavior, as did his rules (e.g., "I should work hard"). They
developed in the same way as core beliefs, as Abe tried to make sense of
his world, of others, and of himself. Mostly through interactions with
his family, and to a lesser degree with others, he developed the
following assumptions: "If I work hard, I'll be okay (but if I don't,
I'll be a failure)." "If I figure things out for myself, I'll be okay
(but if I ask for help, it will show I'm incompetent)." Abe had not
fully articulated these intermediate beliefs or values before therapy.
But they nevertheless influenced his thinking and guided his behavior.

Abe's Behavioral Strategies Beginning in adolescence, Abe developed
certain patterns of behavior, which were mostly quite functional, to
live up to his values and to avoid the activation of his core belief
(and the emotional discomfort connected with it). He worked hard when he
was at home, when playing sports, and when

he got his first job. He set high standards for himself at work and went
out of his way to help other people. On the other hand, Abe rarely asked
for help, even when it was reasonable to do so. He feared others would
criticize him and view him as incompetent. He felt vulnerable at times
and tried to make up for what he saw as his weaknesses. While Abe's
assumptions were fairly inflexible, he nevertheless got along well in
life---until he perceived himself as incompetent and not living up to
his values.

Sequence Leading to Abe's Depression Throughout his life, Abe regularly
had some negative thoughts about himself, particularly in situations in
which he perceived his performance was subpar. "I should have done that
better" was a common thought he had had growing up and later at work and
at home, especially after he married and had children. The thoughts
usually led to mild dysphoria, but when he resolved to put in more
effort, he generally felt better. These kinds of automatic thoughts
became fairly frequent and intense preceding the onset of Abe's
depressive episode, in the context of work, marriage, and home life. He
had a new boss, Joseph, a man 15 years younger than he. Joseph changed
Abe's work responsibilities. Abe had been in charge of customer service
at a lighting company. He enjoyed working with customers and interacting
with the two employees whom he supervised. But Joseph moved him over to
inventory management, which entailed little interaction with others and
required him to use a software program with which he was unfamiliar. Abe
started making mistakes and became highly self-critical. He had thoughts
such as "What's the matter with me? This shouldn't be so hard." He
interpreted his difficulties with his new responsibilities as due to his
own incompetence. He became dysphoric and anxious. But he didn't become
depressed---not yet. Abe finally asked for help, but Joseph growled at
him, saying that Abe should be able to figure out what to do. Instead of
continuing to ask for help, Abe tried harder, but he still couldn't
understand how to fulfill some of his new responsibilities. When he even
considered asking for help again, he thought, "Joseph will think less of
me. What if he says I'm incompetent? I could get fired." His beliefs of
incompetence and vulnerability became stronger.

Soon his negative emotions started to spill over at home, as he
ruminated over his perceived failures. When he developed symptoms of
depression (especially a depressed mood and great fatigue), he changed
his activities. He started to withdraw from others, including his wife.
At dinner, he would sit almost silently, despite his wife's efforts to
get him to open up. After dinner, instead of doing household tasks, he
mostly sat in his armchair, ruminating over his perceived failings. On
weekends, he sat on the couch for hours at a time, watching television.
His wife became very impatient with him when he was reluctant to make
social plans, when he helped much less around the house, and when he
spoke little to her. She began to nag and criticize him much more than
before. His own self-critical thoughts became more and more intense too.
His avoidance led to few opportunities for him to feel competent, in
control, productive, and connected to others---crucial values of
his---and to a dearth of pleasurable or enjoyable activities that could
have lifted his mood. As he developed stronger symptoms of depression,
he started avoiding additional tasks he thought he wouldn't do well, for
example, paying bills and doing yard work. He had many automatic
thoughts across situations about the likelihood that he would fail.
These thoughts led him to feel sad, anxious, and hopeless. He viewed his
difficulties as due to an innate flaw and not as the result of
encroaching depression. He developed a generalized sense of incompetence
and helplessness and curtailed his activities further. His relationship
with his wife became quite strained, and they started having significant
conflict. He interpreted the conflict as meaning he was failing in the
marriage, that he was incompetent as a husband. Over the course of
several months, Abe's problems at work became even worse. Joseph became
quite critical of Abe and downgraded him at his yearly performance
review. Abe's depression intensified significantly when his wife filed
for divorce. He became preoccupied with thoughts of how he had let her
and his children and his boss down. He felt like (that is, he had a
belief that he was) an incompetent failure. He felt (believed he was) at
the mercy of his sad and hopeless feelings ("I'm out of control") and
thought there was nothing he could do to feel better ("I'm helpless").
And then he lost his job. This sequence of events illustrates the
diathesis--stress model. Abe had certain vulnerabilities: very strong
and rigid values of productivity and responsibility, biased information
processing, a tendency to see himself as

incompetent, and genetic risk factors. When these vulnerabilities were
exposed to relevant stressors (loss of job and marriage), he became
depressed. Abe's depression became maintained by the following factors
or mechanisms: An ongoing negative interpretation of his experiences
Attentional bias (noticing everything he wasn't doing well or not doing
at all) Avoidance and inactivity (which resulted in few opportunities
for pleasure, a sense of accomplishment, and connection) Social
withdrawal Increased self-criticism Deterioration of problem-solving
skills Negative memories Rumination over perceived failures Worrying
about the future

These factors negatively affected Abe's self-image and helped maintain
his depression. They became important targets in treatment.

Abe's Strengths, Resources, and Personal Assets Even though Abe was
severely depressed when he first came to see me, his life wasn't
unremittingly negative. His children and their spouses offered him
support. His mood lifted somewhat when he interacted with his
grandchildren, especially around sports. He was still doing very basic
selfcare. Although his funds were dwindling, he had some money in
savings. He was able to do a minimal amount of housework and meal
preparation. Historically, he had been a highly responsible, hardworking
husband, father, and employee. He had learned many skills on the job
that were potentially transferable to other jobs. He had good common
sense and had been a good problem solver. To summarize, Abe's belief
that he was incompetent stemmed from childhood events, especially
through interaction with his critical mother, who kept telling him that
he was doing a poor job (at tasks beyond his abilities) and that he was
letting her down. Nonetheless, he had neutral or relatively positive
school experiences, and his dominant core belief was that

he was okay. Years later, significant stress at work and at home
contributed to the activation of his core belief of incompetence and to
his use of maladaptive coping strategies, most notably avoidance, which
triggered his belief of helplessness. He avoided asking for help, he
withdrew from his wife and friends, and he sat on the couch for hours
instead of being productive. In addition, he became highly
self-critical. Ultimately, Abe became depressed, and his maladaptive
core beliefs became fully active. Abe's beliefs made him vulnerable to
interpreting events in a negative way. He didn't question his thoughts
but rather accepted them uncritically. The thoughts and beliefs by
themselves did not cause the depression. (Depression is undoubtedly
caused by a variety of psychosocial, genetic, and biological factors.)
Abe may have had a genetic predisposition for depression; however, his
perception of and behavior in the circumstances at the time undoubtedly
facilitated the expression of a biological and psychological
vulnerability. Once his depression set in, these negative cognitions
strongly influenced his mood and helped maintain the disorder.

THE COGNITIVE CONCEPTUALIZATION DIAGRAMS It's important to develop both
strengths-based and problem-based conceptualizations. Cognitive
Conceptualization Diagrams (CCDs) help you organize the considerable
amount of data you get from clients. You can start filling out these
diagrams (between sessions) as soon as you identify relevant information
during the evaluation and first session. You'll continue to look for
pertinent data throughout treatment. Most clients, like Abe, provide you
with negative data at the beginning of treatment, so it's important to
ask questions to elicit positive information. It's also important to be
continually on the lookout for positive data that clients overlook or
discount.

The Strengths-Based Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram

The Strengths-Based Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram (SB-CCD; Figure
3.4) helps you pay attention to and organize the client's patterns of
helpful cognitions and behavior. It depicts, among other things, the
relationship among important life events and adaptive core beliefs,
adaptive core beliefs and the meaning of the client's automatic
thoughts, adaptive core beliefs, related intermediate beliefs, and
adaptive coping strategies, and situations, adaptive automatic thoughts,
and adaptive behaviors.

FIGURE 3.4. Abe's SB-CCD. Copyright © 2018 CBT Worksheet Packet. Beck
Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Figure 3.5 contains the questions you should ask yourself to fill it
out. You'll elicit relevant data at the evaluation (e.g., when you ask
clients to describe the best period in their life) for the top of the
diagram and additional data for the whole diagram throughout treatment.
The list in Figure 3.6 (adapted from Gottman & Gottman, 2014) can help
specify their positive qualities.

FIGURE 3.5. The SB-CCD: Questions. Copyright © 2018 CBT Worksheet
Packet. Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. 1. Loving 2. Sensitive 3. Brave 4. Intelligent 5.
Thoughtful 6. Generous 7. Loyal 8. Truthful 9. Strong 10. Energetic 11.
Sexy 12. Decisive 13. Creative 14. Imaginative 15. Fun 16. Attractive
17. Interesting 18. Supportive 19. Funny 20. Considerate 21.
Affectionate 22. Organized 23. Resourceful 24. Athletic 25. Cheerful 26.
Coordinated 27. Graceful 28. Elegant 29. Gracious 30. Playful 31. Caring
32. A great friend 33. Exciting 34. Thrifty 35. Planful 36. Committed
37. Involved 38. Expressive 39. Active 40. Careful 41. Reserved 42.
Adventurous 43. Receptive

44. Reliable 45. Responsible 46. Dependable 47. Nurturing 48. Warm 49.
Virile 50. Kind 51. Gentle 52. Practical 53. Lusty 54. Witty 55. Relaxed
56. Beautiful 57. Handsome 58. Rich 59. Calm 60. Lively 61. A great
partner 62. A great parent 63. Assertive 64. Protective 65. Sweet 66.
Tender 67. Powerful 68. Flexible 69. Understanding 70. Totally silly 71.
Shy 72. Vulnerable FIGURE 3.6. List of positive qualities. Adapted with
permission from Gottman and Gottman (2014). Copyright © 2014 J. Gottman
and J. S. Gottman.

The SB-CCD is too complex to present to many clients. If you do, show
them a blank copy. You can fill it out together, choosing historical
(premorbid) situations in which they had adaptive automatic thoughts and
behaviors. Or you can wait until the clients are currently perceiving
themselves and their experiences more realistically and are engaging in
helpful coping strategies.

The (Traditional) Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram The traditional
(i.e., problem-based) CCD (Figure 3.7) organizes the maladaptive
information you collect about clients. You'll gather data at the
evaluation and throughout treatment. Begin filling it out as soon as you

begin to see patterns in the themes of clients' automatic thoughts or
unhelpful behaviors. This CCD depicts, among other things, the
relationship among important life events and core beliefs, core beliefs
and the meaning of clients' automatic thoughts, core beliefs,
intermediate beliefs, and dysfunctional coping strategies, and trigger
situations, automatic thoughts, and reactions.

FIGURE 3.7. (Traditional) CCD. Copyright © 2018 CBT Worksheet Packet.
Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.

Figure 3.8 presents questions to help you fill out the CCD. When you
start, regard your first efforts as tentative; you have not yet
collected enough information to determine the extent to which the
automatic thoughts clients have expressed are typical and important. The
completed diagram will mislead you if you choose situations in which the
themes of clients' automatic thoughts are not part of an overall
pattern.

FIGURE 3.8. (Traditional) CCD: Questions. Copyright © 2018 CBT Worksheet
Packet. Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.

You share your partial conceptualization with clients verbally at every
session as you summarize their experiences in the form of the cognitive
model. At times, especially initially, you'll illustrate your summary
via a handwritten diagram of the cognitive model. Initially, you may
have data to complete only the top box (important lifetime data) and the
bottom of the diagram (three cognitive models). Leave the other boxes
blank or fill in items you have inferred with a question mark to
indicate their tentative status. You will check out missing or inferred
items with the client at future sessions. Fill in the bottom half of the
CCD, starting with three typical current situations related to the
presenting problems in which clients became upset or behaved in an
unhelpful way. If clients have one more theme in their automatic
thoughts, make sure to choose situations that reflect those themes.
Next, fill in the key automatic thoughts and the subsequent emotion,
relevant behavior (if any), and physiological reaction (sometimes
important for clients with intense anxiety). If clients experience more
than one emotion in a given situation, make sure to have separate boxes
for each key automatic thought, followed by the emotional and behavioral
reaction to that thought (Figure 3.9).

FIGURE 3.9. Adapting the CCD for additional emotions.

Early in treatment, you may avoid asking clients for the meaning of
their negative thoughts because eliciting these deeper-level cognitions
can evoke significant distress. You can hypothesize about the meanings,
but include a question mark next to your hypotheses, to remind you that
you need to confirm their accuracy with clients at some point. The
meaning of the automatic thought box in Figure 3.8 is below the
automatic thought box because you identify the automatic thought first.
In actuality, the core belief becomes activated and triggered (actually,
the schema containing the core belief becomes activated) in a particular
situation and gives rise to automatic thoughts (see Chapter 17). When
appropriate, usually a little later in treatment, you'll ask clients
directly about the meaning of their thoughts, using the "downward arrow"
technique (pp. 291--292). The meaning of the automatic thought for each
situation should be logically connected with one of the client's core
beliefs. Note that you don't have to ask for the meaning of an automatic
thought when the cognition is pervasive and overgeneralized (not just
specific to only one or a few situations). Abe's automatic thought "I'm
a failure" was also a core belief because he didn't believe he was a
failure in just one situation (e.g., when he saw the pile of mail on the
table); when he had that thought, he meant he was an overall failure as
a person. To complete the top box of the diagram, ask yourself (and the
client): How did the core belief originate and become maintained? What
life events (often including those in childhood and adolescence, if any
are relevant) did the client experience that might be related to
developing and maintaining the beliefs? Typical relevant childhood data
include such significant events as continual or periodic strife among
parents or other family members; parental divorce; negative interactions
with parents, siblings, teachers, peers, or others in which the child
felt blamed, criticized, or otherwise devalued; serious medical
conditions or disabilities; deaths of significant others; bullying;
physical or sexual abuse; emotional trauma; and other adverse life

conditions, such as moving frequently, experiencing trauma, growing up
in poverty, or facing chronic discrimination, to name a few. The
relevant data may, however, be more subtle: for example, youths'
perceptions (which may or may not have been valid) that they did not
measure up in important ways to their siblings; that they were different
from or demeaned by peers; that they did not meet expectations of
parents, teachers, or others; or that their parents favored a sibling
over them. Next ask yourself, "What are the client's most important
intermediate beliefs: rules, attitudes, and conditional assumptions?"
Unhelpful rules often start with "I should" or "I shouldn't," and
unhelpful attitudes often start with "It's bad to." These rules and
attitudes are often connected to client's values, or they may serve to
protect the client from the activation of the core belief. Clients'
broad assumptions often reflect their rules and attitudes and link their
maladaptive coping strategies to the core belief. They are often phrased
in this way: "If I \[engage in the coping strategy\], then \[my core
belief may not immediately come true; I'll be okay for the moment\].
However, if I \[do not engage in my coping strategy\], then \[my core
belief is likely to come true\]."

See Figure 3.10 for Reader E's intermediate beliefs and coping
strategies, the patterns of dysfunctional behaviors that are linked to
clients' intermediate beliefs. Note that most coping strategies are
patterns of normal behaviors that everyone engages in at times. The
difficulty clients experience is in the inflexible overuse of these
strategies at the expense of more adaptive strategies in certain
situations.

FIGURE 3.10. Cognitive conceptualization of Reader E.

At some point, usually in the middle part of treatment, you will share
the information from both the top and the bottom of the CCD, when your
goal for a session is to help the client understand the broader picture.
Review the conceptualization verbally, draw a simplified diagram for
your client (Figure 3.11), and elicit feedback. Occasionally, clients
benefit from completing a blank CCD with you. (Don't present a
filled-out CCD to clients because it won't be as good a learning
experience.) But many clients

would find it confusing (or demeaning if they interpret the diagram as
your attempt to "fit" them into boxes). Ask clients questions to get the
needed data to fill in the diagram. If you present a hypothesis, make
sure to do so tentatively and ask clients whether it "rings true."
Correct hypotheses generally resonate well with the client. Core beliefs
↓ Intermediate beliefs (rules, attitudes, assumptions) ↓ Situation ↓
Automatic thoughts ↓ Reaction (emotional, behavioral, physiological)

FIGURE 3.11. Simplified CCD.

To summarize, the CCDs are based on data clients present, their actual
words. You should regard your hypotheses as tentative until confirmed by
the client. You will continually reevaluate and refine the diagrams as
you collect additional data, and your conceptualization is not complete
until the client terminates treatment. While you might not show the
actual diagram to clients, you will verbally (and often on paper)
conceptualize their experience from the first session on, to help them
make sense of their current reactions to situations. At some point, you
will present the larger picture to clients so they can understand how
their earlier experiences contributed to the development of their
beliefs, how they developed certain assumptions or rules for living, and
how these assumptions led to developing particular coping strategies or
patterns of behavior.

Some clients are intellectually and emotionally ready to see the larger
picture early on in therapy. You should wait to present it to others
(especially those with whom you do not have a sound therapeutic
relationship or who don't fully grasp the cognitive model or accept it
as true). As mentioned previously, whenever you present your
conceptualization, ask the client for confirmation, disconfirmation, or
modification of each part. Finally, an online course
(beckinstitute.org/CBTresources) can help you master the complex process
of conceptualization. And it's often helpful to practice by
conceptualizing characters in a movie or a novel.

SUMMARY Conceptualizing clients in cognitive terms is crucial to
determine the most effective and efficient course of treatment. It also
aids in developing empathy, an ingredient that is critical in
establishing a good therapeutic relationship. Conceptualization begins
at the first contact and is an ongoing process, always subject to
modification as new data are uncovered and previous hypotheses are
confirmed or rejected. You base your hypotheses on the information you
collect, using the most parsimonious explanations and refraining from
interpretations and inferences not clearly based on actual data. You
continually check out the conceptualization with clients for several
reasons: to ensure that it is accurate, to demonstrate your accurate
understanding to them, and to help them understand themselves, their
experiences, and the meanings they put to their experiences. The ongoing
process of conceptualization is emphasized throughout this book, as are
techniques to present your conceptualization to clients. REFLECTION
QUESTIONS How does an individual develop depression? Why is
conceptualization so important?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Download a traditional CCD and start filling it out
using Maria as the client. You'll find information about her on pages 2,
27, and 32. Keep adding to it as you get additional information.
Remember to put question marks next to anything you have inferred.

4

THE THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP

it's an act of courage for most clients to enter treatment. Many have
Ithink automatic thoughts such as "What is therapy going to be like?";
"Is it really going to work?"; "Could it make me feel even worse?";
"What am I going to have to do?"; "What if my therapist pushes me too
hard?"; and "What if my therapist expects too much or criticizes me?" So
while I am warm, kind, and realistically optimistic throughout therapy,
I am especially so at the beginning of treatment. As far back as 1979,
Aaron Beck and colleagues devoted an entire chapter to the therapeutic
relationship in the first CBT treatment manual, Cognitive Therapy of
Depression. They emphasized the Rogerian counseling skills of warmth,
accuracy, empathy, and genuineness, along with basic trust and rapport.
They also prescribed tailoring the relationship to the individual
client, seeking agreement on the goals and tasks of treatment, sharing
an interpersonal bond, and attending to clients' negative reactions to
therapists and vice versa. You will find the answers to these questions
in this chapter. What are four essential guidelines to keep in mind at
every session? How do you demonstrate good counseling skills? How do you
monitor clients' affect and elicit feedback? How do you collaborate with
clients? How do you tailor the therapeutic relationship to the
individual?

How do you use self-disclosure? How do you repair ruptures? How do you
help clients generalize what have they learned to other relationships?
How do you manage your negative reactions?

FOUR ESSENTIAL GUIDELINES When I teach psychiatric residents at the
University of Pennsylvania, we start our discussion on how to establish
a good therapeutic relationship. Then I ask them to write themselves a
virtual or actual card with four ideas, which they express in their own
words. Here's a typical card: Treat every client at every session the
way I'd like to be treated if I were a client. Be a nice human being in
the room and help the client feel safe. Remember, clients are supposed
to pose challenges; that's why they need treatment. Keep expectations
for my client and myself reasonable.

I ask the residents to read their card before every therapy session.
It's essential to start building trust and rapport with your clients
from your first contact with them. Research demonstrates that positive
alliances are correlated with positive treatment outcomes (e.g.,
Norcross & Lambert, 2018; Norcross & Wampold, 2011; Raue & Goldfried,
1994). Your objective is to make your clients feel safe, respected,
understood, and cared for. Spend enough time on the relationship to make
that happen, but ensure that you have sufficient time to help clients
reach their goals, alleviate their distress, and enhance their
functioning and positive mood. Research has demonstrated that the
therapeutic alliance becomes strengthened when clients perceive
improvement from one session to the next (DeRubeis &

Feeley, 1990; Zilcha-Mano et al., 2019). So, roll up your sleeves and
get to work. You will need to focus more heavily on the relationship
when you treat clients with strong, dysfunctional personality traits or
serious mental health conditions. They tend to bring the same extreme
negative beliefs about themselves and others to treatment---and may
assume, until strongly demonstrated otherwise, that you will view them
negatively (J. S. Beck, 2005; Beck et al., 2015; Young, 1999). A good
case conceptualization can help you avoid problems. For example, Abe
believed that people would look down on him because he was unemployed.
He was concerned that I would too. Fortunately, I noticed a change in
his facial expression during the evaluation when he first told me he was
unemployed. I asked him how he was feeling. He said, "A little anxious."
I asked him what was going through his mind. He told me he was afraid I
was viewing him negatively. I praised him for telling me that and
assured him that it made sense to me that he would have been having
difficulty getting himself to look for a job, given his level of
depression. He was relieved. I asked him if he'd be willing to let me
know if he had any other thoughts about my being critical in the future.
And I made a mental note to be on the lookout for future instances where
that could happen.

DEMONSTRATING GOOD COUNSELING SKILLS Norcross and Lambert (2018) have
reviewed the research and drawn the following conclusions about the
therapeutic relationship: Collaboration, goal consensus, empathy,
positive regard and affirmation, and collecting and delivering client
feedback are effective. Congruence/genuineness, emotional expression,
cultivating positive expectations, promoting treatment credibility,
managing countertransference, and repairing ruptures are probably
effective. Self-disclosure and immediacy are promising but have not yet
been sufficiently researched.

Therapist humor, self-doubt/humility, and deliberate practice also lack
sufficient research.

In CBT, the Rogerian counseling skills of empathy, genuineness, and
positive regard are especially important (Elliott et al., 2011). You
will continuously demonstrate your commitment to and understanding of
clients through your empathic statements, choice of words, tone of
voice, facial expressions, and body language. You will try to impart the
following implicit (and sometimes explicit) messages, when you genuinely
endorse them: "I care about you and value you." "I want to understand
what you are experiencing and help you." "I'm confident we can work well
together and that CBT will help." "I'm not overwhelmed by your problems,
even though you might be." "I've helped other clients with issues like
yours."

If you cannot honestly endorse these messages, you may need help from a
supervisor or colleague to respond to your automatic thoughts about the
client, about CBT, or about yourself. And you may need additional
training and supervision to increase your competence. Important basic
counseling skills, along with examples, are below. Empathy ("It must be
so difficult for you when your ex-wife is angry"). Acceptance of client
("It makes sense to me, given how upset you were, that you \[engaged in
a dysfunctional coping strategy\] this week"). Validation ("It can be
really hard to start difficult conversations with people"). Accurate
understanding ("Did I get this right? She said, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_;
you felt \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_; you then \[did
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\]"). Inspiring hope ("The reason I'm so hopeful
for you is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_"). Genuine warmth ("I'm glad you were
able to get out of your apartment so many times this week!"). Interest
("Tell me more about your grandsons"). Positive regard ("Offering to
help your neighbor was such a kind thing to do! I'm not sure everyone
would be willing to put themselves out the way you did"). Caring ("It's
really important to me that I make this therapy right for you").
Encouragement ("You know, the fact that you felt a little better when
you spent some time with your friends is such a good sign"). Positive
reinforcement ("How great that you finally got your taxes done!").
Offering a positive view of the client ("It sounds like it was so
complicated to figure out what was wrong with your cousin's car. You're
so good at things like that").

Compassion ("I'm sorry you had such an upsetting conversation with your
exwife"). Humor ("You should have seen me when I
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_").

As described later on, you'll need to figure out when and to what degree
to use these basic counseling skills. But the using the right amount at
the right times, can help clients feel likeable, when you are warm,
friendly, and interested; feel less alone, when you describe the process
of working together as a team to resolve their issues and work toward
their goals; feel more optimistic, as you present yourself as
realistically hopeful that treatment will help; and feel a greater sense
of self-efficacy, when you help them see how much credit they deserve
for solving problems, completing Action Plans, and engaging in other
productive activities.

MONITORING CLIENTS' AFFECT AND ELICITING FEEDBACK You will be
continuously alert for your clients' emotional reactions throughout the
session. You'll observe their facial expressions and body language,
their choice of words, and tone of voice. When you recognize or infer
that clients are experiencing increased distress, you will often address
the issue right at the moment---for example: "You're looking a little
upset. \[or 'How are you feeling right now?'\] What was just going
through your mind?" Clients often express negative thoughts about
themselves, the process of therapy, or you. When they do, make sure to
positively reinforce them. "It's good you told me that." Then
conceptualize the problem and plan a strategy to resolve it. You'll read
more about how to do this later in the chapter. I hope you won't let a
concern about getting negative feedback prevent you from eliciting
clients' responses. If there's a problem, you need to know what it is so
you can

solve it! If you aren't sure what to say, try this: "It's good you told
me that. I'd like to think more about it. Is it okay if we discuss it at
our next session?" Then get advice from your supervisor or colleague and
practice roleplaying your response. If you don't address clients'
negative feedback, they will probably be less able to focus on the work
of the session. They may even decide not to return to therapy the
following week. Even when you discern that your alliance with clients is
strong, elicit feedback from them at the end of sessions. For the first
few sessions, you might ask, "What did you think about the session? Was
there anything that bothered you, or you thought I misunderstood? Is
there anything you want to do differently next time?" After several
sessions, when you believe clients will give you honest feedback, you
can just ask, "What did you think of the session?" Asking these
questions can strengthen the alliance significantly. You may be the
first health or mental health professional who has ever asked the client
for feedback. I find that clients usually feel honored and respected by
our genuine concern for their reactions. You won't necessarily elicit
feedback every time you infer the client has had a negative reaction.
For example, you may be able to ignore teenage eye-rolling the first
couple of times your young client engages in it. I remember an adult
client of mine who often sighed. Initially, I helped her respond to her
unhelpful thought, "I wish I didn't have to do that." When she sighed in
subsequent sessions, I judged that we could continue with the issue we
were discussing without needing to address the automatic thought
associated with her sighing.

COLLABORATING WITH CLIENTS As mentioned previously, collaboration is a
hallmark of CBT. In chapter 6, you'll read more about how to start the
collaborative process in the first session, and you'll see collaboration
in action in many of the videos. Throughout treatment, you will foster
collaboration in many ways. For example, you and your client will
jointly make decisions such as

which goals to work toward during a session; how much time to spend on
various goals and obstacles; which automatic thoughts, emotions,
behaviors, or physiological responses to target; which interventions to
try; which self-help activities to do at home; how often to meet; and
when to start tapering sessions and ending treatment.

You'll explain to clients in the first session that you and they will
act as a team. You'll be transparent and ask for feedback about your
goals, the process of therapy, the structure of sessions, and your
conceptualization and treatment plan. Throughout this book, you'll find
examples of collaborative empiricism where you and clients act as
scientists, looking for evidence that supports or disconfirms their
cognitions and, when relevant, seeking alternative explanations.

TAILORING THE THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP TO THE INDIVIDUAL While the
counseling skills we discussed earlier are essential, so is your ability
to assess and adjust the degree to which you use these skills with each
client. Most clients respond positively to your use of these behaviors.
But you need to be careful not to overdo it or underdo it with
individual clients. For example, some clients may view warmth and
empathy in a negative light and feel suspicious, patronized, or
uncomfortable. Too little can lead other clients to believe that you
don't value or like them. Watching for clients' emotional reactions in
the session can alert you to a problem so you can change how you present
yourself and help the client feel more comfortable working with you.
Your clients' cultures and other characteristics (such as age, gender,
ethnicity, socioeconomic status, disability, gender, and sexual
orientation) can influence the therapeutic relationship (Iwamasa & Hays,
2019). Clients may differ in the way they view you, your role, and their
role. Clients from one culture, for example, may feel more comfortable
when they perceive

you as an expert who takes charge in the session, while clients from
another culture may perceive you as dominating the session in a
disrespectful way. Some clients value your suggestions of alternative
perspectives or behaviors. Other clients may be disturbed when these
same suggestions are in conflict with their culturally influenced
beliefs and practices. It's important to recognize that your own
background and culture exert an influence on your beliefs and values and
on how you perceive, speak to, and behave toward your clients.
Understanding the impact of your cultural biases helps you respond to
clients in a culturally sensitive way. You may, for example, need to
vary how you introduce yourself to and address clients, how you maintain
eye contact, what words you choose, how you express respect, and how
much self-disclosure you use, depending on the client's culture. Of
course, each client is an individual for whom you develop an
individualized conceptualization and an individualized treatment plan.
You may find that despite significant cultural differences, any given
client may respond well, without the need for you to adapt your general
style.

USING SELF-DISCLOSURE I know some therapists are taught in graduate
school not to use selfdisclosure. This prohibition may stem from the
psychoanalytic concept of the therapist as a "blank screen." But in CBT,
you don't want to be a blank screen. You want clients to accurately
perceive you as a warm, authentic person who wants, and is capable, of
helping them. Judicious selfdisclosure can go a long way in fortifying
this perception. Of course, selfdisclosure should have a definite
purpose, for example, strengthening the therapeutic relationship,
normalizing the clients' difficulties, demonstrating how CBT techniques
can help, modeling a skill, or serving as a role model. I've found that
most clients are curious about me as a person. These days, your clients
may be able to find out about you through social media--- so be careful
what you post and what your friends and family post about you. I'm happy
to answer questions about my age, how long I've been married, how many
children and grandchildren I have, where I went to school, and what my
training and experience have been. If clients ask me

additional questions, I gently turn the discussion back to them---for
example: "We could keep on talking about me, but then we won't have as
much time to talk about what's important to you, how you can have a
better week. Is it okay if we turn \[or get back\] to
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_?" It's also acceptable and sometimes important to
reveal less about yourself than I do. It is usually inappropriate, for
example, to answer questions about subjects such as your dating life or
alcohol use. You might say something like the following: "I'm sorry not
to answer your question, but I want to focus on how I can help you." I
tend to use some self-disclosure in most sessions with most of my
clients. For example, when clients are perfectionistic, I often tell
them that I keep a sticky note on my desk that says, "Good enough." When
they are overly responsible and say yes too often, I tell them about my
sticky note that says, "Just say no." I generally do mild
self-disclosures when clients are giving me an update of their week,
especially when they tell me about an experience in which they felt
better. For example, when Abe told me he watched a baseball game with
his son and grandsons, I asked, JUDITH: Which team are you rooting for?
The Phillies? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: I didn't watch the game, but who won?
ABE: Unfortunately, it was the Braves. JUDITH: Oh, too bad. How are the
Phillies doing this season? When Abe told me he took his granddaughters
to an amusement park, I said, "My grandchildren aren't quite old enough
to go there. But I did take my kids there when they were teenagers. I
wonder if it's changed much over the years." I also often use
self-disclosure when a client tells me about a problem that I have
experienced myself. Abe related that he was having trouble cleaning out
a closet because he couldn't figure out what to throw away and what to
keep. JUDITH: I sometimes have that problem too. Should I tell you what
I do? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: Instead of two piles, I make three. One is for
things I definitely want to keep. A second is for things I definitely
want to get rid of. The

third is for things I'm uncertain about. I put all the uncertain things
in a box for a few months. Then I go through it again. Anything I
haven't used in that time probably means I can get rid of it. (pause) Do
you think that could work for you, too? As with any technique, pay
attention to your clients' verbal and nonverbal reactions to your
self-disclosures. I learned early on, for example, that many clients
with narcissistic personality disorder didn't particularly appreciate
hearing anything about me. Finally, be judicious in revealing your own
automatic thoughts and reactions. Timing is everything! Saying something
like "It makes me feel sad when I hear about what your father did when
you were a child" may be inappropriate at the first session, before the
client trusts your genuineness. It might be better to say, "I'm so sorry
that happened to you." Expressing your genuine sadness can really
strengthen your bond, though, after you've established a trusting
relationship. Your clients may also benefit from your reactions to their
unhelpful behaviors. Here's something nonpejorative you can say when an
angry client has calmed down a little. "When you get really passionate
about something and yell, it makes it harder for us to figure out what
to do about the problem we've been discussing." If the client takes your
feedback well, you can ask him (at the time or at a later time) whether
he yells loudly outside of session. If he does, you can inquire whether
yelling is inconsistent with a value he holds or if it fails to produce
the long-term outcome he desires.

REPAIRING RUPTURES Why do difficulties in the relationship arise with
some clients and not others? Clients bring their general beliefs about
themselves, other people, and relationships to the therapy session, as
well as their characteristic behavioral coping strategies. Many clients
enter treatment with the beliefs "Other people are generally trustworthy
and helpful" and "Problems in a relationship can usually be resolved."
If so, they tend to assume that you will accurately understand,
empathize with, and accept them. They feel free

to reveal their difficulties, faults, weaknesses, and fears and to
express their preferences and opinions. It's relatively easily to form a
collaborative team with them. But some clients believe "Other people
will hurt me" and "Problems in relationships can't be solved." These
clients tend to feel vulnerable and are on guard when they start
therapy, assuming you may be critical, uncaring, manipulative, or
controlling. They may resist revealing what they see as their negative
qualities or behaviors, either avoiding certain topics or insisting on
controlling or dominating the session. A problem obviously exists when
clients give you negative feedback (e.g., "I don't think you understand
what I'm saying" or "You're treating me like everyone else"). Many
clients, however, allude indirectly to a problem, sometimes taking
responsibility themselves, for example, saying, "Maybe I'm not
expressing myself clearly" when they really mean, "You're not
understanding me." If so, you'll need to question the client further to
find out whether a problem does indeed exist and whether it's had a
negative impact on the alliance. It's important to use your
conceptualization of the client to prevent or repair problems. Let's say
your client has given you negative feedback (e.g., "This isn't helping")
or you have inferred an affect shift and elicited an important automatic
thought (e.g., "You don't care about me"). First, you provide positive
reinforcement ("It's good you told me that" or the equivalent); then,
you conceptualize the problem and plan a strategy. The first question to
ask yourself is "Is the client right?" If so, model good apologizing and
discuss a solution. Typical mistakes include introducing a worksheet
that is confusing to your client, offering a suggestion that your client
finds inappropriate, proposing Action Plan items that are too difficult,
misunderstanding what your client has said, or being too directive or
too nondirective. Another common problem is interrupting too much (see
p. 194). At one particular session, I noticed a negative affect shift on
Abe's face JUDITH: You're looking a little distressed. What were you
thinking when I asked you about the Action Plan? ABE: I don't think I
can talk to my ex-wife about our daughter. She'd just criticize me.

JUDITH: It's good you told me. I think I made a mistake to suggest it.
Should we try to figure out another way to help your daughter? After we
came up with another solution, I questioned Abe further, to increase the
likelihood that he'd be willing to tell me about other
misunderstandings: JUDITH: Abe, are there any other things you think I
don't understand? ABE: (Thinks.) No, I don't think so. JUDITH: If I do
make another mistake, do you think you could you let me know right away?
If you haven't made a mistake, the problem is likely to be related to
your client's inaccurate cognitions. After positively reinforcing your
client for expressing the feedback, you might do the following: Express
empathy. Ask for additional information in the context of the cognitive
model. Seek agreement to test the validity of the thought.

I did this with Maria. JUDITH: Can we talk for a moment about phone
calls? MARIA: (guardedly) Okay. JUDITH: It seems to me that at least
once this week when you called me, it wasn't really a crisis. MARIA: You
don't understand! I was so upset! JUDITH: It's good you told me that.
What does it mean to you that we're even talking about phone calls?
MARIA: Well, obviously, you don't care about me or a few phone calls
wouldn't bother you. JUDITH: That's an interesting thought, that I don't
care. How much do you believe it? MARIA: 100%. JUDITH: And how does that
thought make you feel? MARIA: Upset. Really upset.

JUDITH: It would be so important for you to find out whether that
thought is 100% true, or 0% true, or somewhere in the middle. (pause)
Other than phone calls, do you have other evidence that I don't care
about you? MARIA: (Thinks; mutters.) I can't think of anything. JUDITH:
Okay, is there any evidence on the other side, that maybe I do care
about you? MARIA: Not really. JUDITH: \[offering evidence\] Well, do you
see how I always start our sessions on time? Do I seem glad to see you?
Do I seem sorry when you're upset? Do I work hard to help you? MARIA: I
guess so. JUDITH: Could there be another explanation for why I've
brought up phone calls, other than I don't care? MARIA: I don't know.
JUDITH: Is it possible I brought it up because I know you get upset and
I want to teach you some skills to reduce your distress---so you won't
even have to call? MARIA: I guess so. But when I'm upset, there's
nothing I can do! JUDITH: Which is exactly why I brought up the phone
calls. I want you to build your skills so you can be confident that you
can help yourself. That way, when I'm out of the picture, you'll have
the choice about whether to call someone immediately---or whether to
help yourself and then either call or not. MARIA: (Sighs.) Okay.

HELPING CLIENTS GENERALIZE TO OTHER RELATIONSHIPS When clients have an
incorrect view of you, they may very well have a similarly incorrect
view of other people. If so, you can help them draw a conclusion about
your relationship and then test it in the context of other
relationships. JUDITH: Maria, can you summarize what you just learned?
MARIA: I guess you do care.

JUDITH: That's right. Of course I care. (pause) Maria, have you had this
idea about anyone else lately? MARIA: (Thinks.) Yeah. My friend,
Rebecca. JUDITH: What happened? MARIA: Well, this was yesterday. We were
supposed to go to a movie together, but she texted me at the last minute
and said she wasn't feeling well and didn't want to go. But she could
have invited me over! We could have watched a movie at her apartment!
We've done that before. JUDITH: And when she cancelled and didn't offer
to get together in another way, what went through your mind? MARIA: That
she didn't care. JUDITH: You know, we can use the same questions as a
few minutes ago: What other evidence do you have that she doesn't care?
And what's the evidence on the other side, that maybe she does care, or
does care somewhat? (pause) But I wonder if you could just think about
the next question: Is there another explanation for why she did that?
MARIA: (Sighs.) I don't know. Maybe she felt too sick. JUDITH: Or she
was just too tired? MARIA: Could be. JUDITH: Looking at it now, what do
you think is most likely? Does she have a history of cancelling on you
and not caring? MARIA: (Thinks.) No, I guess not. JUDITH: It's so
important that you recognized that! I wonder if you have a certain
vulnerability to assuming that people don't care when they actually do.
(pause) Do you think that's possible? MARIA: I'm not sure. JUDITH: Well,
let's keep it in mind. I'm going to put it in my notes in case it comes
up again. MARIA: Okay.

MANAGING NEGATIVE REACTIONS TOWARD CLIENTS You and your clients have a
reciprocal influence on each other (Safran & Segal, 1996). You, too,
will likely bring your general beliefs about yourself,

other people, and relationships to the therapy session, as well as your
characteristic behavioral coping strategies. If your negative core
beliefs get triggered during a session, you may react in an unhelpful
way and your client may then engage in an unhelpful coping strategy. For
example, one therapist I supervised believed he was incompetent. During
therapy sessions, he had lots of thoughts such as "I don't know what I'm
doing," and he became quite passive and quiet. His client became
uncomfortable with the silences and criticized him, which intensified
his belief of incompetence. Another therapist who believed she was
incompetent became angry at a client who disagreed with her, perceiving
that he was implying that she didn't know what she was talking about.
The client then blamed himself and became quite distressed. So, it's
important to have an accurate cognitive conceptualization of both your
clients' and your own beliefs and behaviors and their reciprocal
interaction. Here's something I'd like you to do at the start of every
workday. Look at your schedule. Ask yourself: "Which clients do I wish
would not come in today?"

Then use CBT techniques on yourself if any client comes to mind.
Identify your cognitions about this client and do one or more of the
following: Evaluate and respond to your cognitions about the client;
create a coping card to read. Check on your expectations for your
clients. Work on accepting them and their values as they are. Check on
your expectations for yourself. Make sure they're realistic. Specify
your concern and conceptualize: What might the client do or say (or not
do or not say) in session (or between sessions) that could be a problem?
Which beliefs might underlie this behavior? Cultivate nondefensiveness
and curiosity. Problem-solve by yourself or with a colleague/supervisor.
Set appropriate limits with clients. Work on accepting your own
emotional discomfort. Do good self-care throughout the day (e.g., deep
breathing, taking a walk, calling a friend, doing a short mindfulness
practice, eating in a healthy way).

I remember having to do some work on myself when, for the first time, I
started treating a client who had narcissistic personality disorder. I
was nervous before our sessions and sometimes wished she would skip a
week. My thought was "She's going to say something provocative and I
won't know how to respond." I had a fair amount of evidence that she was
likely to put me down in some way. In previous sessions, she had
questioned my experience and expertise. She had told me she thought she
was smarter than I was. She had even criticized how my office was
decorated. I had to remind myself that her provocative statements were a
coping strategy because she was a relatively new client who hadn't yet
learned that I wouldn't put her down or make her feel inferior. In other
words, she didn't feel safe enough with me. I recognized that I could
respond to some provocative statements by saying, "It's good you told me
that." And/or I could ask, "If it's accurate, what would be so bad about
that?" If she said, "Oh, nothing," I could make a mental note of what
happened and then bring the discussion back to the issue at hand. If she
continued with a provocative statement, such as "I want my therapist to
be smarter than I am," I could ask, "Could we continue working together
for a few more sessions until you have more information?" In any case, I
was alert that my own belief of incompetency could get activated and so
I prepared myself to react in a nondefensive way. Making these mental
preparations allowed me to approach our sessions with curiosity ("I
wonder what she'll do today to feel safe?") instead of with dread. It's
important to observe your negative reactions, accept your emotional
reactions nonjudgmentally, and then figure out what to do. Once clients
feel safe with you, you can address the maladaptive coping strategies
they use with you---and likely with others as well. Monitor your level
of empathy, and be on the alert for your own unhelpful reactions. Assess
your skill deficits, engage in continual self-reflection and
self-improvement (BennettLevy & Thwaites, 2007), get additional
training, and regularly consult with others or seek supervision to
increase your competence. And, when indicated, consider personal
therapy.

SUMMARY

It's essential to have a good working relationship with clients. You
facilitate this objective by adapting treatment to the individual, using
good counseling skills, working collaboratively, eliciting and
responding appropriately to feedback, repairing ruptures, and managing
your own negative reactions. Clients who are in distress may have strong
negative core beliefs about themselves that they bring to the therapy
session. If they also have strong negative beliefs about other people,
they may assume you will mistreat them in some way. That's why it's
important to help clients feel safe. REFLECTION QUESTIONS How can you
help clients feel safe in session? What automatic thoughts might
interfere with your asking clients for feedback? How can you respond to
those thoughts?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Write a coping card about the therapeutic relationship
that would be helpful for you to read just before your therapy sessions.

5

THE EVALUATION SESSION

CBT requires you to evaluate clients thoroughly, so you can Effective
accurately formulate the case, conceptualize the individual client, and
plan treatment. While there is overlap among treatments for various
disorders, there are important variations as well, based on the
cognitive formulation---the key cognitions, behavioral strategies, and
maintaining factors---of a particular disorder. Attention to the
client's presenting problems, current functioning, symptoms, and
history, along with their values, positive attributes, strengths, and
skills, helps you develop an initial conceptualization and formulate a
general therapy plan. You hold the evaluation session before the first
treatment session. Assessment isn't limited to the initial evaluation
session though. You continue to collect assessment data at each session
to confirm, change, or add to your diagnosis and conceptualization and
to make sure clients are making progress. It's possible to miss a
diagnosis if you get incomplete information, clients deliberately
withhold information (e.g., some clients with substance use problems or
ego-syntonic eating disorders may do this), and/or you erroneously
attribute certain symptoms (e.g., social isolation) to a particular
disorder (depression), when another disorder is also present (social
phobia).

When another clinician has performed the evaluation, you will
undoubtedly need to collect additional information pertinent to the use
of CBT as the

treatment modality. In this chapter, you'll learn the answers to these
questions: What are the objectives and structure of the evaluation
session? How do you conduct the evaluation session? What do you do in
Part 1 (starting the session)? What do you do in Part 2 (conducting the
assessment)? What do you do in Part 3 (relating your diagnostic
impressions, setting broad goals, and relating your general treatment
plan)? What do you do in Part 4 (setting an Action Plan)? What do you do
in Part 5 (establishing expectations for treatment)? What do you do in
Part 6 (summarizing the session and eliciting feedback)? What do you do
between the evaluation and the first treatment session?

It will likely take between 1 and 2 hours (or possibly more) to conduct
the evaluation session.

OBJECTIVES FOR THE EVALUATION SESSION Your objectives for the evaluation
session are to collect information (both positive and negative) to make
an accurate diagnosis and create an initial cognitive conceptualization
and treatment plan, determine whether you will be an appropriate
therapist and can provide the appropriate "dose" of therapy (level of
care, frequency of sessions, and duration of treatment), figure out
whether adjunctive services or treatment (such as medication) may be
indicated, initiate a therapeutic alliance with the client (and with
family members, if relevant), educate the client about CBT, and set up
an easy Action Plan.

It's desirable to collect as much information as possible before the
evaluation session. Request that clients send, or arrange to have sent,
relevant reports from current and previous clinicians, including both
mental health and health professionals. The evaluation session itself
will require less time if clients are able to fill out questionnaires
and self-report forms beforehand. It's especially important that clients
have had a recent medical checkup. Occasionally, clients suffer from
organic problems, not psychological ones. For example, hypothyroidism
can be mistaken for depression. It's good practice to inform the client
during the initial phone call that it's often useful to have a family
member, partner, or trusted friend accompany the client to the
evaluation session to provide additional information and/or to learn how
he or she can be helpful to the client. Make sure clients understand
that the evaluation will help you determine whether they are good
candidates for CBT and whether you believe you will be able to provide
the needed treatment.

STRUCTURE OF THE EVALUATION SESSION In this session, you greet the
client, collaboratively decide whether a family member or friend should
participate in the session, set the agenda and convey appropriate
expectations for the session, conduct the psychosocial assessment, set
broad goals, relate your tentative diagnosis and your broad treatment
plan and educate the client about CBT, collaboratively set an Action
Plan, set expectations for treatment, and summarize the session and
elicit feedback.

At this session or the first treatment session, you'll also fulfill the
ethical and legal requirements where you practice. If you work in an
area that doesn't have such requirements, it's still a good idea to have
clients read

and sign a consent to treatment form that includes such items as risks
and benefits of treatment, limits of confidentiality, mandatory
reporting, and privacy of records.

PART 1: STARTING THE EVALUATION SESSION Before clients enter your
office, review whatever records they have brought and the forms they've
completed. It's usually desirable to meet with clients alone at first.
At the beginning of the session, you can discuss whether the client
wants an accompanying family member or friend (if there is one) to
attend none, part, or all of the session. It's often helpful to bring
this person in at least toward the end of the session, as you convey
your initial impressions (including tentative diagnosis) and review
broad therapy goals. You can ask for the family member/friend's
perspective on the client's problems and, if advisable, set the scene
for this individual to return at some point to learn more about what he
or she can do to be helpful to the client.

Setting the Agenda Start the session by introducing yourself and setting
the agenda. JUDITH: Abe, as I explained on the phone, this is our
evaluation session. It's not a therapy session, so we won't work on any
issues today. We'll start doing that next time. (pause) Today, I need to
ask you a lot of questions \[providing a rationale\] so I can make a
diagnosis. Some of the questions will be relevant. Some won't be, but I
need to ask them so I can rule in the problems you have and rule out the
problems you don't have. \[being collaborative\] Is that okay? ABE: Yes.
JUDITH: I'll probably need to interrupt you a few times, so I can get
the information I need. If it bothers you, would you let me know? ABE:
Yes. JUDITH: Before we begin, I'd like to tell you what to expect. This
is what we call "setting the agenda," and it's something we do at every
session. Today, I need to find out why you're here, and I'll ask you
about the symptoms you've been having, how you've been functioning
lately, and about your history. (pause) All right? ABE: Yes.

JUDITH: Second, I'm going to be asking you what's going right with your
life and when the best period of your life was. Then I'll ask you to
tell me anything else you think I should know. Does that sound okay?
ABE: (Nods.) JUDITH: Third, I'll tell you what I think your diagnosis
is, but I may need to look over your records and forms and my notes and
talk to you more about it next week. Fourth, I'll tell you what I think
we should focus on in treatment. (pause) And along the way, I'll be
telling you more about CBT, and I'll ask you how it all sounds. (pause)
At the end, we'll set some broad goals for how you'd like your life to
be different. Then I'll ask you whether you have any questions or
concerns. Okay? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: Anything else you want to cover today?
ABE: Well, it would be good to know how long therapy will last. JUDITH:
(making a note) Good question. We'll talk about that toward the end of
the session. ABE: Okay.

PART 2: CONDUCTING THE ASSESSMENT Areas of Assessment You need to know
about many aspects of the client's current and past experience to
develop a sound treatment plan across sessions, to plan treatment within
sessions, to develop a good therapeutic relationship, and to carry out
effective treatment. (See Appendix B for Abe's Case Write-Up, which
includes many different areas you need to ask clients about; you can
download an outline with specific questions at
beckinstitute.org/CBTresources.) While a detailed account of assessment
procedures and instruments are beyond the scope of this book, many
sources can help, including Antony and Barlow (2010), Dobson and Dobson
(2018), Kuyken and colleagues (2009), Lazarus and Lazarus (1991), Ledley
and colleagues (2005), and Persons (2008). Note that it is critical to
determine the degree to which clients might be homicidal or suicidal.
Wenzel and colleagues (2009) provide assessment and practice guidelines
for suicidal clients, as does an online course on suicidality
(beckinstitute.org/CBTresources).

Eliciting a Description of a Typical Day Another important part of the
evaluation (or the first treatment session) is asking clients how they
spend their time. This description gives you additional insight into
their daily experience, facilitates goal setting, and helps pinpoint
positive activities that you can encourage them to engage in more
frequently. It also helps you identify activities clients are spending
too much or too little time doing. As clients describe a typical day,
take notes and look for variations in their mood; the degree to which
they are interacting with family, friends, and people at work; their
general level of functioning at home, work, and elsewhere; how they're
spending their free time; activities that bring them a sense of
pleasure, accomplishment, and/or connection;

self-care activities; and activities they're avoiding.

JUDITH: Abe, I'd like to get an idea of what your daily routine is like.
Can you tell me what you do from the time you wake up in the morning
until the time you go to sleep at night? ABE: Okay. (Sighs.) Well, I
usually wake up around 7 o'clock. JUDITH: Then what do you do? ABE:
Usually I toss and turn for a couple of hours, or I just doze. JUDITH:
What time do you get out of bed for the day? ABE: It depends. Sometimes
not until 10. JUDITH: What do you do when you first get out of bed? ABE:
I usually have coffee and a little breakfast. Some days I get dressed.
Some days I don't. JUDITH: What do you do after breakfast? ABE: I
usually just stay home. Watch TV or waste time on the computer. JUDITH:
What else do you do in the afternoon? ABE: Sometimes I just sit on the
couch doing nothing. If I have enough energy, I might run an errand, get
some food. But usually I don't. JUDITH: Do you have lunch? ABE: I just
grab some snack food. JUDITH: Anything else you do in the afternoon?
ABE: I might do one thing, like a load of laundry. Sometimes I try to
read the newspaper. But I usually just fall asleep. JUDITH: Do you take
a nap most days? ABE: Yeah. Maybe for an hour or two. JUDITH: What do
you do for dinner? ABE: I usually put a frozen dinner in the microwave.
JUDITH: What do you do after that? ABE: Not much. Watch TV. Surf the
web. JUDITH: And when do you get in bed? ABE: Around 11 or so. JUDITH:
Do you fall asleep right away? ABE: Not usually. It sometimes takes a
really long time. JUDITH: And then do you sleep through until 7 o'clock?
ABE: Sometimes. But sometimes I'm up for a couple of hours around 3
o'clock.

Next, I ask Abe if his weekends are different from his typical weekday.
Fortunately, he's a bit more active. He sometimes attends his grandson's
games or visits with one of his two children and their family. He told
me there had been a change in his routine about a year before. Until
then, even though he was moderately depressed, he routinely had
breakfast with two buddies on Saturdays and attended church on Sundays.
Collecting data in this way guides your thinking in developing an
initial treatment plan. You'll also use the information in the first
session when you set goals for treatment and do activity scheduling.

Responding to Hopelessness and Skepticism Throughout the evaluation,
you'll be alert for indications that the client is unsure about
committing to treatment. As Abe describes his current symptoms, he
expresses hopeless thinking. I use his automatic thoughts to subtly
relate the cognitive model, indicate how thoughts like these would be a
target of treatment, and ensure that our tentative alliance hadn't
suffered. CLINICAL TIPS When clients offer you too much information, you
can structure their responses so you'll have time to accomplish what you
need to. Providing a guideline can help---for example: "For the next few
questions, I just need you to answer 'yes,' 'no,' or 'I'm not sure' \[or
'in one or two sentences'\]." When clients start to provide unneeded
details or go off on a tangent, it's important to gently interrupt:
"Sorry to interrupt, but I need to know. ..."

ABE: It feels like I've got so many problems. I'm not sure anything can
help. JUDITH: Okay, it's good you told me. That's an interesting
thought: "I don't think anything can help." How does that thought make
you feel? Sad? Hopeless? ABE: Both. JUDITH: This is exactly the kind of
depressed thought that we'll be talking about starting next week. We'll
need to find out whether that thought is 100% true, 0% true, or
someplace in the middle. Meanwhile, is there anything I said or did that
leads you to think I can't help, or that this kind of treatment can't
help? ABE: No ...

JUDITH: What makes you think it might not work? ABE: I don't know. My
problems just feel overwhelming. JUDITH: Good to know. And given your
depth of depression, I'm not surprised. We'll take your problems one at
a time and do problem solving together. I want you to know, you're not
alone anymore. You've got me on your team. ABE: (Sighs in relief.) Okay,
good. JUDITH: Now I don't have a crystal ball, so I can't give you a
100% guarantee. But there's nothing you've told me that makes me think
it won't work. (pause) And there are a lot of things that make me think
it will work. Should I tell you some of them? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH: You're
obviously intelligent and very capable. You accomplished a lot and
functioned highly before you got depressed. For many, many years, you
did really well at work. You got promoted. You prided yourself on doing
a good job. You were productive and reliable. You were a good father and
you tried to be a good husband. Also, you had good friends and you
helped other people. All of these are good signs. ABE: Okay. JUDITH: So,
what do you say? Are you willing to give it a try? Do you want to come
back next week? ABE: Yeah, I do. CLINICAL TIPS When clients express
concern because previous treatment hasn't worked, positively reinforce
them ("It's good you told me that") for expressing their skepticism or
misgivings. Ask whether they felt they had a good relationship with
their previous therapists and whether, at every session, their
therapists set agendas, figured out with them what they could do to have
a better week, made sure the most important points of the session were
recorded for them to review daily at home, taught them how to evaluate
and respond to their thinking themselves, successfully motivated them to
change their behavior, and asked for feedback to make sure therapy was
on the right track. Most clients have not experienced this kind of
treatment, and you can say, "I'm glad to hear that your previous
therapists didn't do all these things. It sounds as if our treatment
here will be different. If it were exactly the same as your past
experiences, I'd be less hopeful." Don't take clients' reports at face
value if they say that a previous therapist engaged in all these
activities at every session. Do spend more time finding out precisely
what occurred,

especially whether the therapist provided treatment individualized for
the client and his/her specific disorder(s), based on the latest
research and practice guidelines. In any case, you can encourage the
client to give your treatment a try for four or five sessions and
indicate that you and the client can then review how well treatment is
working.

Seeking Additional Information Toward the end of the assessment, it's
useful to ask clients two questions: "Is there anything else that's
important for me to know?" and "Is there anything you're reluctant to
tell me? You don't have to tell me what it is. I just need to know
whether there's more to tell, maybe some time in the future."

Involving a Trusted Person If a family member/friend has accompanied the
client to the office, you might now ask the client whether he or she
would like to invite the individual into the session (unless, of course,
this person has been there from the beginning). Make sure there is
nothing the client wants you to refrain from saying. Elicit the client's
agreement for you to inquire what the family member/friend thinks is
most important for you to know; ask about the client's positive
qualities, strengths, and helpful coping strategies; review your initial
diagnostic impressions; and present your tentative treatment plan and
elicit feedback.

If the client doesn't want you to talk about all these topics or wants
you to address something else, make a collaborative decision to do so,
or provide a rationale for why you don't think it's a good idea.

PART 3: RELATING YOUR DIAGNOSTIC IMPRESSIONS, SETTING BROAD GOALS, AND
RELATING YOUR GENERAL TREATMENT PLAN Diagnostic Impressions When you
aren't confident of clients' diagnoses, explain that you will need time
to review your notes, their forms, and previous reports. For many
clients though, it's appropriate to give your initial impression of
their diagnosis(es) and offer hope that you can help them. JUDITH: Abe,
you certainly are depressed. Next week, we'll talk about how I know
that. Okay? ABE: Okay. JUDITH: The good news is that depression is
treatable, and cognitive behavior therapy has been shown in dozens and
dozens of studies to be effective for this condition.

Setting Goals and Relating Your General Treatment Plan Setting goals
often stimulates hope (Snyder et al., 1999), as does describing a
treatment plan that makes sense to clients. It's important for them to
get a concrete idea of how it is that they will recover from their
condition. When you relate the treatment plan, make sure to elicit
feedback. JUDITH: Now I'd like to set some broad goals with you and tell
you how I think you're going to get better and then I want to hear how
it sounds to you. ABE: Okay. JUDITH: (Writes "Goals" at the top of a
sheet of paper and gives a copy to Abe at the end of the session.) I
know you told me you'd like to get over your depression and be less
anxious, right? ABE: Yes.

JUDITH: Would another good goal be to help you have a sense of
wellbeing? ABE: Yeah, that's really important. JUDITH: Based on what you
told me, we'll also work on helping you function better at home and,
when you're ready, start reconnecting with people and looking for a job.
ABE: That sounds good. JUDITH: \[to avoid Abe's becoming overwhelmed\]
We'll do all of this step by step, so it doesn't feel overwhelming.
(pause) How does that sound? ABE: (Sighs in relief.) Good. JUDITH: Next
week, I'm going to find out what's really important to you and what you
want for your life. Then we'll set more specific goals for treatment. At
every session, we'll be working toward your goals. For example, next
week you might say that you want to reconnect with a friend or start
doing more around your apartment. We'll figure out what obstacles could
get in the way and we'll do some problem solving. (pause) Does that
sound okay? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: In fact, about half of what we'll do in
therapy is problem solving. The other half is teaching you skills to
change your thinking and how you behave. We'll especially look for
depressed thoughts that could get in your way. For example, earlier in
today's session you said, "I can't do anything right" and you told me
how depressed you feel when you have thoughts like that. Do you see how
that idea can affect your motivation to get off the couch? How it can
make you feel terrible? How you might then keep watching television
instead of getting busy? ABE: Yeah, that's what happens. JUDITH: So one
thing we'll do together is evaluate thoughts like that. What's the
evidence you can't do anything right? Any evidence that's not true, or
not 100% true? Could there be another way of looking at this situation?
For example, maybe we'll discover that because you're so depressed, you
need some help in problem solving or motivating yourself. But needing
help doesn't necessarily mean you do everything wrong. ABE: Hmm. JUDITH:
Here are three things we'll do. One, we'll work together to help you
change your depressed and anxious thinking to make it more realistic.

Two, we'll come up with things for you to try so you can move closer to
improving your life and creating the life you want. Three, you'll learn
skills you can use during the week and actually for the rest of your
life. (pause) How does that sound? ABE: It makes sense. JUDITH: So
that's going to be our general treatment plan: set goals, start working
toward them one by one, and learn skills. In fact, that's how people get
better, by making small changes in their thinking and behavior every
day. \[asking for feedback\] Now, was there anything I just said that
didn't sound good? ABE: No, it makes sense.

PART 4: SETTING THE ACTION PLAN Creating an easy Action Plan with
clients at the evaluation gets them accustomed to the idea that it's
important for them to carry on the work of the session throughout the
week. Make sure you keep a copy of Action Plans yourself. Here's how I
transitioned from relating the treatment plan to setting Abe's Action
Plan. JUDITH: Good. I'll write down some of what we just talked about so
you can look at it during the week \[Figure 5.1\]. What should we call
the things you're going to do between sessions? Your Action Plan?
Self-help activities? Something else? ACTION PLAN

May 6

Put this Action Plan next to the coffee maker and read it every morning
and again later in the day. 1. Therapy Notes: When I start to feel more
depressed, remind myself that the therapy plan makes sense. With Judy's
help, I'll be working toward goals every week, step by step. I'll learn
how to evaluate my thinking, which may be 100% true, or 0% true, or
somewhere in the middle. The way I'll get better is by making small
changes in my thinking and behavior every day. 2. Take grandchildren out
for ice cream. 3. Give myself credit for doing all of the above and for
doing anything that's even a little difficult---because I do it anyway.
FIGURE 5.1. Abe's evaluation Action Plan.

ABE: Action Plan is good. JUDITH: Do you think you could read this
Action Plan twice a day, once in the morning and once later on,
especially if you start to feel more depressed? ABE: Yeah, I can do
that. JUDITH: How will you remember to read it? ABE: I'll put it next to
the coffee maker. I have coffee every morning, so I'll see it. JUDITH:
And every time you read it, I'd like you to give yourself credit. ABE:
Okay.

JUDITH: You know, when people are depressed, it's like they're trying to
walk through quicksand. Everything is harder. Have you found that? ABE:
Yeah. JUDITH: So actually, I'd like you to give yourself credit whenever
you do anything on your Action Plan and anything that's even a little
bit hard but you do it anyway. You can just say something like "It's
good I did that." (pause) Could you try giving yourself credit this
week? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH: Okay, I'll write that down, and we'll talk more
about credit next week. Now what do you want to remind yourself if you
start to feel hopeless? Abe and I then jointly composed the following:
"When I start to feel more depressed, remind myself that the therapy
plan makes sense. With \[my therapist's\] help, I'll be working toward
goals every week, step by step. I'll learn how to evaluate my thinking,
which may be 100% true, or 0% true, or somewhere in the middle. The way
I'll get better is by making small changes in my thinking and behavior
every day." JUDITH: So, you'll do most of the work of therapy between
sessions. (pause) I wonder if there's something meaningful you could do
this week to demonstrate to yourself that you can make a change. (pause)
Could you do something you haven't done for a while, maybe with a family
member? ABE: (Thinks.) I could take my grandchildren out for ice cream.
JUDITH: Excellent. And when you do, could you tell yourself that this is
an important first step in taking control of your depression? And give
yourself credit? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: Should I write that down? ABE: Yeah.

PART 5: ESTABLISHING EXPECTATIONS FOR TREATMENT It's important to give
clients reasonable expectations for treatment (Goldstein, 1962). Doing
so can help reduce the possibility of termination (Swift et al., 2012)
and lead to better treatment outcomes (Constantino et al., 2012). You
should give clients a general sense of how long they should expect
treatment to take. Usually it is best to suggest a range, 2 to 4 months
for many clients with straightforward major depression, although some
might need fewer sessions (or be constrained by finances or insurance).
Other clients, particularly those with chronic psychiatric disorders, or
those who are comorbid with substance use or personality disorders, may
require more treatment. Clients with severe or recurrent mental illness
may need more intensive treatment when they are more highly symptomatic,
and periodic booster sessions for a very long time. Many clients make
progress with weekly sessions. But if their symptoms are severe or their
functioning is at quite a low level, they may need to see you more
frequently, especially initially. Toward the end of treatment, you will
gradually space sessions farther apart to give clients more
opportunities to function independently. Here's how I give Abe an idea
of how I expected therapy would proceed. JUDITH: If it's okay with you,
Abe, we'll plan to meet once a week until you're feeling significantly
better, then we'll move to once every 2 weeks, then maybe once every 3
or 4 weeks. We'll decide how to space out therapy together. Even when we
decide to end, I'll recommend that you come back for a "booster" session
once every few months for a while. (pause) Okay? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH: It's
hard to predict now how long you should be in therapy. My best guess,
given how severe your depression is, is somewhere around 15 to 20
sessions. If we find that you have some long-standing issues that you
want to work on, it could take longer. Again, we'll decide together what
seems to be best. Okay?

PART 6: SUMMARIZING AND ELICITING FEEDBACK At the end of the evaluation,
you'll summarize the session to give the client a clear picture of what
was accomplished. First, remind the client that treatment will start
next week. Then elicit the client's reaction to the session. Here's what
I say to Abe: JUDITH: Okay, I'd like to summarize what we covered today,
if that's all right. I told you that this is an evaluation session, not
a therapy session, and that we'd really start to work on reaching your
goals and solving your problems next week. Right? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH: I
asked you lots of questions, and I gave you a tentative diagnosis. You
told me how you spend your time on a typical day. I told you a little
about how your thoughts can make you feel depressed and that when people
are depressed, their thoughts may be true or they may be not true.
Right? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: I also told you a little about this kind of
therapy and what I thought your treatment plan should focus on, and we
created an Action Plan for you for the coming week. Then we discussed
the mechanics of treatment, for example, how often we'll meet and how
long treatment will last. (pause) Any final questions? Or was there
anything you thought I got wrong or didn't understand? ABE: No, I think
you understand me pretty well. JUDITH: Good. Then I'll see you next week
for our first therapy session.

ACTIVITIES BETWEEN THE EVALUATION AND FIRST TREATMENT SESSION Before the
first therapy session, you'll write up your evaluation report and
initial treatment plan. If you haven't already done so, you'll obtain
consent and contact the client's previous mental health and health
professionals to

request reports, ask questions, and obtain additional information.
You'll also contact relevant current professionals to discuss your
findings and coordinate care. Talking by phone to other professionals
often reveals important information that had not been documented in
writing. You'll also start to devise a tentative cognitive
conceptualization and an initial treatment plan. (See also Chapters 3
and 9.)

SUMMARY In your initial session with a client, you will conduct a
thorough assessment to collect data so you can accurately conceptualize
and diagnose your client and plan treatment. You seek to accomplish many
objectives, including developing the therapeutic relationship,
increasing the client's hope, educating the client about CBT and the
cognitive model, addressing hopelessness and skepticism, setting broad
treatment goals, relating your general treatment plan, setting an Action
Plan, establishing expectations for treatment, and summarizing and
eliciting feedback. Following this session, you confirm the diagnosis
and, when relevant, contact former and current health and mental health
care providers who have treated or are treating the client. You will
continue to assess the client at every session, to ensure your diagnosis
is correct, to refine your conceptualization of the client, and to
monitor progress. REFLECTION QUESTION What's important to accomplish
during the evaluation session in addition to collecting data to make a
diagnosis?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Create a partial Case Write-Up about a real or
imaginary client (Parts One and Two in Appendix B).

6

THE FIRST THERAPY SESSION

important objective in the first session is to inspire hope. You do
Thethismost by providing psychoeducation (e.g., research shows that CBT
is effective for the client's condition), reiterating the general
treatment plan, directly expressing your confidence that you can help
the client feel better, and identifying the client's values,
aspirations, and goals. You'll also establish rapport and trust with
clients, socialize them into treatment, do a mood check (so you can
monitor progress and adjust treatment), collect additional data for the
conceptualization, teach clients about the cognitive model, schedule
activities or work on an issue, develop a new Action Plan, and elicit
feedback. See Figure 6.1 for the structure of the first therapy session.
You'll learn how to structure future sessions in Chapter 9. In addition
to the elements listed below, you may interweave psychoeducation,
eliciting and responding to automatic thoughts, devising Action Plan
items, and identifying goals throughout the session. Initial Part of
Session 1 1. Do a mood (and, when relevant, a medication or other
treatment) check. 2. Set the agenda. 3. Ask for an update (since the
evaluation) and review the Action Plan. 4. Discuss the client's
diagnosis and provide psychoeducation. Middle Part of Session 1 5.
Identify aspirations, values, and goals. 6. Do activity scheduling or
work on an issue. 7. Collaboratively set a new Action Plan; check on
likelihood of completion.

End of Session 1 8. Provide a summary. 9. Check how likely it is that
the client will complete the new Action Plan. 10. Elicit feedback.
FIGURE 6.1. Structure of the first therapy session.

You'll find the answers to the questions below in this chapter. How do
you do a mood/medication (or other treatments) check? How do you set an
initial agenda? How do you ask for an update and review the Action Plan?
How do you provide psychoeducation about depression, negative thinking,
the treatment plan, and the cognitive model? How do you elicit values,
aspirations, and goals? How do you set an Action Plan? How do you
summarize the session and elicit feedback?

Before the first session, review the client's intake evaluation and keep
your initial conceptualization and treatment plan in mind as you conduct
the session. Because it's important to tailor treatment to the
individual, be prepared to change course if necessary. Most standard CBT
outpatient sessions last for about 45 to 50 minutes, but the first one
usually takes an hour. Try to identify one or more of the client's
automatic thoughts sometime during the session. Then you can introduce
or reintroduce the cognitive model. Or you can provide clients with an
example. Also, look for opportunities during the session to generate
positive emotions, for example, by having clients create a visual image
in their minds of having achieved their aspirations, by having a brief
conversation about their interests and values, and/or by using
self-disclosure. CLINICAL TIPS You may want to write key words of the
structure on your Session Notes (Figure 10.1, pp. 176--177) prior to the
session, so you can remember what to do. You'll provide a significant
amount of psychoeducation in the first session. A booklet such as Coping
with Depression (J. S. Beck, 2020) reviews important concepts and can be
suggested as an Action Plan item.

MOOD CHECK At the beginning of the session, greet the client and do a
mood check. Research shows that when therapists and clients routinely
track progress and therapists use feedback to improve their treatment,
outcomes are enhanced (Miller et al., 2015). You can use published
scales, such as the Beck Depression Inventory--II (Beck et al., 1996),
the Beck Anxiety Inventory (Beck & Steer, 1993a), and the Beck
Hopelessness Scale (Beck & Steer, 1993b). Or you can use scales in the
public domain, such as the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9;
www.integration.samhsa.gov/images/res/PHQ%20-%20Questions.pdf) or the
Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale (GAD-7;
www.integration.samhsa.gov/clinicalpractice/gad708.19.08cartwright.pdf).
If clients are unable or unwilling to fill out forms, you can assess
their mood by asking them to assign a number on a scale (0--10) that
represents how they've been feeling. You might say, "If 10 means the
most depressed you've ever felt and 0 means not depressed at all, how
strong was the depression for most of the past week?" It's also good to
ask clients to rate their sense of well-being on a 0--10 scale as
illustrated in the dialogue below. It's especially critical to check on
the level of clients' suicidality (and/or aggressive and homicidal
impulses). Elevated scores on items of suicidality and hopelessness
indicate the client may be at risk. If so, do a risk assessment (Wenzel
et al., 2009) to determine whether you will need to spend the next part
of the session (or the entire session) developing a plan to keep the
client safe. It may also be important to check more specifically about
other problems, such as sleep, anxiety symptoms, and impulsive
behaviors. These issues may be important for the agenda. An advantage of
having clients fill out symptom checklists is that you can quickly
identify problems without having to ask additional questions. If you use
symptom checklists, also elicit a subjective description ("How have you
been feeling this week?") from clients and match it with their objective
test scores. Regardless of how you measure their mood, make sure that
clients are not reporting how they feel just that day but, instead, are
providing an overview of their mood for the past week. Alert clients
that you'd like to continue checking their mood every week. You might
say:

"I'd like you to come to every session a few minutes early so you can
fill out these forms. \[providing a rationale\] They help give me a
quick idea of how you've been feeling in the past week, although I'll
always want you to describe how you've been doing in your own words
too." As you'll see below, I start the session by checking on Abe's
mood. As he's speaking, I quickly review the PHQ-9 and GAD-7 scales he
filled out just prior to the session. And I ask him to rate his sense of
well-being. (I want to make sure we're not only decreasing his
depression and anxiety but also helping him feel better more generally.)
JUDITH: Hi, Abe. How are you doing today? ABE: Eh, not so good. JUDITH:
Not so great? ABE: No. JUDITH: Is it all right if I take a look at the
forms you filled out? ABE: Sure. JUDITH: Thanks for filling them out.
\[repeating the rationale\] I think I mentioned last week that they help
both of us make sure you're making progress over time. (looks at forms)
Let's see. How do you think your mood is compared to what it was last
week? ABE: Probably about the same. JUDITH: That's what the forms look
like too. This one, which measures depression (shows him the PHQ-9), was
18 last week and this week (pause), and this one, which measures anxiety
(shows him the GAD-7), is still 8. (pause) Could you also tell me how
much of a sense of wellbeing you've had for most of the week? Zero means
no sense of wellbeing, and 10 means the greatest sense of well-being
you've ever experienced. ABE: About a 1, I guess. CLINICAL TIPS The mood
check should be brief. When clients give you too many details, you might
apologize for interrupting and then say one of two things: "Could you
summarize how you've been feeling this week in just a sentence or two?"
or "Could we put how you've been feeling \[or the issue you've just been
describing\] on the agenda and get to it in a few minutes?"

MEDICATION/OTHER TREATMENTS CHECK When clients take medication for their
psychological difficulties, you'll briefly check on adherence, problems,
and side effects. It's important to phrase the adherence question in
terms of frequency---not "Did you take your medicine this week" but
rather "How many times this week were you able to take your medicine the
way \[the provider\] prescribed?" (See J. S. Beck, 2001, and Sudak,
2011, for suggestions on how to increase medication adherence.) Whether
your client is taking medication or receiving a different kind of
treatment (e.g., electroconvulsive therapy, transcranial magnetic
stimulation, or other brain stimulation therapies), you should obtain
clients' permission and then periodically contact the provider to
exchange information. You won't recommend changes in medication, but you
might help clients respond to obstacles that are interfering with their
being fully adherent. When clients have concerns about issues such as
side effects, dosage, addiction to medications, or alternative
medications or supplements, help them record specific questions to ask
their provider and suggest that they write down the provider's answers.
If clients aren't taking medication, but you believe a pharmacological
or other intervention is indicated, you might propose that they have a
medical or psychiatric consultation. CLINICAL TIPS If clients are
hesitant to set up a consultation, they may be willing to look at the
advantages and disadvantages of scheduling a consultation versus the
advantages and disadvantages of not scheduling a consultation. It's
helpful to suggest to them that they don't have to commit to taking
medication or receiving an adjunct treatment; they can just get more
information and then decide.

INITIAL AGENDA SETTING Ideally, you set the agenda quickly. Most clients
feel comfortable when you tell them how you'd like to structure the
session. When you explain the rationale, you make the process of therapy
more understandable to clients---

which helps to elicit their active participation in a structured,
productive way. JUDITH: \[being collaborative\] If it's all right with
you, what I'd like to do now is to set the agenda. \[providing a
rationale\] The reason we set an agenda is so I can find out what's most
important to you and so we can figure out together how to spend our
time. Since it's our first session, we have a lot to cover, and we'll
have less time to talk about your agenda items. We'll have much more
time, starting next week. (pause) Is that okay?" ABE: Yes. JUDITH:
You'll also notice that I take a lot of notes \[providing a rationale\]
so I can remember what's important. Let me know if that bothers you.
ABE: Okay. Next, you'll name your agenda items. JUDITH: The first thing
I want to do is to get an update of what happened between last session
and this session \[providing a rationale\] so I can see if there are
other important things for us to cover today. I'd like to see what you
were able to get done on your Action Plan and then talk a little bit
about your diagnosis. ABE: Okay. JUDITH: Next, we'll set some goals, and
if we have time, we'll talk about some things you can do this week as
part of your new Action Plan. Or we'll start working on one of your
goals. (pause) And then at the end of the session, I'm going to ask you
for some feedback. (pause) Does that sound all right? ABE: Yes. JUDITH:
\[eliciting Abe's agenda items\] Anything else you want to make sure and
talk about? ABE: No, that sounds like a lot. That'll be enough. Be alert
for potentially important issues that arise during the session. You and
the client may decide together that a new issue is more important than
the ones on the original agenda. But be careful not to let clients drift
into talking about a different issue without calling their attention to
it. If this

happens, make a collaborative decision about whether to continue talking
about the new issue or to return to the original one.

UPDATE AND REVIEW OF THE ACTION PLAN In traditional CBT, we would ask
for an update in this way: "What happened between last session and this
session that I should know?" This invariably led to a recounting of
negative experiences, especially early in treatment. We'd then ask,
"What happened that was positive?" As you'll see below, in CT-R (Beck et
al., in press), we tend to start with positive experiences and help
clients draw adaptive conclusions. The update is frequently intermingled
with a review of the Action Plan. JUDITH: You know, Abe, when people are
depressed, they're usually preoccupied with all their problems.
\[providing a rationale\] So it's important to focus on what's actually
going okay. I wonder if you can think over the past week and tell me
when you were at your best? ABE: (Thinks.) That would have been when I
took my grandson Ethan out for ice cream. JUDITH: So you were able to do
that? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: \[giving positive reinforcement\] That's great.
That was part of your Action Plan. ABE: Yeah. It was good. JUDITH:
\[becoming conversational to try to lighten his mood\] Did you get ice
cream? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH: And how about Ethan? Did he have a good time?
ABE: I think so. Next, I get Abe to focus on this experience and draw
positive conclusions about it and about himself. JUDITH: So, what was
good about taking him?

ABE: Well, just getting out and doing something was good. We were
outside for a while, but probably just being with him and hanging out
was the best part. JUDITH: \[asking more questions to help Abe to
reexperience the positive event\] What did you talk to him about? ABE:
Mostly about soccer because he's on a team. So, we talked about how he's
doing and how things are coming along for him. JUDITH: \[being
conversational, showing interest\] How is he doing? Is he a good player?
ABE: Well, according to him, he's doing pretty well. I haven't seen him
lately, so I don't know. I think so. JUDITH: \[trying to elicit a
positive core belief\] Abe, what does it say about you that you were
able to take him out for ice cream? You told me last week that it's
something you hadn't done in a long time. ABE: Seemed like something I
should have done a long time ago.

Reinforcing the Cognitive Model Like many clients, Abe expressed a
self-critical automatic thought. I take the opportunity to frame it
according to the cognitive model. JUDITH: I see. And I bet you wish you
had done it a long time ago. \[discovering whether Abe has put a
negative meaning on his avoidance\] Why do you think you haven't done it
for so long? ABE: I don't know. I keep thinking, "Everything is too
hard." JUDITH: When you have the thought "Everything is too hard," how
does that thought make you feel emotionally? \[providing a multiple
choice\] Happy, sad, anxious? ABE: Sad. Really sad. JUDITH: And what do
you usually end up doing? ABE: Just sitting on the couch. JUDITH: So,
did I get this right? It sounds as if this kind of thing has been
happening a lot. \[summarizing in the form of the cognitive model\] The
situation is that you're deciding whether or not to do something, like
taking your grandson out, and you have the thought "Everything is too
hard." This thought makes you feel bad and you end up usually sitting on
the couch.

ABE: That sounds right. I could then have helped Abe respond to his
automatic thought. Instead, to stay on track, I continue on with the
update. JUDITH: Well, maybe we'll come back to this thought in a little
while. To get back to the update, did anything else happen between last
session and this session that I should know? ABE: Nothing I can think
of. I didn't do much.

Action Plan Review If you and the client agreed on an Action Plan during
the evaluation, it's important to find out what the client did and to
what degree it was helpful. I start by reviewing the therapy notes we
had composed the week before. JUDITH: Can we look at your Action Plan
and see what else you were able to get done? Do you have it with you?
ABE: Yeah. JUDITH: Oh, good. Were you able to put it next to your coffee
maker and read it every morning and again later in the day? ABE: I read
it every morning, but I didn't read it much later on. JUDITH: Okay.
(Makes a mental note to discuss reading the new Action Plan twice later
in the session.) Could you read the therapy notes right now and tell me
what you think about them? ABE: "When I start to feel more depressed,
remind myself that the therapy plan makes sense." JUDITH: Okay, does it
still make sense to you? ABE: Yes, it still makes sense. JUDITH: What
else does the note say? ABE: "With Judy's help, I'll be working toward
goals every week step by step. I'll learn how to evaluate my thinking,
which may be 100% true or 0% true or somewhere in the middle." JUDITH:
What do you think about that? Because you're depressed, your thinking
might not always be completely true. ABE: Well, mostly up until now, my
thinking seems 100% true. JUDITH: (making a note) Let's get back to that
in a little while. What's next?

ABE: (reading) "And the way I'll get better is by making small changes
in my thinking and behavior every day." JUDITH: Exactly. Next, we review
the activities on the past week's Action Plan. JUDITH: Let's see what's
next. You were able to take Ethan out for ice cream. And how about the
third item? Do you want to read that? ABE: "Give myself credit for doing
all of the above, for doing anything else that helps me get over the
depression, and for doing anything that's even a little difficult, but I
do it anyway." JUDITH: So, were you able to give yourself credit for
taking Ethan to ice cream? ABE: Not very well, no. I should just do that
stuff \[automatic thought\]. JUDITH: Well, in a few minutes, we're going
to talk about your depression and how that's been getting in the way.
Were you able to give yourself credit for reading your therapy notes
every morning? ABE: I did, most of the time anyway. JUDITH: That's good.
Next, I summarize, to make the process of therapy more understandable
and to keep us on track. "Okay, we checked your mood, we set the agenda,
you gave me an update, and we reviewed the Action Plan. Next, I'd like
to talk about your diagnosis."

DIAGNOSIS AND PSYCHOEDUCATION ABOUT DEPRESSION Most clients want to know
their general diagnosis and to establish that you don't think they're
crazy or strange or abnormal. It's usually better to avoid the label of
a personality disorder (and sometimes a serious mental health condition)
at the first session and instead describe the difficulties the client
has experienced, for example: "It looks as if you have major depressive

disorder. It also seems that you've had some long-standing problems with
relationships and with work. Is that right?" It's desirable to let
clients know how you made the diagnosis and to give them some initial
psychoeducation about their condition. We want them to start attributing
some of their problems to their disorder instead of to their character.
Thoughts such as "There's something wrong with me"; "I'm lazy"; or "I'm
just no good" will negatively affect their mood---and probably their
behavior---and thus reduce their motivation. JUDITH: I'd like to talk
about your diagnosis. Abe, you have a real illness. It's called
depression. Now a lot of people go around saying "I'm depressed" from
time to time. But that's very different. When people say, "I'm
depressed," usually that's like having a common cold---but \[offering an
analogy\] what you have is like a really bad case of pneumonia. You see
how pneumonia and the common cold are very different? ABE: Yes. JUDITH:
You have a real illness that's called depression. I know that because I
have a book that helps me diagnose the problems people have when they
come to see me. It's abbreviated as the DSM. It lists the symptoms of
the real illness called depression. (pause) And I found from talking to
you last week that you really do have this. Next, I list the symptoms
he's been having that indicate he has the illness of depression. "Tell
me if I'm right. You're tired all of the time. You've felt very, very
depressed for a long time. You've lost interest in almost everything.
You rarely get a sense of pleasure. Your appetite has been off. You've
been sleeping much, much more. You have trouble concentrating and making
decisions, and sometimes you even think about death. (pause) These are
all symptoms of what's called a major depressive disorder. It's a real
illness." Having described his symptoms, I want to offer Abe hope.

JUDITH: Fortunately, research shows that there's a really good treatment
for it: cognitive behavior therapy. That's the kind of treatment that I
do. (pause) So, what do you think of this idea---that you do have a real
illness? ABE: I mean, what you said makes sense, and I do all that
stuff. It describes me. I don't know about the idea of illness. A lot of
this seems like I'm just not doing what I'm supposed to be doing.

Analogizing Depression and Pneumonia JUDITH: If you had a terrible case
of pneumonia, would you be able to do everything that you should be
doing? ABE: No. JUDITH: No, because you'd be very tired all of the time,
right? ABE: (Nods.) JUDITH: You might even have trouble concentrating if
your symptoms were really severe. Your depression is every bit as real
as pneumonia. And part of this real illness, Abe, is your depressed
thinking.

Psychoeducation about Depression and Negative Thinking Clients may start
to blame themselves for their symptoms. Here's what I say to Abe to head
that off. JUDITH: Now, it's not your fault that you have depressed
thinking. These thoughts just pop up automatically. In fact, we call
them "automatic thoughts." (pause) And depressed automatic thoughts are
a symptom of depression, just like tiredness and sleeping too much and
having a depressed mood are symptoms. (pause) Okay? ABE: Yes. JUDITH:
Abe, when people are depressed, \[offering a metaphor\] it's as if
they're wearing the blackest glasses imaginable. And they see all of
their experience as coming through these black glasses. So, everything
looks very dark and very negative. (pause) What do you think about that?
ABE: I guess that could be right.

Additional Psychoeducation about the Treatment Plan and Depressed
Thinking Next, to inspire hope, I preview how we're going to deal with
his depressed thoughts. JUDITH: Because you're depressed, we know for
sure that some of your automatic thoughts just aren't 100% true. Others
may be true, but they're really unhelpful. I'm going to teach you how to
evaluate your thoughts, so you can see for yourself how accurate or
helpful they are. Okay? ABE: Okay. JUDITH: I also want to give you
another analogy. When people are depressed ... well, it's like horses in
races that wear blinders. Why do they have them? ABE: So they don't get
distracted. To keep them looking only straight ahead. JUDITH: Exactly.
And when people are depressed, it's as if they have blinders too. All
they can see is what's immediately ahead of them. And all of those
things, because they have black glasses on, seem really terrible and
really negative. One of the things that we'll do, Abe, is to open up
those blinders so you can see everything that's going on, not just the
negative. ABE: Okay. JUDITH: Do you think it would be helpful to
remember that this week? ABE: Yeah, probably. Next, we collaboratively
create a therapy note for Abe to read daily between sessions. JUDITH: Do
you want to write this down, or do you want me to write it down? ABE:
You can. JUDITH: Okay. Maybe we should start this out, "When I criticize
myself, remember ..." And what do you think would be good to remember?
Asking Abe to summarize in his own words allows me to check on his level
of understanding, makes him more active in the session, and reinforces
the

adaptive response in his mind. ABE: I'm only looking at part of the
scene. JUDITH: Yes, "I'm only looking at part," and what part are you
looking at? ABE: The part through my black glasses. JUDITH: Yes. "I'm
only looking at part of the scene, and it's through black glasses." To
make the response more robust, I offer two other ideas. JUDITH: And how
about "It's not my fault I'm doing this"? ABE: (Sighs.) JUDITH: Doesn't
sound like you really believe that? ABE: Not too much. I don't want to
write down anything Abe disagrees with, so I modify the idea. JUDITH:
How about "Judy says it's not my fault"? ABE: Okay. JUDITH: Is that all
right? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH: "Judy says it's not my fault." And why do I
say you're doing this? ABE: Because I have depression. JUDITH: Right.
"It's happening because I have depression." (pause) Do you think that
this is something that you could read to yourself this week? ABE: Yeah,
yeah. I can do that.

Psychoeducation about the Cognitive Model In the next part of the
session, I explain, illustrate, and record the cognitive model with
Abe's own examples. I also ask Abe to put what I had said in his own
words so I could check on his understanding. JUDITH: The next thing I'd
like to do is to talk just a little bit more about your depressed
thinking. Here's the situation that just happened a few minutes ago. We
were talking about why you hadn't taken Ethan for ice

cream for a long time. That was the situation, and do you remember what
you were thinking? What your thought was? ABE: I'm not sure. JUDITH: You
said, "Everything is too hard." ABE: Oh. JUDITH: Right? And so, when you
had that thought, "Everything is too hard," how did it make you feel?
ABE: Really depressed. JUDITH: And what did you usually end up doing?
ABE: Just sitting on the couch. JUDITH: Let me draw a diagram that shows
this.

Now if you'd had another thought, I wonder if you would have felt
differently. For example, if you had thought "Well, everything seems too
hard, but because I'm depressed that might not be true. Therapy makes
sense. Judy says that she can help me, and I already did something good
by taking Ethan out for ice cream." If you had had those thoughts, how
do you think you would have felt? ABE: Better. JUDITH: Exactly.
(Pointing to the cognitive model diagram.) It's not the situation
directly that makes you feel tired or bad or depressed. It's what you're
thinking in that situation. So, if you have the thought "Everything is
too hard," of course you're going to feel depressed and sit on the
couch. If you have a thought like "Well, therapy makes sense. Judy says
she can help me," then you might feel a little bit better and you might
be a little more likely to do something.

ABE: I can see that. JUDITH: One of the things that's going to be really
important in this treatment is to have you learn to identify your
automatic thoughts. This is just a skill, like learning to ride a bike.
I'm going to teach you how to do it. And then we're going to figure out
whether a thought is 100% true or 0% true or someplace in the middle.
(pause) So, I wonder, before you took Ethan out for ice cream, were you
thinking that it would be a very hard thing to do? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH:
And then how did it turn out? ABE: Pretty good. JUDITH: Was it as hard
as you expected? ABE: No. JUDITH: So, that's a really good example of
how you could have an automatic thought like "This is too hard" or "It's
going to be very hard to take him out," but it might turn out not to be
true, or not 100% true. Is that right? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: So, I wonder,
could you tell me in your own words then what we've just been talking
about here? ABE: Well, I guess you're saying that I have all these
negative thoughts because I'm depressed. JUDITH: Right. And what effect
do these thoughts have on you? ABE: They make me feel bad and then I
might just sit on the couch. JUDITH: Oh, well, that's excellent. You're
right. Your thinking affects how you feel and then what you do. In fact,
if you had thought "It's too hard to take Ethan out" instead of just
"It's very hard," what do you think would have happened? ABE: I don't
know. I might not even have called him. See Chapter 12 (pp. 222--225) to
find out what to do when clients have difficulty identifying automatic
thoughts. But be careful to downplay the importance of identifying
automatic thoughts when they struggle. You don't want clients to think
they're incompetent. CLINICAL TIPS If you have difficulty identifying
one of your client's automatic thoughts, you can provide an example:

THERAPIST: I'd like to talk for a couple of minutes about how your
thinking affects how you feel and what you do. CLIENT: Okay. THERAPIST:
What would you think if you texted your best friend 8 hours ago and he
didn't text you back? CLIENT: That maybe there's something wrong.
THERAPIST: How would that thought make you feel? CLIENT: Worried, I
guess. THERAPIST: And what would you do? CLIENT: Probably text again,
and if I still didn't hear anything, I'd probably call. THERAPIST: Okay,
that's a good example of how your thinking influences how you feel and
what you do. Then, if you want to reinforce the cognitive model, you can
provide a different automatic thought, using the same situation. For
example, ask what the client would feel and do if she had the thought
"He's always doing this to me. He's so rude." Next, ask her to summarize
what she's just learned. CLINICAL TIPS When clients' cognitive abilities
are impaired or limited, you can use more concrete learning aids such as
cartoon figures with various expressions to illustrate emotions with
empty "thought bubbles" above their heads.

Setting an Action Plan Item to Reinforce the Cognitive Model Next, I
suggest that Abe look for depressed automatic thoughts during the week.
I ask him to anticipate an automatic thought and remind himself that it
might or might not be true. JUDITH: Here's something I'd like you to do
this week. Notice when your mood is getting worse or when you're not
being productive. Then ask yourself, "What was just going through my
mind?" ABE: Okay. JUDITH: I wonder if you could predict what one of
these thoughts might be? ABE: It could be almost anything. I could be
sitting on the couch, and I could think about doing anything, cleaning
the apartment ... JUDITH: That's good. So, let's say you're thinking of
cleaning the apartment. How do you think you'll be feeling? ABE:
Probably tired. I'll probably think, "I'm too tired to do anything."

JUDITH: That's a good example. So, the situation is that you're sitting
on the couch, thinking of cleaning, and you think, "I'm too tired to do
anything." How does this thought make you feel emotionally? ABE:
Depressed. JUDITH: And if you believe this thought, that you're too
tired to do anything, what do you think you'll do? ABE: Probably just
keep sitting. JUDITH: I think you're probably right. (pause) Okay, this
week, I'd like you to notice when you're feeling really depressed or not
being productive. Then I'd like you to ask yourself, "What was just
going through my mind?" (pause) Then I'd like you to jot down your
thoughts. But then remind yourself that they might not be true, or at
least not completely true. Okay? ABE: I'll try. JUDITH: You can write
your automatic thoughts on this Identifying Automatic Thoughts Worksheet
(pulls out worksheet in Figure 6.2) or you can use paper or a notebook
or your phone. Which would be best? ABE: I'll try the worksheet.
Remember: Just because I think something doesn't necessarily mean it's
true. When I change my unhelpful or inaccurate thoughts, I'll likely
feel better. Instructions: When my mood gets worse or I'm engaging in
unhelpful behavior, ask myself, "What was just going through my mind?"
Write down my thoughts below.

FIGURE 6.2. Identifying Automatic Thoughts Worksheet. Copyright © 2018
CBT Worksheet Packet. Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

JUDITH: Good. (Hands Abe the worksheet.) You see it has the directions
right at the top, the ones I just showed you. ABE: Okay.

JUDITH: (Making sure Abe knows what to do.) Could you write your
automatic thought on it---"I'm too tired to do anything"? ABE: Okay.
(Writes this thought on the worksheet.) JUDITH: I wonder if you'll need
a reminder? Like a sticky note, or you could move your watch to your
other hand or wear a rubber band around your wrist---to remind yourself
to look for your automatic thoughts. ABE: I think I need to see
something, some kind of reminder that I can see. A rubber band would be
good. JUDITH: I have one here. Do you want to put it around your wrist
now? ABE: Okay. JUDITH: (Hands Abe a rubber band; he puts it on his
wrist.) So, every time you look at the rubber band, what are you going
to ask yourself? ABE: What just went through my mind? JUDITH: That's
right, especially if your mood is getting worse, or you're doing
something that's not productive. And you'll remind yourself that the
thoughts might not be true. ABE: Okay.

IDENTIFYING VALUES AND ASPIRATIONS Eliciting Values Next, you focus on
identifying clients' values. Values are long-standing beliefs about what
is most important in life. People's values shape their choices and
behavior. But when they perceive they're not living up to their values,
they often become distressed. In a conversational tone, you can ask
clients, "What's really important to you in life? Or what used to be
really important to you?" CLINICAL TIPS If clients reply that nothing
seems important or if they have difficulty formulating a response, you
can offer suggestions: "How important is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ to you?"
You can ask them to consider areas such as the following: relationships
(family, friends, intimate partner), productivity (work outside the
home, managing at home), health (might also include fitness, eating,
sleep, use of alcohol or substances),

self-improvement (education, skills, culture, appearance, self-control),
community (locally or more broadly), spirituality, recreation
(entertainment, hobbies, sports), creativity, nature, and relaxation.

Having clients reflect on what's really important to them aids in
identifying their aspirations and setting goals. These interventions can
inspire hope, motivate clients to engage in treatment and complete
Action Plans, and help them overcome obstacles and problems they face
day to day. JUDITH: Abe, I wonder if we could turn to something else,
and that is to talk about what's really important to you in life. What
are the most important things to you in life? Or maybe before you got
depressed, what was really, really important to you? ABE: My kids.
JUDITH: Yes. ABE: Grandkids too. JUDITH: Your grandkids, okay. What else
was really important? ABE: Well, it was always important to me to work
and be productive, but I screwed that up. I had already reviewed the
cognitive model with Abe, and I decide it would be better to let that
automatic thought go unaddressed so we can continue identifying values.
JUDITH: What else has been important to you? ABE: Friends. Sports, I
guess. I've always liked sports. JUDITH: Oh, that's good. Playing or
watching or both? ABE: Both. JUDITH: Anything else that's been really
important to you? ABE: I don't know. I used to go to church, and I used
to do things. I used to volunteer, help people. I liked helping people.
JUDITH: Anything else? How about your health? ABE: Yeah. I used to eat
healthy, exercise---things like that.

Eliciting Aspirations To elicit clients' aspirations, ask one or more
questions such as the following (Beck et al., in press): "What do you
want for your life?" "What are your hopes for the future?" "What do you
want your future to look like?" "When you were growing up, what did you
want your life to be like? What did you hope for?"

It's fairly easy to elicit Abe's aspirations. JUDITH: I know you've been
very depressed for quite a while and you're unhappy with your life.
(pause) What do you want for your life? ABE: I want it to be like it was
before I got depressed. JUDITH: And what was that? ABE: I want to have a
job. I want to have better relationships with my family. And with my
friends. (Thinks.) I want to take care of myself better. And my
apartment. JUDITH: Anything else? ABE: (Thinks.) I want to feel good
about myself. I want to feel useful, helpful.

Drawing Conclusions about Aspirations It's not clients' aspirations and
experiences alone that are important. It's the meaning that clients put
to them. Help clients draw conclusions about having achieved their goals
and aspirations, especially in terms of improving their life,
self-image, sense of purpose and control, and connectedness to others.
Ask questions such as these (Beck et al., in press): "What would be
especially good about \[achieving your aspirations and goals\]?" "How
would you feel about yourself? What would it say about you? How might
other people view you or how might they treat you differently?" "What
would it suggest about your future?" "How would you feel \[emotionally\]
if all this came true? Can you get that feeling right now?"

I use these questions with Abe. JUDITH: Abe, if you had a good job, good
relationships with your family and your friends, if you were taking
better care of yourself and your apartment, if you were helping other
people, what would be good about that? ABE: I'd feel good about myself.
I'd be productive. JUDITH: And what would that show about you as a
person? ABE: I guess it would show I'm a good person, I'm responsible.
JUDITH: Would it show that you were a good worker, a good father, a good
grandfather, a good friend? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: And how would other people
view you? ABE: I would hope the way they did before. That I'm reliable,
I'm hardworking, friendly. JUDITH: And if all these things happen, what
do you think your future would be like? ABE: Pretty good, I think.
JUDITH: And how would you feel about yourself? ABE: Much better.

Creating an Image of Having Achieved the Aspirations Using imagery can
make aspirations more concrete and lead to clients' experiencing
positive emotion in the session. JUDITH: Abe, I wonder if you could
imagine a day in the future when you've completely recovered from
depression, when all these good things have come true? Let's say it's a
year from now. Where do you think you'll wake up? ABE: If I was working
and had more money, maybe in a different apartment. JUDITH: Can you
imagine opening your eyes? What does the room look like? ABE: Umm, a
year from now? My bedroom would be bigger. There would be a lot of light
in the room. It'd be neat, well organized. JUDITH: And how are you
feeling as you wake up? ABE: Pretty good.

JUDITH: Looking forward to the day? ABE: If I had a good job? Then yes.
JUDITH: Can you see yourself getting out of bed? What are you thinking?
ABE: Probably just about what I'm going to do that day. JUDITH: And how
are you feeling? ABE: Pretty good. JUDITH: What do you think you'd do
next? I continue to coach Abe in imagining this future day, in detail.
As he speaks, I see his affect start to brighten a little.

SETTING GOALS (PART 1) Having identified clients' values and
aspirations, you collaboratively set goals and record them. These goals
are more specific than the broad ones you discussed during the
evaluation session. Clients with depression benefit from identifying
goals in a variety of areas (Ritschel & Sheppard, 2018). You might
suggest that they think about goals related to the same areas that were
outlined on pages 104--105. Below, Abe and I set some goals. Then we
address an automatic thought that gets in the way, before returning to
goal setting. JUDITH: Abe, could we talk about some specific goals you
might have? How would you like your life to be different? How would you
like to be different? ABE: I'd like to be the way I used to be, doing
all that stuff \[we just talked about\]. JUDITH: So, you'd like to spend
more time your kids and your grandkids? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: (writing it
down) That's a good goal. What else? ABE: Well, get a good job. But I
don't know how I'm going to be able to do these things. I haven't been
able to, up to this point.

Addressing Automatic Thoughts That Interfere with Goal Setting I
conceptualized that rather than continuing to set goals, it would be
important to respond to Abe's automatic thoughts. I use our discussion
to reinforce that his thinking may be biased and inaccurate, we will
work together as a team, I have good reason to expect treatment to help,
and coming to treatment is a sign of strength.

I also ask Abe to commit to making a change in the coming week, even if
he has interfering thoughts.

JUDITH: Yes, your depression has made it hard for you to do these
things. So, what's different now? ABE: I don't know. JUDITH: Hey, Abe,
I'm here. Do you have a sense that I can help? ABE: I think maybe you
could. JUDITH: \[trying to build hope\] Abe, I have to tell you there's
nothing about you that makes me think that you're not going to get over
this depression. I really think you are. Should I tell you why I think
that? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: Okay. So, the first thing is that you were
willing to come for an evaluation last week, even though you were
skeptical about treatment. But you did a good job on the evaluation. You
were able to answer all my questions. We were able to make an Action
Plan, especially taking your grandson for ice cream. You were able to do
that, even though you thought it would be very hard. So I see that
you're willing to try this treatment. And it's fine if you're still
skeptical about treatment. (pause) You'll need to see for yourself that
it's working. Okay? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: And you're not in this alone.
We'll be working as a team to get you better. We'll work on the goals,
step by step, so it won't feel overwhelming. And there are skills you
need to learn, like answering back your automatic thoughts. You don't
know how to do these things yet---I'll need to teach them to you. ABE:
But I've always thought I should solve my problems myself. JUDITH: Okay.
Back to the pneumonia analogy. If you had bacterial pneumonia, would you
try to cure yourself? ABE: No. I'd have to go to the doctor. JUDITH: And
the doctor would help you. (pause) I will too. But instead of giving you
medication, I'll be teaching you skills to get over your depression.
Skills that research shows get people better. (pause) Okay? ABE: I guess
so. JUDITH: You know, I think it's a sign of strength that you're
willing to do something that goes against your grain. ABE: Maybe I am
seeing everything through black glasses. JUDITH: Yes, I think you are.
And what we have to do together---note I said "together"---is to scratch
off the black paint so you can get over your depression. (pause) Should
we get back to setting goals?

ABE: Okay.

SETTING GOALS (PART 2) Having responded to Abe's dysfunctional thinking,
we return to goal setting. I make sure to avoid overwhelming Abe with
too many goals, and I limit our discussion so we'll have time to get to
activity scheduling. JUDITH: Okay. Do you have other goals? ABE: I
should see my friends more. But they might be annoyed with me, so I
don't know if that'll work \[automatic thought\]. I haven't been in
contact with them for a while. I conceptualize that it's more important
to keep setting goals than to respond to this automatic thought. JUDITH:
Should we put that down with a question mark? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: Anything
else? ABE: Well, it would be good to clean the apartment. JUDITH: And
how about your physical health? ABE: Yeah. It would be good to start
eating better and exercising. JUDITH: I think this is a really good
list. I've written your goals here on the bottom of your Action Plan.
Would you be willing to take a look at this list during the week to see
whether there are any goals that you want to cross off or add or change?
I'm thinking you might want to have a goal of having more fun, doing
more pleasurable things, but it's up to you.

Goal List Get a good job See friends more? Clean the apartment Eat
better Exercise

May 13

Difficulties in Setting Goals There are three difficulties that
sometimes arise when you're trying to set goals: 1. Clients have
difficulty coming up with goals. 2. Clients set goals that are too
broad. 3. Clients set goals for other people.

When clients say, "I don't know" to your goal setting questions, you can
try a "miracle" question instead. Solution-focused brief therapy (de
Shazer, 1988) suggests you ask a question such as the following: "If a
miracle happened and you weren't depressed when you woke up tomorrow,
what would be different? How would someone know you weren't depressed?"
Or you can find out whether clients believe there are disadvantages to
setting goals. Sometimes clients express goals that are too broad (e.g.,
"I don't want to be depressed anymore" or "I want to be happier" or "I
just want everything to be better"). To help them become more specific,
you can ask, "If \[you weren't depressed anymore/if you were happier/if
everything was better\], what would you be doing differently?"
Occasionally clients state a goal over which they don't have direct
control: "I'd like my partner to be nicer to me"; "I want my boss to
stop putting so much pressure on me"; "I want my kids to listen to me."
In this case, it's important to help them phrase the goal so it's
something they do have control over. "I don't want to promise you that
we can directly get your sister to be nicer to you. What do you think of
phrasing it this way: 'Learn new ways of talking to Erica.' It's
possible that if you take control and change what you're doing, it will
have some impact on her." For a broader discussion of what to do when
clients set goals for others, see J. S. Beck (2005).

CLINICAL TIPS Add new goals to the list as they come up in later
sessions. Note that goals are the flip side of problems. For example, if
the client says, "I don't know what to do about my teenager," you can
say, "Do you want to have a goal to decide what to do?" If the client
says, "It's so hard to get everything done," you can say, "Do you want
to have a goal to figure out if you can do something to make it easier?"

SCHEDULING ACTIVITIES If there's time in this first session, it's a good
idea to help most depressed clients schedule activities for the coming
week and give themselves credit for engaging in these activities.
Alternatively, if there's a pressing problem that needs immediate
attention, you can work on that. Because Abe has been so inactive, and
because he hadn't brought up a more pressing problem, I bring up
scheduling activities for the coming week. You'll read about what we did
in the next chapter.

END-OF-SESSION SUMMARY The final summary ties together the threads of
the session and reinforces important points. Initially, you'll probably
summarize. When you think clients are capable of providing a good
summary, you'll ask them to do it. At the end of the first session, you
might say something like this: "I'd like to summarize what we went over
about today, so it's clear to both of us. We talked about your diagnosis
and how your thoughts influence how you feel and what you do. We
identified what's really important to you and what you want for your
life. Then we set goals and figured out some activities for you to do
this week." The summary also includes a review of what clients have
agreed to do for their Action Plan and an assessment of how likely they
are to complete it. You'll read about this in Chapter 8 (pp. 135--159).
Figure 6.3 presents Abe's first-session Action Plan. Make sure to give
clients the written Action Plan and any other worksheets or notes that
they'll need.

FIGURE 6.3. Abe's Session 1 Action Plan.

FEEDBACK The final element of the first session is feedback. By the end
of this session, most clients feel positive about the therapist and the
therapy. Eliciting feedback further strengthens rapport, providing the
message that you care

about what the client thinks. It also gives clients a chance to express,
and you to resolve, any misunderstandings. Clients may occasionally make
an idiosyncratic (negative) interpretation of something you said or did.
Asking them whether there was anything that bothered them gives them the
opportunity to state and then test their conclusions. In addition to
verbal feedback, it's a good idea to ask clients to complete a written
Feedback Form (Figure 6.4). Name
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Date
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ What do you want to
remember from the therapy session today?

Was there anything that bothered you about the therapist or about
therapy? If so, what was it?

How likely are you to do the new Action Plan? How is it related to your
aspirations and values? If you do it, what will that show you
(especially about yourself)?

What do you want to make sure to cover next session?

FIGURE 6.4. Feedback Form. Copyright © 2018 CBT Worksheet Packet. Beck
Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

JUDITH: Abe, can you give me some feedback about this session,
\[providing rationale\] so I can make changes for our next session if I
need to? (pause) What did you think of it? Was there anything that
bothered you or anything you thought I didn't understand? ABE: No, it
was good. JUDITH: Is there anything you think we should do differently
next time?

ABE: No, I don't think so. JUDITH: If you did have any negative
feedback, do you think you could tell me? ABE: I think so. JUDITH: If
you do, the first thing I'll say is "It's good you told me that." If
there's something I'm doing that's not right, I want to know, so I can
fix it. In fact, you'll have another chance to tell me. Can I give you
this Feedback Form to fill out in the reception area? You can give it to
\[the receptionist\], and he'll give it to me. It will help you think
about the session and whether there's anything I should know. ABE: Okay.
JUDITH: That's good. Well, I'm so glad that you came in today. Is this
time good for you next week? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: I'll see you then.
REFLECTION QUESTION Why is it important to help clients identify their
values, aspirations, and goals?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Ask yourself the relevant questions in this chapter to
identify your own values and aspirations. Then identify at least one
goal and write down one or two steps you can take this week toward
achieving it.

7

ACTIVITY SCHEDULING

of the most important initial steps for depressed clients is scheduling
Oneactivities (Cuijpers et al., 2007). Most have withdrawn from and are
actively avoiding at least some activities that had previously given
them a sense of achievement, control, pleasure, or connection---and that
lifted their mood. Many stop following their daily routine and do less
self-care. Like Abe, they eat less well, exercise less often (if at
all), and sleep too much or too little. They frequently increase certain
behaviors such as staying in bed, watching television, playing video
games, looking at social media, or surfing the internet. This change in
activities helps maintain or increase their current dysphoria and the
sense that they're at least somewhat out of control. We get across the
following messages: "It's important to act according to your values,
what's really important to you, instead of what you feel like
doing---because depression makes you tired and then you'll feel like
avoiding. But avoidance just makes depression worse. Don't wait until
you feel energetic or motivated to start an activity or task. Do it
first. You'll probably find that you get more energized and motivated
some time after you start. "As you're engaged in an activity, watch out
for negative thoughts that can decrease your sense of competence,
purpose, and connection to others. Because you're depressed, at least
some of these thoughts are likely to be inaccurate, or at least
partially inaccurate. When you're finished the task or activity, make
sure to give yourself credit---you can just say something like 'good.'
Recognize that pushing yourself to

do something means you're taking control, even if in a small way, of
your depression." Clients often believe they can't change how they feel
emotionally. Helping them become more active and giving themselves
credit for their efforts are essential parts of treatment. Doing so
improves their mood and strengthens their sense of self-efficacy---they
demonstrate to themselves that they can take more control of their mood
and behavior than they had previously believed. We usually start
collaboratively scheduling activities in the first or second therapy
session. In this chapter, you'll find answers to these questions: How do
you conceptualize inactivity? How do you conceptualize lack of mastery
and pleasure? How do you schedule activities with clients? How do you
use an Activity Chart? How do you help clients track and rate their
activities? What types of activities should depressed clients engage in?
How do you use an Activity Chart to assess predictions?

CONCEPTUALIZATION OF INACTIVITY When considering engaging in activities,
clients' depressed automatic thoughts frequently get in the way.

Clients' relative inactivity then contributes to their low mood, as they
have a paucity of opportunities to gain a sense of mastery, pleasure, or
connection, which leads to more negative thinking, which leads to
increased dysphoria and inactivity, in a vicious cycle.

On the other hand, becoming more active and recognizing that they
deserve credit usually lifts their mood and makes it easier to continue
being more active.

If you think it would be helpful, you can draw these diagrams for
clients and add them to their Action Plans to review at home.

CONCEPTUALIZATION OF LACK OF MASTERY OR PLEASURE Even when clients do
engage in various activities, they often derive low levels of
satisfaction and pleasure because of their self-critical automatic
thoughts.

Clients may also have similar negative thoughts after engaging in an
activity ("I should have done that better"; "Doing that was just a drop
in the bucket"). When scheduling activities, therefore, it's important
to anticipate automatic thoughts that could interfere with clients'
initiation or continuation of activities and thoughts that could
diminish their sense of pleasure, achievement, or connection during or
after the activity.

SCHEDULING ACTIVITIES

Most clients who are depressed have changed their daily or weekly
activities to some degree. It's important to help them reengage more
fully in life. Some therapists ask depressed clients to fill out an
Activity Chart (Figure 7.1) early in treatment, noting the activities
they do each hour and, if they're willing, rating their sense of mastery
and pleasure.

Activity Chart, Side One Name: Eric L.

Date: October 24

Aspirations, values, or goals: Be a better father, husband. Work in the
music business. Take better care of my physical and mental health. Find
a spiritual home. Get involved in the community. See reverse side for
optional rating scales. MON. 6:00--7:00 Sleep A.M. 7:00--8:00 A.M.
8:00--9:00 A.M. Morning 9:00--10:00 Doze off and on---2 A.M.
10:00--11:00 Get up/shower/dress---3 A.M. 11:00 A.M.-- Breakfast,
kitchen 12:00 P.M. cleanup (10 min)---3 12:00--1:00 TV/computer/video
P.M. games---2 1:00--2:00 TV/computer/video Afternoon P.M. games---2
2:00--3:00 Nap---2 P.M. 3:00--4:00 Lunch, kitchen cleanup P.M. (10
min)---3 4:00--5:00 Call Natasha---6 Laundry P.M. (10 min)---4
5:00--6:00 Errands or take a walk--- P.M. 5 6:00--7:00 TV/computer/video
Evening P.M. games---2 Laundry (10 mins)---3

TUE. WED. THU. FRI. SAT. SUN.

MON.

TUE. WED. THU. FRI. SAT. SUN.

7:00--8:00 Dinner, kitchen cleanup P.M. (10 min)---3 8:00--9:00 Walk
around mall---4 P.M. 9:00--10:00 TV/computer/video P.M. games---2
10:00--11:00 TV/computer/video P.M. games---2 11:00 P.M.-- Get in bed,
try to sleep--- 12:00 A.M. 2 12:00--1:00 Sleep A.M. FIGURE 7.1.
Partially completed Activity Chart, side 1: Tracking and rating
activities. Overall mood ratings on a 0--10 scale.

Then they use the information to guide clients in scheduling activities.
But not all clients are willing to fill out the chart. And I prefer to
have them schedule activities even at the evaluation. That's why I ask
them to describe their activities on a typical day, which gives me
enough information to discover which kinds of activities they have been
avoiding. Ideally, you'd have enough time in the evaluation and first
session to elicit potential activities from clients. If there's not
enough time, you can suggest activities that are in line with your
client's aspirations and values. In subsequent sessions, you might do a
combination of suggesting and eliciting ideas. Here's what I discuss
with Abe in our first therapy session. JUDITH: \[being collaborative\]
Could we talk about how you've been spending your time? Are you still
sitting on the couch, watching TV, or using your computer a lot? ABE:
Yeah, too much. JUDITH: \[collecting data to motivate Abe\] What's your
mood usually like after you've done that for a couple of hours? ABE:
(Thinks.) Pretty bad, I guess. I always feel like I should have been
doing something more productive. JUDITH: Can we talk about some other
things you might be able to do this week? I think it'll be an important
step in taking control. ABE: Okay. JUDITH: \[providing the rationale\]
First, you should know that research shows that if you want to get over
depression, you need to become more

active. We don't have a lot of time today, but I wonder if you could
think of some things you could do this week. ABE: I'm not sure.
\[expressing an automatic thought that could be an obstacle\] I'm pretty
tired most of the time. JUDITH: Would you be willing to try some things
as an experiment? To see whether you're actually too tired? ABE: Yeah.
JUDITH: For example, what would you think of trying to get out of your
apartment, even if just for a few minutes, most days this week? ABE: I
guess I could do that. JUDITH: You could take a 5-minute walk. Or you
could go someplace in the car. ABE: Okay. JUDITH: \[making the step more
specific\] Where could you go? ABE: (Thinks, sighs.) Well, I have to go
to the grocery store today. JUDITH: That's good. How about the other
days? ABE: I suppose I could go to the hardware store. I have to get
some light bulbs. JUDITH: That sounds good. Could you go to other places
even if you don't need anything? The important thing is to demonstrate
to yourself that you can start to take more control of your life, that
even though you're tired, you can start reengaging with the world. ABE:
Yeah. I understand. Next, I want to make sure that Abe is prepared for
the possibility that getting out doesn't make him feel better. I also
reinforce the cognitive model. JUDITH: Now, I don't know whether getting
out will affect your mood or not. It will depend on what you're
thinking. If you think, "What's the point of doing this?" or "This is
just a drop in the bucket," how do you think you'll feel? ABE:
Depressed. JUDITH: I think you're right. And if you think, "Hey, this is
really good. Even though I'm tired, I'm taking control. It's a really
important step," then how do you think you'd feel? ABE: Better.

JUDITH: Okay. But I don't want to promise you that getting out will
definitely improve your mood. Some people do feel better right away. But
for others, it's like a jack-in-the-box; you know, that toy that you
wind up (motions with a circular hand movement) and the clown pops out?
ABE: Yeah. My kids had one. JUDITH: Some people can crank the level only
once and the clown pops out ---they feel better. Other people need to
crank it around and around and around. It can take weeks for the clown
to pop out and for them to feel better. But you have to start someplace.
ABE: Should I get out of the apartment every day? I don't want to set an
Action Plan item that Abe might have difficulty with (and then blame
himself), so I propose a range. JUDITH: Maybe we should say four times
this week? So, four times is great, and if you do more than that, so
much the better. ABE: Okay. JUDITH: Should I write this down, or do you
want to? ABE: You can. JUDITH: (Writes it down on Abe's Action Plan.)
Next, I elicit the rationale from Abe and help him respond to automatic
thoughts that could pose an obstacle to taking these steps by tying
these activities to his aspirations and values. JUDITH: Now let's write
down why it would be good to do this. ABE: You said it's a first step,
to take control. JUDITH: Exactly. (Writes that down; then looks for
potential obstacles.) Now, what could get in the way? ABE: (Sighs.) If
I'm too tired. JUDITH: You might be really tired. What would you like to
say to yourself if you're feeling really tired? \[I ask this question
because I sense that Abe would have a good response. With other clients,
Socratic questioning might have been important.\] ABE: I guess, "Go
anyway"? JUDITH: Good. Go anyway because ... ABE: Because I need to get
back in the world.

JUDITH: How important is it to you to get back in the world? ABE: Very
important. JUDITH: \[eliciting his values and aspirations\] Why is it
important? ABE: So I can get back to work. So I'll feel useful. So I can
be productive. JUDITH: Anything else? ABE: Yeah, so I can be a better
father and grandfather. JUDITH: Should we write something down about
this too? "If I'm feeling really tired and feel like staying on the
couch instead of going out---or, I suppose, doing something
else---remind myself ... ABE: I have to get back in the world. It's
important to go. Not going will probably keep me depressed. JUDITH: And
you want to get back in the world so you can ... ABE: Be productive, be
better to my family. JUDITH: When you're back in the world, will you
feel more useful and competent? In control? Have a sense of purpose?
ABE: Yeah, all those things. JUDITH: That's good. Let me get that down
on your Action Plan. (pause) And should we add that going out may or may
not affect your mood right away? And if it doesn't, it just means you
need to crank up the jack-in-the-box? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH: (Writes it
down.) Now how likely are you to get out of your apartment---even if
it's just for a 5-minute walk or a fast trip to a store ---at least four
times this week? ABE: I'll definitely do that. JUDITH: Okay! Now, if you
find you just can't, that's all right. It just means we probably need to
start with something easier. But do try to keep track of the thoughts
that get in the way. ABE: Okay. JUDITH: I'll add that to the Action Plan
too. (Does so.) CLINICAL TIPS If the discussion above isn't persuasive,
you can try the following, as I did with Maria.

When Clients Resist Scheduling Activities

When I tried to schedule activities with Maria in the first session, she
didn't want to commit to anything specific. I thought pressing the point
would impair the therapeutic relationship, so we agreed that she would
try to become more active in general. During our review of the Action
Plan in the following session, it turns out that Maria hasn't been able
to be more active, so we add that goal to the agenda. I start off by
reminding her of the rationale for activity scheduling. JUDITH: Is it
okay if we talk about scheduling some activities this week? MARIA: Okay.
JUDITH: Do you remember what we said last week about why that's
important? MARIA: Not entirely. JUDITH: First, research show that an
essential part of getting over depression is becoming more active.
Second, it doesn't sound as if there's much you're currently able to do
that brings you much pleasure or helps you feel competent and effective
and in control. Is that right? MARIA: I guess not. JUDITH: You know,
most people who are depressed think they'll feel better if they stay in
bed. Can I ask you this? Haven't you already done the experiment of
staying in bed, actually for months and months? Has it helped you
recover from your depression? \[referring to Maria's aspirations\] Has
it helped you get to where you want to be in life--- having more
friends, working and earning money, having a better apartment, finding a
romantic relationship ...? MARIA: No, it hasn't. JUDITH: And if you keep
staying in bed, do you think it will suddenly work? MARIA: I suppose
not. JUDITH: Would you like to try a different experiment this week?
MARIA: (Sighs.) I guess so. JUDITH: We could talk about activities you
feel you could do that would be either meaningful or easy. Which do you
think would be better? MARIA: Maybe both? JUDITH: Good idea. Okay, here
are some categories: self-care, like showering, getting dressed, eating
well, and getting exercise. Another category is connecting with people.
A third category is managing better at home. A fourth category is
recreation or entertainment. So that's self-

care, connecting with people, managing better, and
recreation/entertainment. (pause) Which category do you think would be
easy and also meaningful? MARIA: I don't see how scheduling activities
will help. (a little angrily) My whole life is a disaster. JUDITH: It's
good you told me that. I probably should have explained some more.
You're absolutely right. You have big problems that you need help in
solving. But here's what I've found. When people are as depressed as you
are, trying to solve really big problems becomes overwhelming. That's
why it's better to start with small things and build up your confidence
by showing you that you can take control of parts of your life and that
you can be effective. That's why the small steps are important. MARIA:
(Sighs.) Oh. Next, I remind Maria about her aspirations and how
achieving those aspirations would make her feel good and change her view
of herself and how others viewed her. We also make a chart showing her
how her actions could make her mood better or worse: Things that make me
feel better

Things that make me feel worse

Meeting up with friends Looking for things to do with friends (concerts,
etc.) Baking Looking at photographs Working on my scrapbook Having a
clean apartment Calling Hillary Doing a crafts project Planning a trip

Staying in bed Taking long naps Watching too much TV Sitting around (not
being productive) Staying on phone with Mom when she's mad Dwelling on
the past Drinking too much Listening to sad songs

Then she is more motivated to continue with activity scheduling. JUDITH:
Can I review the four categories again? Self-care, connecting with
others, managing at home, and fun. Do you want to pick a category?
MARIA: Managing better at home, I guess. JUDITH: Good. What are three
things you could do this week that would be meaningful and relatively
easy?

MARIA: I'm not sure. I don't know if I have the energy to do any more
than I'm already doing. JUDITH: Would you be willing to try some things
as an experiment? To see whether you might possibly have more energy
than you predict? MARIA: Yeah, I guess so. JUDITH: Okay, so three things
that wouldn't be overly tiring? MARIA: I could throw out the newspapers
and take the trash out. JUDITH: Good. What else? MARIA: Change the
sheets on my bed. JUDITH: Good. What else? MARIA: (Thinks.) Throw out
some food from the refrigerator. JUDITH: All good things. What would it
mean if you can do those things? MARIA: I'm not sure. JUDITH: Might it
mean that you can do things even if you're tired? That you can start to
take control of your life? That you can take steps toward getting a
better life? MARIA: Yes. I think so. JUDITH: Can we write some of this
down on your Action Plan? Next, Maria and I talk about obstacles that
could get in her way or that could interfere with her feeling good about
doing these activities. We discuss unhelpful thoughts she might have
before, during, and after the activities. We review the importance of
giving herself credit and set up a reminder system. We also discuss how
she would feel when she accomplished these tasks and what that would
signify about herself and her future. Finally, we make this a no-lose
proposition: Either she would do the activities or she would keep track
of the thoughts or practical problems that got in the way.

USING AN ACTIVITY CHART Some clients, like Abe, are likely to follow
through with activities they committed to in session without discussing
precisely when to do them. Other clients benefit from committing to do
certain activities on certain days at certain times. You and the client
can collaboratively schedule these

activities on their Action Plan or using an Activity Chart (Figure 7.1).
Make sure to help clients list their aspirations at the top of the chart
to help motivate them. It's useful for some clients to use the Activity
Chart to collaboratively plan an entire day, hour by hour. Clients can
use this schedule as a template, making a more specific schedule each
morning or previous evening. Make sure that the schedule is on the easy
side, especially when clients are more severely depressed. It's
unreasonable to expect that they can go from being almost completely
inactive to being active every hour of the day. They may need to
schedule periods of relative inactivity interspersed with activities
that require more effort.

RATING ACTIVITIES When clients use the Activity Chart to schedule
activities, they can later use the same chart to circle or check off
which of the activities they had actually completed. Some clients are
willing to fill in the Activity Chart with all their activities,
prescheduled or not. You'll collect a lot of important data if clients
are willing to rate how much of a sense of pleasure and/or mastery they
got from each activity. Or they can just rate their overall mood during
the activity on a scale of 0--10. Clients can create scales with their
own sample activities at anchor points such as 1, 5, and 10 or 2, 5, and
8. (See Figure 7.2 for two kinds of rating scales.) Activity Chart
Rating Scales Name: Eric L.

Date: October 24

Directions (optional): Use either the top or bottom scale and fill in
activities. PLEASURE

MASTERY

0

Arguing with partner

Thinking about my credit card debt

5

Watching hockey on TV

Raking leaves last year

10

Finding out about my promotion

Finishing the 5K race

OVERALL RATING SCALE

OVERALL RATING SCALE 0

Very distressed/depressed

When my girlfriend broke up with me

5

Neutral mood

Running errands

10

Feeling great

Going to a football game

FIGURE 7.2. Activity Chart, side 2: Rating scales.

When people are depressed, their memories are often more negative than
their actual experience. They may believe that an entire day or week was
bad. Doing ratings immediately after an activity (or at lunch, dinner,
and bedtime) helps them recognize the parts that were better. And it
allows the two of you to figure out whether they need to schedule more
pleasure, mastery, social, or self-care activities---and whether to
decrease other activities. But here's a caveat. Some clients dislike
rating scales. Others may lack the motivation to track their
experiences. Make sure clients are highly likely to rate their
activities---if not, it may be better to make the ratings optional. On
the other hand, clients who tend to be organized and detail oriented may
be willing to keep track of all their activities during the week and
rate them.

TYPES OF ACTIVITIES If you don't know which activities to suggest to
clients, you can review their typical day (pp. 121--123). Then ask
yourself these questions: "Given my client's aspirations ... Which
activities is the client doing too much of? Which activities is she
doing too little of or avoiding altogether? Does he have a good balance
of mastery, pleasure, self-care, and social experiences? What can she do
that will be meaningful and lead to positive emotion, connection, and
empowerment? What can he do that will help him draw positive
conclusions, especially about himself?"

Also ask yourself, "Which new activities is the client most likely to
engage in?" When relevant, you can suggest that clients search online
for pleasurable activities or hobbies or interview other people to find
out what they do. When appropriate, you might suggest engaging in some
activities with family members, friends, neighbors, or others in the
community. In any case, when reviewing their Action Plans in subsequent
sessions, make sure to help clients draw conclusions about these
experiences and especially what it means about them that they did these
things. In the next chapter, you'll read more about setting and
reviewing Action Plans and what to do when clients have difficulty
following through with Action Plans. CLINICAL TIPS When Clients Have a
Problematic Behavior or Habit Clients who binge eat, smoke, use
substances, overspend, gamble, or act angrily or aggressively might
record all their activities to investigate patterns of occurrence, or
they might just record the occurrence of maladaptive behaviors.

USING THE ACTIVITY CHART TO ASSESS PREDICTIONS When clients are
skeptical that scheduling activities can help, you can ask them to
predict levels of mastery and pleasure and connection, or what their
overall mood will be on an Activity Chart and then record their actual
ratings. These comparisons can be a useful source of data. If they find
their predictions are inaccurate, they usually become more motivated to
continue scheduling activities. If their predictions turn out to be
accurate, you'll ask questions to conceptualize the problem, and then
likely do problem solving and respond to unhelpful thinking. JUDITH: Can
we take a look at your predictions on the Activity Chart and what
actually happened? MARIA: (Nods.)

JUDITH: (Looks at the first chart.) Let's see ... It looks as if you
predicted very low scores, mostly 0's and 1's for the three times you
scheduled to meet your friends, but you actually rated your pleasure and
sense of connection as 4's and 5's. (pause) What do you make of that?
MARIA: I guess I was wrong. I thought I wouldn't enjoy myself, but I
did, at least some. JUDITH: What do you think it says about you that you
were willing to get together with your friends even though you predicted
you wouldn't have a good time? MARIA: I guess it shows I'm willing to
give things a try. JUDITH: Absolutely! That's such a good sign. (pause)
Would you like to schedule more social activities for this coming week?
MARIA: Yeah. JUDITH: Good. Do you see what could have happened---and, in
fact, what was happening before you came to therapy? You kept predicting
that you'd have a bad time with your friends so you didn't make any
plans. In fact, you turned down their invitations. It sounds as if this
Action Plan helped you test your ideas. You found it was wrong that
you'd have a bad time, and now it sounds as if you're more willing to
schedule more. Is that right? MARIA: Yes. But that reminds me, I wanted
to talk about one prediction that actually turned out worse. JUDITH:
Okay, when was that? MARIA: I predicted that I'd get a 5 in pleasure
when I went to the community garden over the weekend. But I got a 2.
JUDITH: Do you have any idea why? MARIA: Not really. JUDITH: How were
you feeling when you were at the garden? MARIA: Kind of sad. JUDITH:
What was going through your mind? MARIA: I don't know. I mean, going to
the garden used to be one of my favorite things to do. But I didn't
enjoy it. I just felt tired. JUDITH: Did you have thoughts like
that---"Going to the garden used to be one of my favorites. I'm not
enjoying this. I'm so tired"? MARIA: Yeah, I think so. JUDITH: Anything
else go through your mind?

MARIA: I remembered this time when I went with my ex-boyfriend. It was
soon after we met. I was so hopeful about our relationship. JUDITH: Did
you have a picture in your mind of that occasion? MARIA: Yeah. We were
walking around, holding hands. I was telling him the names of all the
flowers I knew. But he eventually broke up with me. JUDITH: Okay, let me
see if I understand. \[summarizing\] Here in my office you thought you'd
get a moderate sense of pleasure when you went to the garden. But,
instead, you got very little. It sounds as if you were thinking of how
it used to be and then you had some negative thoughts like "Going to the
garden used to be one of my favorites; I'm not enjoying this; I'm so
tired." And you also had an image in your mind of a specific time when
you first went there with Roger but then you remembered he broke up with
you. And these thoughts and the memory made you feel sad. (pause) Does
that sound right? MARIA: Yeah. In this last part, I use the Activity
Chart to identify automatic thoughts that are undermining Maria's
enjoyment of an activity. Next, we come up with responses to these
thoughts and to the memory so she can enjoy the garden more in the
future. CLINICAL TIPS When Clients Aren't in the Moment It's important
for clients to give their full attention to the activity they're engaged
in. If they engage in depressive rumination or obsessive thinking,
mindfulness (Chapter 16) can help them let the thoughts come and go as
they focus their attention on their immediate experience.

SUMMARY Scheduling activities is essential for most depressed clients.
Many clients need a rationale, a reminder of their aspirations, guidance
in selecting and scheduling activities, instruction in how to focus
their attention fully on the experience (and how to bring their focus
back to it when their mind strays), and responses to predicted automatic
thoughts that might interfere with initiating activities or gaining a
sense of pleasure, mastery, or connection.

Therapists often need to be gently persistent in helping clients become
more active. Clients who are quite inactive initially benefit from
learning how to create and adhere to a daily schedule with increasing
degrees of activity. Clients who are skeptical about scheduling
activities may benefit from doing behavioral experiments to test their
ideas and/or checking the accuracy of their automatic thoughts by
comparing their predictions to what actually occurs. REFLECTION
QUESTIONS Why is scheduling activities so important for most clients
with depression? How might you conceptualize a client's relative
inactivity and lack of mastery or pleasure?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Using an Activity Chart, schedule for the coming week
some worthwhile activities, in line with your aspirations, that you
might have difficulty committing to. Create scales to predict the sense
of pleasure, mastery, and/or connection you'll get from doing each
activity. Use the same scales to write your actual ratings after
engaging in these activities.

8

ACTION PLANS

Plans (traditionally labeled as "homework") should be considered Action
an integral, not optional, part of CBT (Beck et al., 1979; Kazantzis et
al., 2018; Tompkins, 2004). Remember what we tell clients in the
evaluation or first session: The way people get better is to make small
changes in their behavior and thinking every day.

In every session, clients need to learn new ways of thinking and acting
that they'll practice at home. Researchers have found that CBT clients
who carry out Action Plans progress significantly better in therapy than
those who don't (see, e.g., Callan et al., 2019; Kazantzis et al.,
2016). It's very important that clients experience (and recognize their)
success and learn from every Action Plan item. When they do, therapy
progresses more quickly and clients have an increased sense of hope,
mastery, selfefficacy, and control, and their mood and symptoms improve.
When they aren't successful, they often become self-critical or
hopeless. This chapter answers the following questions: How do you set
Action Plans? What are various kinds of Action Plan items? How do you
encourage clients to set their own Action Plans?

How do you increase the likelihood that clients will successfully
complete their Action Plans? How can you anticipate and prevent problems
in adherence? How can you prepare clients for a potential negative
outcome? How do you review Action Plans at the next session? How do you
conceptualize and solve problems around completing Action Plans? What
kind of beliefs can interfere with completing Action Plans? What
unhelpful cognitions might therapists have?

SETTING ACTION PLANS There is no set formula for assigning Action Plans.
How do you and the client decide what would be good for the client to
do? It depends on your conceptualization, the client's aspirations, what
you have discussed in the session (which is influenced by your overall
treatment plan and the client's goals), what you and the client think
will help most, and very importantly, what the client is willing and
able to do. The more depressed clients are feeling at the beginning of
treatment, the more their Action Plans should initially emphasize
changing behavior (e.g., through activity scheduling). The initial
cognitive work often involves modifying automatic thoughts that could
interfere with carrying out behavioral Action Plans or gaining a sense
of achievement, pleasure, or connection from engaging in the planned
activities. As their symptoms improve, you'll add in an additional
emphasis on cognitive change. Good Action Plans provide opportunities
for clients to draw positive conclusions about their experiences and
about themselves, educate themselves (e.g., through bibliotherapy),
collect data (e.g., through monitoring their thoughts, feelings, and
behavior), evaluate and modify (or disengage from) their cognitions,
practice cognitive and behavioral skills, and experiment with new
behaviors.

TYPES OF ACTION PLAN ITEMS In addition to scheduling activities, many
Action Plans contain the following ongoing activities: 1. Reading
therapy notes. After you've discussed an issue or problem, you'll ask
clients to summarize or report on what they think is most important for
them to remember and to do (pp. 261--264). You'll often suggest
additional ideas to make their therapy notes more robust. 2. Monitoring
automatic thoughts. From the first session forward, you'll encourage
clients to ask themselves, "What's going through my mind right now?"
when they notice their mood is changing or they're engaging in unhelpful
behavior. You'll also ask them to remind themselves that their thinking
may be true or not true or not completely true. They may jot down their
thoughts (in their smartphone, on their computer, or simply on paper, in
a notebook, on an index card, or on a worksheet). 3. Evaluating and
responding to automatic thoughts. At virtually every session, you'll
help clients modify their inaccurate or unhelpful thoughts, especially
those that interfere with carrying out their Action Plans. You'll also
teach clients to evaluate their thinking on their own. 4. Doing
behavioral experiments. To test the validity of negative predictions,
it's often important to collaboratively design experiments that clients
can conduct between sessions (or in session). Using Socratic questioning
first is often useful, but actually disconfirming predictions out in the
world through personal experience usually results in significantly
greater cognitive and emotional change (Bennett-Levy et al., 2004). 5.
Disengaging from thoughts that are part of an unhelpful thought process
(self-criticism, rumination, obsessive thinking, or frequent intrusive
thoughts). You might teach clients mindfulness techniques to practice
between sessions. 6. Implementing steps toward their goals. You'll ask
clients about their goals for each session and collaboratively decide
what steps the client wants to take in the coming week. You'll also
identify obstacles to taking these

steps and do cognitive restructuring for potentially interfering
cognitions and/or problem solving, and/or skills training. 7. Engaging
in activities to lift affect. These activities are usually closely tied
to clients' aspirations, values, and goals, and often promote self-care,
social interaction, better management (at home and/or work), and/or a
sense of pleasure, mastery, or purpose. 8. Credit lists. Ideally,
clients mentally praise themselves and keep a running written list
throughout the day of anything they do that's even a little difficult,
but they do it anyway. This task is especially important when clients
are self-critical or have core beliefs of incompetence or helplessness.
A good rationale for the task is that it helps people regain confidence
in themselves and see themselves more realistically. If you give
yourself credit throughout the day (as I do), you can use
self-disclosure to motivate clients to do the same. 9. Practicing
behavioral skills. To effectively solve their problems, clients may need
to learn new skills, which they'll practice as part of their Action
Plan. For example, you might teach mindfulness or relaxation, emotional
regulation, communication, or organizational, time management, or
budgeting skills. 10. Engaging in bibliotherapy. You can greatly
reinforce important concepts you've discussed in session when clients
read about them between sessions. Many clients benefit from reading a
few pages in a CBT book for consumers on depression
(www.abct.org/SHBooks) or a booklet (J. S. Beck, 2020). These can
reinforce important ideas you've reviewed in session. Ask clients to
make mental or written notes as they read: What do they agree with?
Disagree with? What questions do they have? Be careful when suggesting
this Action Plan item though. Consider a client's level of concentration
and motivation in suggesting what and how much to read. If they try to
read and can't comprehend the material, they may become quite
self-critical or fear your criticism. 11. Preparing for the next therapy
session. The beginning part of each therapy session can be greatly
speeded up if clients think about what will be important to tell you
before they enter your office. The Preparing for Therapy Worksheet
(Figure 10.3, p. 178) can help prepare them.

ENCOURAGING CLIENTS TO SET ACTION PLANS At the beginning of treatment,
you may need to suggest Action Plan items; clients don't usually know
what would be beneficial for them to do. As therapy progresses,
encourage clients to set their own Action Plans. "What would you like to
do this week \[about this issue or to get closer to reaching your
goal\]?" "What could you do if you start getting uncomfortably anxious?"
"How will you handle \[this obstacle\] if it does arise?"

Clients who routinely set their own Action Plans are more likely to
continue doing so when treatment has ended.

INCREASING ACTION PLAN ADHERENCE Many clients do Action Plans quite
willingly and easily; some do not. Even the most experienced therapists
encounter difficulty with an occasional client. Nevertheless, you should
initially assume that any client (unless he or she is very low
functioning) will do Action Plans if you set them up properly. Here are
some guidelines to follow: Tailor Action Plans to the individual.
Provide or elicit the rationale. Set Action Plans collaboratively; seek
the client's input and agreement. Make Action Plans easier rather than
harder. Provide explicit instructions. Set up a reminder system. Begin
the Action Plan (when possible) in session. Ask clients to imagine
completing an Action Plan.

Tailor Action Plans to the Individual

Action Plans shouldn't be one size fits all. You and your clients will
collaboratively decide what a given Action Plan item should be. When
suggesting an assignment, take your client's individual characteristics
into consideration: Their aspirations, goals, strengths, and personal
assets Their reading, writing, and intellectual abilities Their
preferences Their level of motivation Their current level of distress,
symptoms, executive functioning, and general functioning (cognitive,
emotional, behavioral, and social) Practical constraints (e.g., time,
opportunity, and lack of cooperation by family members)

Abe, for the most part, was a motivated client who was willing to work
hard to overcome his depression. Initially he accomplished much more
between sessions than did Maria, who was highly skeptical that therapy
could help and was functioning at a lower level. A reasonable Action
Plan for one client may be unreasonable for another. Many clients, like
Abe, are able to identify their automatic thoughts in the first session
or two and you may suggest having them try to do the same between
sessions. Maria, however, didn't grasp the cognitive model in the first
session and, indeed, became slightly irritated when I tried to explain
it to her in another way. She said, "You don't understand; I don't know
what was going through my mind. All I know is that I was very upset!" An
Action Plan to monitor her automatic thoughts would have been
inappropriate at that session.

Provide or Elicit the Rationale Clients are more likely to complete
Action Plans when you provide a rationale, so they can see how and why
it will help them. You might say, for example, "Research shows that
exercise often helps people become less depressed. What do you think
about getting more exercise a few times this week?" Asking questions to
link Action Plans to their aspirations, goals, and values can motivate
clients. Here are some examples:

"Why go to the trouble of controlling your behavior when you're angry?"
"What would be the point of asking people if they know someone to fix
you up with?" "Why is it important to you to get a job?" "Can you see
how speaking up at work could help you feel more self-confident?" "What
would it say about you if you were able to help your neighbors?"

Set Action Plans Collaboratively Take care not to unilaterally assign
Action Plan items. Seek the client's input and agreement. For example,
you might say, "What would you think about \[asking your boss to change
your work schedule\]?" "Do you think it could help if \[you read this
coping card before you leave the house\]?" "Do you want to practice \[a
particular technique\] this week?" "I think if you \[get in the shower
as soon as you get up\], you'll demonstrate to yourself that \[you can
take more control of your day\]. What do you think? Is this something
you want to try?"

Err on the Easy Side A typical error made by novice therapists is
suggesting Action Plans that are much too difficult for depressed
clients, for instance, having them complete a daily thought record
immediately after initiating the cognitive model. Remember, they usually
lack energy and motivation. Their concentration and executive
functioning skills may be impaired. When applicable, break a large task
into more manageable parts. For example, you might suggest that clients
read one chapter of a layman's CBT book, spend 10 minutes doing
paperwork, or do one load of laundry.

Provide Explicit Instructions Much of the time, you'll guide clients in
deciding when, where, and for how long (and sometimes with whom) they
should do Action Plan items. Abe and I agreed, for example, that he
would go to the bank immediately

after one of our therapy sessions and ask for a loan application. He
would then spend 15 minutes filling out the application as soon as he
came home.

Set Up a Reminder System It's vital to record, or have clients record,
their Action Plans every week, starting with the first session. If the
Action Plan is recorded in writing, ask clients where they'll keep it
and how they'll remember to look at it. They can pair an Action Plan
with another daily activity (e.g., "How about jotting down what you
deserve credit for at mealtimes and right before bed?"); post notes on
their refrigerator, their bathroom mirror, their computer, or the
dashboard of their car; use their appointment book, device, timer, or
computer to cue them (you might suggest that they set an alarm on their
cell phone as they're sitting in the office with you); and/or ask
another person to remind them.

You can also ask them how they remember to do other regularly scheduled
activities, such as taking vitamins or medication. For activities you
want them to remember throughout the day (such as monitoring their
automatic thoughts or giving themselves credit), they can post sticky
notes or set alarms on their phones. Or you can suggest that they wear a
rubber band on their wrist, switch their watch to the other wrist, or
wear a bracelet they're unaccustomed to wearing. Each time they notice
their wrist, they can remind themselves of the Action Plan.

Begin the Action Plan in Session When applicable, suggest that clients
begin Action Plans right in the therapy session itself. This gives you
an opportunity to assess their capability. If you'd like clients to do
worksheets, for example, make sure they can do them in session first; if
they can't complete one with you, it is highly unlikely they'll be able
to do it outside of session. Starting an Action Plan in session also
makes it far more likely that clients will follow through at home.
Continuing an Action Plan is much easier than initiating one. This

is especially critical because clients often describe the hardest part
of doing Action Plans as the period just before they start.

Ask Clients to Imagine Completing an Action Plan Item Clients are more
likely to complete their Action Plans if they visualize a positive
outcome. Suggest that they imagine a specific time in the coming week
when they've just finished a task or activity. Ask them to imagine
giving themselves credit. You can discuss various ways of doing this
(e.g., "It's good I did that"; "I deserve credit \[for doing that\]";
"That's good"; "This is an important step for me"; "This is going to
help me reach my goal"). It's also desirable for them to visualize and
verbalize what was good about the experience, what the experience meant
to them and what it said about them, and how they felt emotionally. See
if they can experience some of the same positive emotion right there in
the session with you (Beck et al., in press).

ANTICIPATING AND PREVENTING PROBLEMS It's very important to predict the
kinds of obstacles clients may face in completing Action Plans. To
increase the probability of their doing so, there are several things you
can do: Check on the likelihood of completion. Anticipate obstacles; do
covert rehearsal when indicated. Be alert for clients' negative
reactions. Examine advantages and disadvantages. Change the Action Plan.
Make Action Plans a no-lose proposition initially.

Check on the Likelihood of Completion

It's important to predict potential obstacles when setting up Action
Plans. Think about what automatic thoughts or practical problems might
get in the way. The single most important question to ask clients to
assess the probability that they'll complete their Action Plan is this:
"How likely are you to do this, 0--100%?"

Identify Obstacles and Do Covert Rehearsal When clients say they are
less than 90% sure that they'll do their Action Plan, you'll need to
find out what could get in the way. On one occasion, Maria was only 75%
sure. I asked her: "What's the 25% part of you that thinks you won't do
it?"

I could also ask: "Why are you 75% sure and not 50% sure?" "What could
we do to get you from 75% to 95%?" "What are the advantages and
disadvantages of doing the Action Plan?"

Depending on your client's answers, you can problem-solve, do skills
training, help them respond to their interfering automatic thoughts,
and/or make the Action Plan easier or optional.

I use several techniques with Maria to increase the likelihood that she
will complete an Action Plan item. First, I ask about obstacles. Then I
ask her to commit to when she would do it. Next, I use covert rehearsal.
I ask her to visualize carrying out the Action Plan, and I help her
respond to an

interfering thought. I ask her to imagine that she is reading the
response. Finally, we talk about what she would like to remind herself
to respond to another automatic thought. JUDITH: Do you think anything
will get in the way of your asking Randy for help? MARIA: I'm not sure.
JUDITH: \[getting her to specify and commit to a time\] When would be a
good time to call her? MARIA: Saturday morning, I guess, because she
won't be at work. JUDITH: Can you imagine it's Saturday morning right
now? Can you picture it? What time is it? Where are you? MARIA: Around
10 o'clock, I guess. I'm in the kitchen. I've just finished breakfast.
JUDITH: Can you imagine saying to yourself, "I really should call
Randy"? MARIA: Yes. JUDITH: How are you feeling? MARIA: A little
nervous, I guess. JUDITH: What's going through your mind? MARIA: I don't
want to call her \[automatic thought\]. Maybe I'll just try to figure
out how to organize my stuff myself. JUDITH: Well, you could do that. Do
you think you'd be successful? MARIA: (Thinks.) No, I guess not. I've
already tried, and I didn't know what to do. But she might say she's too
busy or something \[automatic thought in the form of a prediction\].
JUDITH: She might. Do you want to remind yourself about what we just
talked about? Calling her is an experiment. That we won't know what
happens unless you call? That if she's not helpful, we'll figure out
Plan B together? (pause) Would it help to put that on your Action Plan
so you can read it a few times between now and Saturday morning? MARIA:
Probably. JUDITH: Okay. Now can you imagine you're in the kitchen?
You're thinking, "I'll just try to organize my stuff myself." Now what
happens? MARIA: I don't feel like calling her. I guess I should read the
Action Plan. JUDITH: Good idea. Where is it? MARIA: In the top drawer of
my dresser.

JUDITH: Can you see yourself getting it? Or would it be better to leave
it in the kitchen? MARIA: It's okay in my dresser. If anyone comes over,
I don't want them to see it. JUDITH: Okay. Can you imagine pulling out
the Action Plan and reading it? MARIA: Yeah. JUDITH: Now, what happens?
MARIA: Probably I remember why I should call her, but I still don't want
to. So I do something else instead. JUDITH: What could you remind
yourself at this point? MARIA: That I may as well call her and get it
over with. That maybe she will help. That if I don't call her then, I
may end up not calling at all and miss out on potential help. JUDITH:
Good. Then what happens? MARIA: I call her. JUDITH: And then? MARIA:
Well, she'll either tell me she'll help or she'll say she can't. JUDITH:
And if she can't, we can figure out what to do next week. (pause) What
do you think we should write on your Action Plan? This kind of covert
rehearsal using imagery helps you discover practical obstacles and
dysfunctional cognitions that could hinder the completion of Action
Plans.

Be Alert for Clients' Negative Reactions When clients have a negative
reaction as you're setting Action Plans, first positively reinforce them
for letting you know. Then specify the problem and establish its meaning
to the client. Next, intervene (or if there's insufficient time, mark
the problem for intervention at the next session). In an early session,
Maria and I have just finished discussing an Action Plan. I notice that
she is looking more distressed. JUDITH: Maria, are you feeling a little
more upset now? What was just going through your mind? MARIA: I don't
know ... I'm not sure this therapy is for me. JUDITH: You don't think
it'll help?

MARIA: No, not really. You see, I've got real-life problems. It's not
just my thinking. JUDITH: I'm glad you told me. This gives me the
opportunity to say that I do believe that you have real-life problems. I
didn't mean to imply that you don't. The problems with your mother and
your sister and your feelings of loneliness ... Of course, those are all
real problems, problems we'll work together to solve. I don't think that
all we need to do is look at your thoughts. I'm sorry if I gave you that
impression. MARIA: That's okay ... It's just, like ... well, I feel so
overwhelmed. I don't know what to do. JUDITH: Are you willing to come
back next week so we can work on the overwhelmed feelings together?
MARIA: Yeah, I guess so. JUDITH: Is the Action Plan contributing to the
overwhelmed feeling too? MARIA: (pause) Maybe. JUDITH: How would you
like to leave it? We could make the Action Plan optional, or some of it
optional, if you want. MARIA: (sigh of relief) Yeah, that would be
better. JUDITH: What seems hardest to do? MARIA: Trying to keep track of
my thoughts. JUDITH: Okay, let's write "optional" next to that one. Or
should I just cross it off? MARIA: No, you can write "optional." JUDITH:
(Does so.) What else feels too hard? MARIA: Maybe calling my friends. I
don't know if I'm up for that. JUDITH: Okay, should I write "optional"
or cross it off? MARIA: Maybe cross it off. JUDITH: Okay. (Does so.)
Now, is there anything else bothering you? When Maria gives me negative
feedback, I recognize that I need to strengthen the therapeutic
alliance. What might have happened if I didn't ask for feedback or been
less adept at dealing with her negative feedback? It's possible that
Maria wouldn't complete the Action Plan. (It's also possible that she
wouldn't return for another session.) I use this difficulty as an
opportunity to refine my conceptualization. My flexibility about the
Action Plan helps Maria reexamine her misgivings about the
appropriateness of CBT. By responding to feedback and making

reasonable adjustments, I demonstrate an understanding of and empathy
for Maria, which facilitates collaboration and trust. In the future, I
make sure she doesn't feel overwhelmed by Action Plans. And at the
beginning of the next session, I reinforce the importance of our working
as a team to tailor the treatment and the Action Plan so it's right for
her.

Examine Advantages and Disadvantages When clients are unsure they will
follow through with an Action Plan item, you might collaboratively
decide to look at the advantages and disadvantages of doing it versus
the advantages and disadvantages of not doing it (see Chapter 19,
pp. 327--329). Then you can ask clients to weigh the items to decide
about what is most important to them. When eliciting advantages, find
out whether clients predict they would feel relief by not doing the
activity or task. If so, you may need to help them appreciate the larger
picture. JUDITH: What was your mood like when you decided to stay in bed
until noon? MARIA: (Sighs.) Well, first I felt better. JUDITH: And how
did you feel when you got up at noon? MARIA: Pretty bad. I hadn't done
all these things we had talked about doing. JUDITH: So, what do you
conclude? MARIA: I always think I'm going to feel better when I stay in
bed, but I usually don't, not for more than a few minutes anyway.
JUDITH: And does staying in bed get you closer to your long-term goals
or further away? MARIA: (Sighs.) Further away. CLINICAL TIPS Sometimes
clients reveal ambivalence about the usefulness of an Action Plan. If
so, you should acknowledge that you don't know what the outcome will be:
"I don't know for sure that doing this will help." Then consider asking
questions such as the following: "What will you lose if it doesn't
work?" "What could be the potential gain in the long run if it does
work?" With some Action Plan items, you can say, "Haven't you already
done the experiment of \[not getting up and getting dressed before
lunch\]? How does that usually turn out? So would you like to try
something different?"

Change the Action Plan If you judge that an Action Plan item is
inappropriate or if clients are still unsure they'll do it, you may need
to modify it. It's far better to substitute an easier Action Plan item
that clients are likely to do than to have them establish a habit of not
doing what they had agreed to in session: "I'm not sure you're ready to
do this. \[or 'I'm not sure this Action Plan is appropriate'\] What do
you think? Do you want to go ahead and try or wait until another time?"
As illustrated earlier in this chapter, you can also collaboratively
decide to make certain Action Plans optional or to decrease the
difficulty, frequency, or duration of an Action Plan item.

Make the Action Plan a No-Lose Proposition (Initially) When creating
Action Plans in the first session or two, it's helpful to stress that
useful data can be obtained even if clients fail to complete their
Action Plans. Clients who don't do their Action Plans are then less
likely to brand themselves as failures. You might say, "If you get this
Action Plan done, that's good. But if you have trouble doing it, that's
okay---just see if you can figure out what thoughts are getting in your
way, and we'll talk about them next time. Okay?" Sometimes clients fail
to do a significant portion of their Action Plan for 2 weeks in a row,
or they do it immediately before the therapy session instead of daily.
In these cases, you should elicit the cognitions and/or practical
obstacles that got in the way and stress how essential it is to do
Action Plans daily, instead of continuing to make them a no-lose
proposition.

PREPARING FOR A POSSIBLE NEGATIVE OUTCOME

There are times when you and the client just can't predict to what
degree an Action Plan item will be successful. It's helpful to have
therapy notes in the Action Plan for clients to read if it doesn't work
out the way the client would have wanted. Abe, for example, fears that
if he visits his mother, she'll be critical of him. But he decides to go
anyway. We set the visit up as a behavioral experiment and jointly
compose the following therapy note for him to read in case her attitude
is negative. If the visit to Mom doesn't go well, remind myself: "I
didn't know whether Mom would be critical or not, but it was worth a
try, and I deserve credit for visiting her. I don't need to take her
criticisms to heart. She's critical toward everyone, not just me. And
she didn't know about my depression, so her criticisms probably weren't
justified. I wish she were different, but the reality is that she
probably won't change. The next time I visit, I can tell her in advance
that it will only be for a short while, and I can figure out some
activity we can do together to try to get her focus on something else."

REVIEWING ACTION PLANS Before each session, prepare by reviewing the
notes and the Action Plan from the previous session. Review the Action
Plan with the client toward the beginning of the session. Doing so gives
clients the idea that Action Plans are important. Even if a client is in
crisis, it's still useful to spend a few minutes discussing Action Plans
later in the session or, in a different case, to collaboratively agree
that the Action Plan from the previous session doesn't apply at the
moment. Deciding how much time to spend reviewing Action Plans and
discussing whether clients want to continue any given Action Plan is
part of the art of therapy. You will spend more time on Action Plans
when they cover an important, ongoing issue or goal that requires
further discussion; clients have not completed a task; and/or clients
have difficulty drawing conclusions from successfully fulfilling their
Action Plans or when they are critical of themselves for not doing a
good enough job.

You will often ask clients to read their therapy notes aloud (or you can
read them if they're reluctant). Then ask, "How much do you believe
that?" If they don't endorse their therapy notes strongly, ask, "What
part don't you believe?" or "What don't you agree with?" When clients
have successfully completed an activity or task on their Action Plan,
there are several questions you can ask to help them derive positive
meanings and strengthen positive beliefs about themselves (Beck et al.,
in press): "Were you able to give yourself credit for doing that?" "What
was good about the experience \[e.g., 'I helped other people'; 'My
family is happy'; 'I got the job finished'\]?" "What emotions did you
experience \[e.g., 'I felt good'; 'I was pleased'; 'I felt proud'\]?"
(You can give them a list of positive emotions (p. 229) to help them
identify additional positive emotions they may have experienced.) "What
did the experience mean to you \[e.g., 'This shows
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_'; 'It's worth putting in the effort'; 'People
seem to like me'\]?" "What did the experience show about you \[e.g., 'I
can do hard things'; 'I can take control'; 'I'm stronger than I thought
I was'; 'I'm a good person'; 'I'm likeable'; 'I'm
effective/competent/capable'; 'I'm able to protect myself'; 'I'm able to
make good decisions'\]?"

You can positively reinforce the client yourself, by saying something
such as "It's great that you \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. This shows
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \[about you\]." When relevant, ask if clients
want to continue this Action Plan item in the coming week.

CONCEPTUALIZING DIFFICULTIES When clients have difficulty doing their
Action Plan, conceptualize why the problem arose. Was the obstacle
related to a practical problem? an interfering cognition? an interfering
cognition masked as a practical problem? a problem related to your
cognitions?

Practical Problems Most practical problems can be avoided if you
carefully and collaboratively create Action Plans and prepare clients to
do them. Covert rehearsal can also help you identify potential
obstacles. Most practical problems can be resolved through problem
solving and/or skills training. Three common practical problems that
don't necessarily include unhelpful cognitions are 1. forgetting the
rationale for an Action Plan, 2. disorganization or lack of
accountability, and 3. difficulty with an item.

These obstacles are discussed below.

Forgetting the Rationale Occasionally, clients neglect an Action Plan
because they don't remember why it's important or how it's connected to
their aspirations, values, or goals. This problem can be avoided by
having clients (who have demonstrated this difficulty) record the
rationale next to an Action Plan. MARIA: I didn't do the Action Plan
because I was feeling fine this week. JUDITH: Do you remember what we
said a few weeks ago---why it's helpful to practice the mindfulness
exercise for 5 minutes every morning, regardless of how you're feeling?
MARIA: I'm not sure. JUDITH: Well, let's say you don't practice the
mindfulness exercise for a couple of weeks. Then you have a very
stressful week and you find you're worrying a lot again. How sharp will
your skills be then? MARIA: Not very, I guess. JUDITH: And how important
does it feel to you to manage your stress so you can feel more relaxed
around other people? MARIA: It's still very important. JUDITH: What do
you think about practicing mindfulness this week, even if you're not
stressed? MARIA: I guess I should.

JUDITH: Maybe you can also write down why it's important to you to
practice. What other reasons are there for reducing your stress? (pause)
Any other problems that could get in the way? If the rationale doesn't
seem strong enough, you can see whether the client is willing to look at
the advantages and disadvantages of doing the Action Plan versus the
advantages and disadvantages of not doing it.

Disorganization or Lack of Accountability Some clients are more likely
to do their Action Plans when they have to mark off a daily checklist.
You or clients can draw a simple diagram (Figure 8.1) in session, and
they can fill it out each evening. This technique helps clients remember
to do their Action Plans and also makes them aware of what they're not
doing. Alternately, clients can write down their Action Plans on a daily
calendar or appointment book or in their phone. (Do the first day
together in the office, and ask clients to write down the rest after the
session.) Later, after completing Action Plans, clients can put a
checkmark next to them or cross them off.

Mon. Tues. Wed. Thurs. Fri. Sat. Sun. Read therapy notes. Make a credit
list. Do a Thought Record when I'm upset. Organize bedroom for 10
minutes a day.

FIGURE 8.1. Sample daily checklist for Maria. CLINICAL TIPS When
clients' adherence is likely to be low, you can suggest they call your
office to leave a message when they have completed an Action Plan item.
Knowing that you expect a message may motivate clients to do it. As with
any intervention, you should suggest these possibilities with a
rationale and be sure that clients agree.

Difficulty with an Action Plan Item If you realize at a subsequent
session that an Action Plan item was too difficult or ill defined
(common problems with novice therapists), take responsibility. Otherwise
clients may unfairly criticize themselves. You might say: "Now that
we've talked about it, I can see that I didn't explain the Action Plan
well enough. \[or 'I can see that it was really too hard.'\] I'm sorry
about that. What went through your mind when you couldn't \[or didn't\]
do it?" Here you have an opportunity to (1) model that you can make and
admit to mistakes, (2) build rapport, (3) demonstrate that you are
concerned with tailoring therapy---and Action Plans---to the client, and
(4) help the client see an alternative explanation for his or her lack
of success.

Interfering Cognitions Whether clients have had a practical problem that
posed an obstacle to completing their Action Plans, their difficulty may
involve unhelpful cognitions. Some clients need to respond to
maladaptive thoughts and beliefs before they're able to complete their
Action Plans. They may believe: "Having to do Action Plans means I'm
defective." "If I try to do the Action Plan, I'll just fail." "I
shouldn't have to put in so much effort to feel better." "My therapist
should cure me without my having to change." "Action Plans are trivial
and won't get me better." "\[My therapist\] is trying to control me."
"If I think about my problems, I'll feel worse." "If I do Action Plans
and get better, my life will get worse."

Below are some strategies you can use for several types dysfunctional
cognitions.

Negative Predictions When clients are in psychological distress, and
particularly when they're depressed, they tend to assume negative
outcomes---as Abe does when considering whether to fill out an
application for work. These predictions can interfere with starting or
completing an Action Plan. When you find that clients haven't completed
an Action Plan, ask them if they still think the Action Plan is a good
idea and then have them predict obstacles to completing it in the coming
week. ABE: I didn't fill out the job application this week. JUDITH: Do
you still think it's a good idea? ABE: (Sighs.) Yeah. I really need to
get back to work. JUDITH: What got in the way this past week? Was there
a practical problem? Did you have enough time? ABE: I had plenty of
time. I'm not sure why I couldn't get myself to do it. Then I did a form
of covert rehearsal. Make sure you or the client records on the new
Action Plan whichever statements seem helpful to the client. JUDITH: Do
you think you might have the same problem filling out the job
application this coming week? ABE: Yeah, probably. JUDITH: Can you
imagine doing it? How are you feeling? ABE: Down, kind of tired. JUDITH:
What's going through your mind? ABE: I might make mistakes on the
application. Then they won't give me the job. JUDITH: No wonder you were
having trouble getting started. In fact, maybe we should have had you
start filling it out right here in session. Can we look at this
thought---that you might make mistakes? What do you want to be able to
tell yourself this week if you have the same thought? I then made
suggestions to make his response more robust. Next, we agree that Abe
will spend 10 minutes filling out the application as soon as he gets
home from his therapy appointment. (He could spend longer on it if he
wants to, but he doesn't have to.) And he will continue to work on it
for 10

minutes a day until it's finished. Then we record the Action Plan, how
he will accomplish it, and what he can say to himself if he has
interfering thoughts. Clients can often test negative predictions (such
as "My roommate won't want to go to \[that event\] with me"; "I won't
understand the instructions even if I ask for help"; or "Doing Action
Plans will make me feel worse") through behavioral experiments. You can
help clients evaluate other thoughts, such as "It's not worth the
effort" or "Doing this will make no difference" with standard Socratic
questioning.

Overestimating the Demands of an Action Plan The negative predictions of
some clients are overestimations of how inconvenient or difficult an
Action Plan will be. Or they don't realize that doing an Action Plan
will be time limited. It's a good idea to ask clients how long they
think an Action Plan item will take. JUDITH: What could get in the way
of your doing a Thought Record a few times this week? MARIA: I'm not
sure I'll find the time. \[automatic thought\] JUDITH: How long do you
think they would take? MARIA: I don't know. Half an hour? I'm pretty
rushed these days, you know. I have a million things to do. JUDITH: It's
good you told me that. I actually want you to spend only 10 minutes
doing a thought record. Does that sound easier? MARIA: I'm not sure.
JUDITH: Maybe it's not worth it to you to find the time. Do you think in
the long run it will improve your life, help you get a better life?
MARIA: (Sighs.) I guess so. You can then do straightforward problem
solving to find possible time slots. Alternatively, you might propose an
analogy about prioritization and/or stress that the inconvenience of
doing Action Plans is temporary: JUDITH: It certainly is true; you are
very busy these days. I wonder---this is an extreme example, I
know---but what would you do if you had to take time every day to do
something that would save your life \[or your loved

one's life\]? What would happen, for example, if you needed a blood
transfusion every day? MARIA: Well, of course I'd find the time. JUDITH:
Now, it's obviously not life threatening if you don't do Thought
Records, but the principle is the same. In a minute, we can talk
specifically about how you could cut back in another area, but first
it's important to remember that this is not for the rest of your life.
We just need you to rearrange some things for a little while until
you're feeling better. The client who overestimates the energy an Action
Plan requires benefits from similar questions. In the next example,
Maria has a dysfunctional (and distorted) image of fulfilling an Action
Plan. JUDITH: What got in the way of your going to the mall this week?
MARIA: (Sighs.) I just didn't have the energy. JUDITH: What did you
imagine would happen if you had gone? MARIA: Well, I would have had to
drag myself into one store after another. JUDITH: You know, we talked
about your going for just 15 minutes. How many stores would you actually
get to in 15 minutes? I wonder if you were imagining that it would be
more difficult than we had planned? In a different situation, Maria has
correctly recalled the Action Plan but again she has overestimated the
energy it would require. I first help specify the problem by doing a
modified, short version of covert rehearsal, and I ask her a question to
link the Action Plan to one of her important values. MARIA: I wasn't
sure I'd have the energy to take Caleb to the park. JUDITH: Was the
problem mostly getting out of the house, going to the park, or what
you'd have to do at the park? MARIA: Getting out of the house. I have to
get so much stuff together---his diaper bag, the stroller, a snack, his
coat and boots ... JUDITH: Is going to the park connected to something
important? MARIA: (Thinks.) Yeah. I really do want to be a good aunt. It
wasn't so good that I had him cooped up the whole day. Next, we
problem-solve; one solution is for Maria to gather all the necessities
earlier in the day when she is feeling more energetic and less

overwhelmed. CLINICAL TIPS Another problem can arise when clients try to
do their Action Plans perfectly. They can benefit from a simple
reminder, such as the following: "Learning to identify your automatic
thoughts is a skill, like learning the computer. You'll get better with
practice. So, if you have any trouble again this week, don't worry.
We'll figure it out together at our next session." Other clients with a
strong underlying assumption about the necessity of being perfect may
benefit from Action Plans that include mistakes: THERAPIST: It sounds as
if your idea about needing to be perfect is getting in the way of doing
your Action Plan. CLIENT: Yeah, I think it is. THERAPIST: How about this
week if we have you do a Thought Record that is deliberately imperfect?
You could do it with messy handwriting or not do it thoroughly or make
spelling mistakes. And how about if we put a 10-minute time limit on it?

Procrastination and Avoidance Depressed clients often have difficulty
getting started on their Action Plan. Earlier in this chapter, you read
about several techniques you can use. It's often helpful to say: "Do you
think you might focus on how you're feeling at the moment instead of how
you'll feel when you finish it? Would it also help to remind yourself
what goal you're trying to reach and why?" Also, telling clients what
you do when you find yourself procrastinating can help. For example, do
you occasionally have difficulty initiating a task (e.g., getting
yourself to work on a paper, pay taxes, or start exercising)? What do
you do to get yourself going? Using self-disclosure can normalize the
experience and provide an example of what they can do. JUDITH: I'm sorry
it's been difficult for you \[to fill out the insurance forms\]. Should
I tell you how I get myself to do something I've been avoiding? ABE:
Yes.

JUDITH: When I'm avoiding something, I find the few minutes just before
starting are the most unpleasant. Once I actually start doing it, I
almost always feel better. This past weekend, I had to go through the
mail on my desk. It was hard to get started, but I told myself I could
stop after 10 minutes and that it was really likely it would get easier
after a couple of minutes. And it did. (pause) Has that ever happened to
you? Abe recognizes that he often has the same experience. He commits to
a behavioral experiment to see what will happen later in the afternoon
when he sits down to fill out the forms.

Doing Action Plans at the Last Minute Ideally, clients carry on the work
of the therapy session throughout the week. For example, it's most
useful for clients to catch and record their automatic thoughts at the
moment they notice their mood changing or they're engaging in unhelpful
behavior. Then they can respond to these thoughts either mentally or in
writing. Some clients avoid thinking about therapy between sessions.
Often this avoidance is part of a larger problem, and you may first have
to help clients identify and modify certain beliefs (e.g., "If I focus
on a problem instead of distracting myself, I'll only feel worse" or "I
can't change, so why even try?"). Other clients, however, need only a
gentle reminder to look at their Action Plan daily.

Interfering Cognitions Masked as Practical Problems Some clients propose
that practical problems such as lack of time, energy, or opportunity
have prevented them from carrying out an Action Plan. If you believe
that a thought or belief is also interfering, you should investigate
this possibility before discussing the practical problem: THERAPIST:
Okay, you couldn't do the Action Plan because you didn't have time.
Let's pretend for a moment that this problem magically disappears. Let's
say you have a whole day free. Now how likely are you do to the Action
Plan? Would anything else interfere? Would any thoughts get in the way?

Problems Related to the Therapist's Cognitions Finally, you should
assess whether any of your thoughts or beliefs hinder you from being
gently assertive about doing Action Plans. Typical dysfunctional
assumptions of therapists include the following: "I'll hurt his feelings
if I try to find out why he didn't do the Action Plan." "She'll get
angry if I \[nicely\] question her." "He'll be insulted if I suggest he
try an Action Plan monitor." "She doesn't really need to do Action Plans
to get better." "He's too overburdened now with other things." "She's
too passive--aggressive to do Action Plans." "He's too fragile to expose
himself to an anxious situation."

Ask yourself what goes through your mind when you think about assigning
Action Plans or exploring why a client has not done an Action Plan. If
you're having dysfunctional thoughts, you might do Thought Records or
behavioral experiments or consult a supervisor or peer. Remind yourself
that you aren't doing clients a favor if you allow them to skip doing
Action Plans (which research shows are important) and don't make a great
enough effort to gain adherence.

SUMMARY In summary, both you and your clients should view Action Plans
as an essential part of treatment. Action Plans should be designed for
the individual client and set collaboratively. Various techniques can be
used to motivate clients to complete their Action Plans, including
anticipating and preventing problems. When difficulties do arise, it's
important to conceptualize the problem and plan a strategy to overcome
it. Action Plans, properly assigned and completed, speed progress and
allow clients to practice therapy techniques that they will need when
treatment is over. REFLECTION QUESTIONS Think about an activity you have
avoided. What practical problems or cognitions got in the way? What did
you do or what could you have done to overcome your avoidance?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Set a moderately difficult Action Plan item for
yourself in the coming week that, if you complete it, will enrich your
learning of CBT. Anticipate a problem that could arise, conceptualize
the difficulty, and plan a strategy to overcome it.

9

TREATMENT PLANNING

to view therapy as a journey, and the conceptualization as the
It'sroadhelpful map. You discuss the client's aspirations and goals, the
destination. There are a number of ways to reach that destination: for
example, by main highways or back roads. Sometimes detours change the
original plan. As you become more experienced and better at
conceptualization, you fill in the relevant details in the map, and your
efficiency and effectiveness will improve. At the beginning, however,
it's reasonable to assume that you may not accomplish therapy in the
most effective or efficient way. An accurate cognitive conceptualization
helps you determine what the main highways are and how best to travel.
In this chapter, you'll learn how to create a treatment plan for a
client with depression. (You'll need to consult specialized texts for
clients who have a different disorder or a comorbid condition.) Here are
the questions that are answered in this chapter: What are (and how do
you accomplish) broad therapeutic objectives? How do you plan treatment
across sessions? How do you create a treatment plan? How do you plan
treatment to accomplish a specific goal? How do you plan individual
sessions? How do you decide whether to focus on a particular goal or
issue? How do you help clients who have difficulty identifying a
problem?

ACCOMPLISHING THERAPEUTIC OBJECTIVES Effective treatment planning
requires a sound diagnosis, a solid formulation of the case, and
consideration of clients' characteristics and their aspirations, values,
sense of purpose, and goals. Treatment is tailored to the individual;
you develop an overall strategy as well as a specific plan for each
session. You also consider your conceptualization of the client; the
stage of treatment; the client's values, state of mind, and level of
motivation; and the nature and strength of the therapeutic alliance. At
the broadest level, your objectives are to facilitate a remission of
clients' disorders; significantly improve their mood, functioning, and
resilience; and prevent relapse. You arrange meaningful experiences for
clients (in and out of sessions) that increase optimism, hope, and
motivation along with their sense of control, worth, empowerment,
purpose, connectedness, and well-being. You help them increase
flexibility in how they think and act. My objectives with Abe, given his
values and aspirations, are to help him see himself as a good family man
and worker, someone who has grit and is resourceful, who can solve
problems and overcome challenges, who helps other people, and who is
confident that he has what it takes to lead a productive and satisfying
life. To achieve your therapeutic objectives, you will build a sound
therapeutic alliance with clients; make the structure and the process of
therapy explicit; monitor progress weekly and modify the treatment plan
as needed; teach clients the cognitive model and share your
conceptualization with them; alleviate their distress through a variety
of interventions, including cognitive restructuring, problem solving,
and skills training; increase positive affect by creating opportunities
for meaningful, pleasurable, mastery-enhancing, and/or social
experiences; develop and strengthen clients' adaptive (positive) beliefs
about themselves, others, the world, and their future by helping them
draw conclusions about their positive experiences, and identify and
weaken their negative beliefs and draw more adaptive conclusions about
their negative experiences; and teach clients how to use CBT and other
techniques, generalize the use of the techniques, and motivate them to
use the techniques in the future.

PLANNING TREATMENT ACROSS SESSIONS Therapy can be viewed in three
phases. In the beginning phase of treatment, you build a strong
therapeutic alliance; identify and specify clients' aspirations, values,
and their goals for therapy; identify steps to achieve each goal or
solve each problem; resolve obstacles (automatic thoughts and problems)
that interfere with taking steps toward goal attainment; socialize
clients to the process of therapy (e.g., to collaboratively set agendas
with you, provide feedback, and do Action Plans); educate clients about
the cognitive model, their disorder, and various helpful coping
strategies; emphasize clients' strengths, resources, and positive
beliefs; teach clients to identify, evaluate, and respond to their
automatic thoughts; help clients draw positive conclusions about their
experiences, including what these experiences mean about them; teach
clients needed skills; and help clients schedule activities (especially
if they're depressed and avoidant).

It's especially important to facilitate a decrease in clients' symptoms
and an improvement in their functioning early in treatment. Doing so is
linked to decreased early termination and to better treatment outcomes
(King & Boswell, 2019). It's also important to increase positive emotion
throughout treatment (Dunn, 2012). In the middle phase of therapy, you
continue not only to work toward these objectives but also to emphasize
strengthening clients' adaptive, more positive beliefs, and you more
directly identify, evaluate, and modify clients' dysfunctional beliefs,
using use both "intellectual" and "emotional" techniques. In the final
phase of therapy, you add an emphasis on preparing for termination,
continuing to work toward goals, increasing a sense of well-being,
improving resilience, and preventing relapse. By this point, clients
have become much more active in therapy, taking the lead in setting the
agenda, identifying solutions to obstacles, responding to unhelpful
thinking, taking therapy notes, and creating Action Plans.

CREATING A TREATMENT PLAN You develop a treatment plan based on your
diagnostic evaluation and the cognitive formulation of the disorder(s);
the principles of treatment and general treatment strategies for that
disorder; your conceptualization of the client; the client's
aspirations, strengths, values, and sense of purpose; and the obstacles
they face in taking steps to reach their goals.

You adapt your treatment plan to the individual, considering his or her
characteristics and preferences, culture and age, religious or spiritual
orientation, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, disability, gender, and
sexual orientation. Having formulated a general treatment plan, you
adhere to it to a greater or lesser degree, revising it as necessary.
Analyzing obstacles to taking steps to reach their goals compels you to
conceptualize clients' difficulties in detail and to formulate a
treatment plan tailored to overcome them. Doing so also helps you focus
each session, understand the flow of therapy from one session to the
next, and become more aware of progress. You'll find the initial
treatment plan I devised for Abe in Figure 9.1. OVERALL TREATMENT PLAN
Reduce depression, hopelessness, and anxiety; increase optimism and
hopefulness Improve functioning, social interactions, and self-care
Increase positive affect Improve self-image and confidence Prevent
relapse VALUES, ASPIRATIONS, AND GOALS Values: Family, being a good
person, responsible, useful Aspirations: To "get my old self back"; to
be in control, productive, helpful to others, mentally healthy, a "good
father and grandfather" Goals: Get a job, spend more time with children
and grandchildren, reconnect with friends, get apartment in order, get
along better with ex-wife (if possible), take better care of self
(exercise, sleep, eating) POTENTIAL OBSTACLES Pessimism, hopelessness,
anxiety about future Low motivation, lack of energy, desire to avoid,
inactivity

Negative self-image, self-criticism, rumination Conflict with ex-wife
POTENTIAL INTERVENTIONS Provide psychoeducation about depression,
anxiety, the cognitive model, and information processing, moving from
the depressive to the adaptive mode, the importance of activity
scheduling, the structure of sessions Increase positive emotions by
creating positive experiences; schedule activities (self-care,
interpersonal, home management, job seeking; mixture of mastery,
pleasure, and interpersonal activities) Increase attention to and draw
positive conclusions about these experiences Reconnect with family and
friends Decrease time in bed and on the couch; decrease passive
activities such as watching television, surfing the web Break down large
tasks into smaller components Give self credit Examine advantages and
disadvantages when making a decision (e.g., how to approach ex-wife,
what kind of job to look for) Evaluate and respond to dysfunctional
thoughts and beliefs, using guided discovery, Socratic questioning, and
behavioral experiments Teach mindfulness skills to decrease rumination
Do problem solving (especially of obstacles that could arise in coming
week) Teach communication skills (e.g., role-play interactions with
ex-wife and job interviewer) FIGURE 9.1. Abe's initial treatment plan.

PLANNING TREATMENT TO ACCOMPLISH A SPECIFIC GOAL It's helpful to
identify the steps needed to help clients reach a goal or solve a
specific problem. Figure 9.2 provides an example. You'll see it outlines
the necessary steps and specifies obstacles for each step (practical
problems, interfering cognitions, and/or skill deficits) and a plan to
overcome them. Goal: Getting a job Identify steps and potential
obstacles; create plan to address obstacles. Step 1: Update résumé.

Potential Obstacles Automatic thoughts: "I won't do this right"; "I
won't get hired anyway" Skill deficit: how to describe previous work
experience Plan to Overcome Obstacles Socratic questioning to evaluate
automatic thoughts; summarize for therapy notes Look online for sample
résumés Ask son for help; evaluate automatic thoughts that could pose
obstacles (e.g., "I shouldn't ask for help"); summarize for therapy
notes Give self credit for taking these steps Set specific Action Plan
to look online and ask son; assess likelihood of completion; if
indicated, look for additional obstacles or change Action Plan Step 2:
Identify potential jobs and apply for them. Potential Obstacles
Automatic thoughts: "If I look online, I won't be able to find any in my
area"; "If I network, people will find out I'm unemployed and they'll
think less of me" Problem/skill deficit: doesn't know where to look
online Plan to Overcome Obstacles Socratic questioning to evaluate
automatic thoughts; summarize for therapy notes Ask son for help in
finding job opportunities online Step 3: Go on interviews. Potential
Obstacles Automatic thoughts: "I'll make a bad impression"; "I'll mess
it up" Plan to Overcome Obstacles Role-play Work on making good eye
contact; firm handshake, smiling, acting as if he's confident

FIGURE 9.2. Sample plan for a specific goal.

PLANNING INDIVIDUAL SESSIONS When planning a session, remember that the
way people get better is by making small changes in their thinking and
behavior every day. Before and during a session, ask yourself questions
to formulate an overall plan for the

session and to guide you as you conduct the therapy session. At the most
general level, ask yourself: "What am I trying to accomplish, and how
can I do so most efficiently?"

Experienced therapists automatically reflect on many specific issues. If
you're a novice therapist, the following list may look daunting. But
it's useful to read it now and review it periodically, especially just
before sessions. It will help you make better decisions about how to
proceed within the session. Consciously contemplating the questions
during a session would undoubtedly interfere with the therapeutic
process. 1. As you review your notes from the previous session before
the session, ask yourself: "What, if anything, do I need to do today to
strengthen our alliance?" "What is the cognitive formulation \[most
important cognitions, coping strategies, and maintaining factors\] for
the client's disorder? What is my conceptualization of the client?" "Do
I need to vary treatment to accommodate the client's individual
characteristics?" "What has happened in the past few therapy sessions?
What progress have we made toward the client's goals and helping the
client achieve a better level of functioning and sense of well-being?
What obstacles have been interfering?" "How can I build on the client's
strengths, assets, and resources, and how can I help the client
experience positive affect in the session?" "At which stage of therapy
are we \[beginning, middle, or final\], and how many sessions do we have
left \[if there is a limit\]?" "At which cognitive level have we
primarily been working: automatic thoughts, intermediate beliefs, core
beliefs, or a mixture? What behavioral changes have we been working
toward? Which skills do I need to reinforce or introduce?" "What was the
client's Action Plan? What, if anything, did I agree to do \[e.g., call
client's health care provider or find relevant

bibliotherapy\]?" 2. As you begin the therapy session and check on the
client's mood, ask yourself: "How has the client been feeling since our
last session compared to earlier in treatment? Which moods predominate?"
"Do objective scores match the client's subjective description? If not,
why not?" "Is there anything about the client's mood we should put on
the agenda to discuss more fully?" 3. As the client provides a brief
review of the week, ask yourself: "How did this week go compared to
previous weeks? When was the client at his best in general?" "What signs
of progress are there? What positive experiences did the client have?
What conclusions did the client draw about these experiences and about
herself?" "Did anything happen this week \[positive or negative\] that
we should put on the agenda to discuss more fully?" 4. As you check on
the client's use of alcohol, drugs, and medication (if applicable), ask
yourself: "Is there a problem in any of these areas? If so, should we
put it on the agenda to discuss more fully? And/or does the client have
a goal in any of these areas?" 5. As you and the client set the agenda,
ask yourself: "Which goal(s) does the client want to work toward this
week? Or what problem(s) does the client want my help in solving?" 6. As
you and the client prioritize agenda items, ask yourself: "Which agenda
item is most important to discuss first?" "How much time will each
agenda item take? How many items can we discuss?"

"Are there any goals or issues the client could resolve alone or with
someone else, or bring up at another session?" 7. As you and the client
review the Action Plan, ask yourself: "When was the client at his best
in relation to his goal(s) in the past week?" "How much of the Action
Plan did the client do? What obstacles or challenges, if any, got in the
way?" "Was the Action Plan useful? If not, why not?" "What did the
client learn from the Action Plan? What did the client conclude about
her experiences and about herself?" "How much does the client agree with
the therapy notes from last week \[and previous weeks, if still
relevant\]?" "Which Action Plan items \[if any\] would be beneficial for
the client to continue in the coming week?" "How, if at all, should we
modify the Action Plan we create today to make it more effective?" 8. As
you and the client discuss the first agenda item, ask yourself questions
in four areas: Defining the Issue or Goal "What is the specific issue or
goal the client wants to work on?" "How does this issue or goal fit into
my overall conceptualization of the client?" Devising a Strategy "What
has the client already done to try to resolve the issue or reach the
goal?" "What would I do if I were in the client's position and had this
issue or goal?" "Do we need to do problem solving? What cognitions might
interfere with problem solving, carrying out a solution, or making
progress toward the goal?"

Choosing Techniques "What specifically am I trying to accomplish as we
discuss this agenda item?" "Which techniques have worked well for this
client \[or for similar clients\] in the past? Which techniques have not
worked well?" "Which technique should I try first?" "How will I evaluate
its effectiveness?" "Will I employ the technique or employ it and teach
it to the client?" Monitoring the Process "To what degree are we working
together as a team?" "Is the client having interfering automatic
thoughts about himself, this intervention, our therapy, me, the future?"
"Is the client's mood improving? How well is this technique working?
Should I try something else?" "Will we finish discussion of this agenda
item in time? If not, should I suggest continuing this item and
curtailing or eliminating discussion of another item?" "What Action Plan
might be beneficial?" "What should we record for the client to review at
home?" 9. Following discussion of the first agenda item, ask yourself:
"How is the client feeling now?" "Do I need to do anything to
reestablish rapport?" "How much time is left in the session? Do we have
time for another agenda item? What should we do next?" 10. Before
closing the session, ask yourself: "Did we make progress? Is the client
feeling better?" "Is the client committed and highly likely to do the
Action Plan we agreed on?" "In addition to asking for feedback, do I
need to probe for any negative reactions \[that the client hasn't
expressed\]? If there is negative

feedback, how should I address it?" 11. After the session, you ask
yourself: "How should I refine my conceptualization?" "Do I need to
improve our relationship?" "How would I score myself on each item of the
Cognitive Therapy Rating Scale \[beckinstitute.org/CBTresources\]? If I
could do the session over again, what would I do differently?" "What do
I want to remember to address in the next session? Future sessions?"
\[You can write these things down on your previous or next Session Note
or put a sticky note in the client's chart.\]

DECIDING WHETHER TO FOCUS ON AN ISSUE OR GOAL A critical decision in
every therapy session is deciding how to spend the time. Although you
collaborate in making this decision with clients, ask yourself: "Which
issue(s) or goals can we work on that will help the client feel better
by the end of the session and have a better week?"

You gently guide clients away from discussion of issues that they can
resolve themselves, are isolated incidents unlikely to recur, are not
particularly distressing or associated with dysfunctional behavior,
and/or they are unlikely to make much progress toward while more
pressing issues need to be addressed.

You also avoid problems or goals that clients don't want to work on,
unless you conceptualize that it's very important to do so at that
session. Even then, you initially try to conceptualize why the client
doesn't want to discuss them. Responding to what they see as the
disadvantages may increase their willingness. Even if they're not
willing to discuss them in full, they may be willing to spend just a few
minutes on them. Ultimately, though, you need to respect their decision.
JUDITH: Maria, do you think we should talk about the upcoming holiday
with your family. MARIA: No, not really. JUDITH: I'm concerned that you
could have a repeat of what happened last month. Would it be okay if we
just looked at the disadvantages of discussing it? And then maybe we can
look at the potential advantages. Having identified and specified an
issue or goal, you need to decide (collaboratively with the client) how
much time and effort to spend on it. You should gather more data (if
needed), review your options, reflect on practical considerations, and
use the stage of therapy as a guide. When clients first bring up an
issue, either while setting the agenda or later in the session, you
assess the nature of the problem and turn it into a goal. For example,
Abe has put a new problem on the agenda: His cousin's business is
failing, and Abe feels badly for her. I ask Abe what his goal is in
relation to this problem so we can assess how useful it will be to
devote a significant portion of therapy time to it. JUDITH: Okay, you
said you wanted to bring up something about your cousin? ABE: Yeah. Her
business has been pretty rocky for a while, but now it looks as if it
may go bankrupt. I'm really sad for her. JUDITH: What would be your goal
in talking about this? Do you want to help her in some way? ABE: No, I
don't think there's anything I can do. JUDITH: How sad do you feel? Do
you think you're feeling "normal" sadness over this? Or do you think
this is affecting you too strongly? ABE: I think I'm having a normal
reaction.

JUDITH: \[having assessed no further work on this problem is warranted\]
Anything else on this? ABE: No, I don't think so. JUDITH: Okay. I'm
sorry this happened to your cousin. (pause) Should we turn to the next
item on our agenda? Abe doesn't seem to be having distorted thoughts
about this issue, he's not catastrophizing; the issue seems to be time
limited, and most importantly, he's having a normal emotional reaction
to it. So we collaboratively decide to start talking about another
agenda item, Abe's goal to look for a new apartment, which does warrant
intervention. JUDITH: You wanted to talk about maybe getting a new
apartment? ABE: Yes. But just thinking about it makes me really nervous.
I don't know where to start. Unlike the issue with his cousin, it was
clear that investigating the possibility of moving was a reasonable goal
and that we had enough time in the session to discuss what could get in
the way and still have time for other important issues or goals. I help
Abe figure out what an initial step could be. We look for obstacles that
could get in the way, and I do some combination of helping Abe respond
to cognitions that could derail him, solving problems, and teaching
necessary skills.

HELPING CLIENTS IDENTIFY A PROBLEMATIC SITUATION Sometimes clients
recognize they are distressed but can't identify a particular situation
or issue that is associated with their distress (or which part of a
situation is the most upsetting). When this happens, you can help them
pinpoint the most problematic situation by proposing several potentially
upsetting problems, asking them to hypothetically fix one problem, and
determining how much relief the client feels. Once a specific situation
has been identified, the automatic thoughts are more easily uncovered.

JUDITH: \[summarizing\] So, it sounds as if you've been very upset for
the past few days and you're not sure why, and you're having trouble
identifying your thoughts---you just feel upset most of the time. Is
that right? MARIA: Yes. I just don't know why I feel so bad. JUDITH:
What kinds of things have you been thinking about? MARIA: Well, I'm
still fighting with my mom. And my sister is mad at me too. I still
can't find a job, my apartment is a mess, and, I don't know, everything.
JUDITH: Anything else? MARIA: I haven't been feeling too well. I'm
afraid I might be getting sick. JUDITH: Which of these situations bother
you the most? Your mom, your sister, not having a job, your apartment,
or feeling sick? MARIA: Oh, I don't know. They're all pretty bad.
JUDITH: Let's say hypothetically we could completely eliminate the
feeling sick problem. Let's say you now feel physically fine, how upset
are you now? MARIA: About the same. JUDITH: Okay. Say, hypothetically,
your mom and your sister call and apologize and say they want to have a
better relationship with you. How do you feel now? MARIA: Somewhat
better. JUDITH: Okay. Let's say you find out you got the job you
interviewed for after all. Now how do you feel? MARIA: Much better. That
would be a great relief. JUDITH: So it sounds as if it's the job that's
the most distressing situation. MARIA: Yeah. I think so. JUDITH: In a
moment, we'll talk more about getting a job, but first I'd like to go
over how we figured it out, so you can do it yourself in the future.
MARIA: Well, you had me list all the things I was worried about and
pretend to solve them one by one. JUDITH: And then you were able to see
which one would give you the most relief if it had been resolved. MARIA:
Yeah. The same process can be used to help the client determine which
part of a seemingly overwhelming problem is most distressing.

CLINICAL TIPS Sometimes you can't easily assess how difficult a goal
will be to reach or how likely it is that a particular discussion will
trigger a painful core belief. In these cases, you may initially focus
on a goal but collaboratively decide to switch to another goal when you
realize your interventions aren't successful and/or the client is
experiencing greater (unintended) distress, as you'll see in the
following interchange I had in an early therapy session with Maria.
JUDITH: Okay, next on the agenda. You said you'd like to meet more
people. (We discuss this goal more specifically.) Now, how could you
meet new people this week? MARIA: (in a meek voice) I could talk to
people in my building, I guess. JUDITH: (noticing that Maria suddenly
looks downcast) What's going through your mind right now? MARIA: It's
hopeless. I'll never be able to do it. I've tried this before. (Appears
angry.) All my other therapists have tried this too. But I'm telling
you, I just can't do it! It won't work! I hypothesize from Maria's
sudden negative affect shift that a core belief has been activated. I
recognize that continuing in the same vein at this time will likely be
counterproductive. Instead of refocusing on the goal, I decide to repair
the therapeutic alliance by positively reinforcing her feedback ("It's
good you told me that"). Then I give her a choice about whether to
return to this agenda item ("Would you like to talk some more about
meeting new people, or should we come back to it another time \[at
another session\] and move on to the issue that you're having with your
mom?").

SUMMARY The overarching goals of treatment are to facilitate remission
of clients' disorders; to increase their sense of purpose, meaning,
connectedness, and well-being and to build resiliency and prevent
relapse. To achieve these objectives, you need to have a solid
understanding of clients' current symptoms and functioning; aspirations,
goals, and values; and presenting problems, precipitating events,
history, and diagnosis. The treatment plan should be based on your
ongoing conceptualization, and you should share your treatment plan with
clients and elicit feedback. It's important to plan treatment both for
individual sessions and across the course of treatment. REFLECTION
QUESTIONS What is an example of a problem or goal that would be helpful
to work on in a therapy session with a client? Why would it be helpful?
What is an example of a problem or goal that wouldn't be helpful to work
on? Why wouldn't it be helpful?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Let's say your goal is to become more proficient in
CBT in the next year. Create a plan to reach this goal. Use Figure 9.2
as a guide.

10

STRUCTURING SESSIONS

you have so much to cover in Session 1, it has a different format
Because from the rest of the sessions. We find the format described in
this chapter to be the most efficient and effective way to conduct
treatment. Having said that, it's important to deviate from the
structure if you find the client is uncomfortable with it. In this
chapter, you'll read excerpts from Abe's fifth session, and you'll find
the answers to these questions: How do you determine the content of
sessions? What happens in each part of a therapy session
(mood/medication/other treatments check, setting initial agenda,
obtaining an update and reviewing the Action Plan, discussing agenda
items, periodic summaries, summary of session, final review of new
Action Plan, and feedback)?

You'll see these session elements in the video of Session 10 with Abe
(beckinstitute.org/CBTresources). You'll learn about typical problems
that arise in structuring sessions in Chapter 11.

CONTENT OF SESSIONS The content of sessions varies according to the
client's issues and goals and your therapeutic objectives. When planning
an individual session, you're mindful of the stage of therapy and you
continue to use your conceptualization of the client to guide treatment.
As clients report on their

mood, briefly review the week, and specify agenda topics, think about
how to integrate your therapeutic objectives with your client's agenda
items. For example, in Session 5, my plan was to continue teaching Abe
(though not necessarily all depressed clients) to evaluate his automatic
thoughts and to continue to schedule activities. We also addressed the
goals he put on the agenda. If you're new to CBT, you may have time to
discuss only one or two issues or goals in depth during a session.
Experienced therapists can often cover more. See Figure 10.1 for Session
Notes from my fifth treatment session with Abe. It's important to take
notes during the therapy session to keep track of what is being covered,
to refine your conceptualization, and to plan future sessions.
Preparatory Notes: Continue activity scheduling and evaluating automatic
thoughts; check on credit list. PATIENT'S NAME: Abe K. SESSION# 5

DATE: 6/10

DIAG./CPT CODE: F 32.3

MOOD RATING/OBJECTIVE MEASURES (SPECIFY): Feeling "a little better."
PHQ-9 = 15; GAD-9 = 6; Well-being = 3. MEDS/changes/side effects/other
treatment: None. RISK ASSESSMENT---suicidal/self-harm/homicidal
ideation: No longer has thoughts of death; low risk. UPDATE/ACTION PLAN
REVIEW/CONCLUSIONS DRAWN: Got more done in apartment/changing thinking
and behavior affects mood/shows taking more control; out of apartment
every day/sees he's starting to take a "little more control"; felt best
at concert/shows he values family/worth it to push self; read therapy
notes daily; got out daily; babysat for granddaughters; dinner with son
and family/good to get out/good to be with them/deserves credit;
identified ATs; gave self credit. AGENDA ITEMS: "Hard stuff" in
apartment, volunteering/tiredness, working for Charlie, evaluate
automatic thoughts, schedule activities. AGENDA ITEM 1---PROBLEM OR
GOAL: Working for Charlie CONCEPTUALIZATION---automatic
thoughts/(meaning/beliefs, if identified)/emotions/behaviors: Situation:
Thinking about working a full day → AT: "I

don't have the stamina." → Emotion: "Worried" → Behavior: Avoided
calling Charlie back. INTERVENTIONS OR THERAPIST SUMMARY: (1) Taught the
"What makes me think ...?" question to evaluate "I don't have the
stamina ..."; (2) Significant evidence AT is true; (3) Evaluated options
when talking to Charlie; (4) Role-played what to say to Charlie. ACTION
PLAN: Ask Charlie to keep him in mind for future work. Remind self that
stamina will improve as depression improves. AGENDA ITEM 2---PROBLEM OR
GOAL: Sorting mail, paying bills, filling out forms
CONCEPTUALIZATION---automatic thoughts/(meaning/beliefs, if
identified)/emotions/behaviors: Situation: Thinking about getting
started → AT: "It's too hard." → Emotion: "Depressed" → Behavior:
Avoided mail. INTERVENTIONS: (1) Skills training (divide mail in four
categories); (2) Evaluated AT (Response: "I don't have to do everything.
The first step is just sorting. I should be able to do the sorting. If
unsure, immediately put items in 'unsure' pile and discuss next
session.") Also discussed what to do with the piles next session; (3)
Covert rehearsal; (4) Imagine completing task; (5) Response to AT ("I
should have done it sooner"): "The depression got in the way"; (6) Set
alarm on phone for tomorrow morning. ACTION PLAN: Read relevant therapy
notes, imagine completing task, sort mail for tomorrow morning. OTHER
ACTION PLAN ITEMS: Keep credit list; get out of apartment every day; see
family, take grandsons to baseball game; identify automatic thoughts and
ask, "What makes me think this thought is true? What makes me think it's
untrue, or not completely true?" SUMMARY/CLIENT FEEDBACK: Feeling better
linked to changed thinking, behavior, and giving self credit; importance
of taking control; very likely to complete Action Plan.
Feedback---"good." THERAPIST'S SIGNATURE: Judith S. Beck, PhD NOTES FOR
NEXT SESSION: Discuss volunteering? Increasing stamina? Assess
selfcriticism; continue activity scheduling and teaching evaluation of
automatic thoughts. FIGURE 10.1. Session Notes. Copyright © 2018 CBT
Worksheet Packet. Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

As you take notes, maintain eye contact as much as possible. It's
important at times, especially when clients are revealing emotionally
painful material, not to take notes so you can be more fully present
with the client.

Format of a Typical Session

Figure 10.2 lists the parts of sessions. It's helpful to provide
rationales for each part in the first couple of therapy sessions. It's
also important to make periodic summaries throughout each session. In
the initial stage of treatment, you'll continue to socialize clients to
CBT: following the session format, working collaboratively, providing
feedback, and starting to view ongoing (and often past) experience in
light of the cognitive model. If clients are feeling somewhat better,
you'll also start relapse prevention (Chapter 21). Above all, you're
concerned with inspiring hope, strengthening or maintaining the
therapeutic alliance, and helping clients feel better and become more
functional. Initial Part of Session 1. Conduct a mood/medication/other
treatment check. 2. Set the agenda. 3. Ask for an update (positives and
negatives), and review Action Plan from the previous week. 4. Prioritize
the agenda. Middle Part of Session 5. Work on agenda item 1, summarize,
make intervention(s), assess need for further interventions, and discuss
Action Plan items. 6. Work on agenda items 2 and 3 (if time). End of
Session 7. Summarize the session. 8. Review the Action Plan for the
coming week. 9. Elicit feedback. FIGURE 10.2. Structure of sessions.

THE FIRST PART OF THE SESSION The specific objectives of the
introductory part of the session, described below, are to reestablish
rapport, collect data to find out what issues/goals will be important to
cover in the session, and draw conclusions about what the client
accomplished as a follow-up to the previous session. To accomplish these
objectives, you will (1) do a mood/medication check, (2) set an initial
agenda, (3) ask for an update and review the Action Plan, and (4)
prioritize the agenda. Experienced CBT therapists tend to interweave
these four elements, but I've separated them in this chapter for
clarity. You may find that the beginning of each session proceeds more
quickly if you ask clients to review (mentally or in writing) the
Preparing for Therapy Worksheet (Figure 10.3) prior to the session. You
can keep these worksheets in the reception area or you can send them
home with clients until they're socialized to give you a concise report
of the previous week without this prompt. 1. What did we talk about last
session that was important? How much do I believe my therapy notes? 2.
What has my mood been like, compared to other weeks? 3. What positive
experiences did I have this week? What did I learn? What do these
experiences say about me? 4. What else happened this week that's
important for my therapist to know? 5. What are my goals for this
session? Think of a brief title for each (e.g., connecting more with
people, getting more done around the house, and concentrating better at
work). 6. What did I do for my Action Plan? (If I didn't do an item,
what got in the way?) What did I learn? FIGURE 10.3. Preparing for
Therapy Worksheet. Copyright © 2018 CBT Worksheet Packet. Beck Institute
for Cognitive Behavior Therapy, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Mood Check

The brief mood check creates several opportunities: You demonstrate your
concern for how clients have been feeling in the past week. You and they
can monitor how they've been progressing over the course of treatment.
You can identify (and then reinforce or modify) their explanation for
progress or lack thereof. You can reinforce the cognitive model: that
their thoughts and activities have influenced their mood. You can check
on suicidal ideation, hopelessness, or aggressive or homicidal impulses
that will need to be addressed in the session, usually as the first
agenda item.

According to clients' diagnoses and symptomatology, you might also ask
for additional information, for example, the number and severity of
panic attacks, time spent doing rituals, binges, substance use, angry
outbursts, self-harm, or aggressive or destructive behavior. Here's how
my fifth session with Abe begins. JUDITH: Hi, Abe. How are you? ABE:
Okay (handing over the scales he filled out). JUDITH: Are you feeling
about the same? Better? Worse? ABE: A little better. Well, there was one
time this week when I felt much worse, but for the most part, it was
better. JUDITH: When we set the agenda, I'd like you to tell me about
that time. But I'm really glad you had another better week. (pause) What
was your sense of well-being like? ABE: About a 3. JUDITH: It seems your
mood has been improving, little by little. (pause) Does it seem that way
to you, too? ABE: Yeah, I think so. JUDITH: (looking at his scales) It
looks like you're having a little more energy? And you're enjoying
things just a little more? ABE: Yeah, that's right. It's important to
get clients' attribution for an improved mood. We want to help them see
that positive changes in their thinking and behavior are associated with
feeling better.

JUDITH: That's good. Why do you think your mood improved this week? ABE:
I guess I've been feeling a little more hopeful, like maybe therapy is
helping. JUDITH: \[subtly reinforcing the cognitive model\] So you
thought, "Maybe therapy is helping," and that thought made you feel
slightly more hopeful, less depressed? ABE: Yes ... and I got a fair
amount done in my apartment this week. And spent time with my kids.
JUDITH: Okay, so changing your thinking and changing your behavior is
really affecting your mood. ABE: Yeah, I think so. JUDITH: Do you want
to continue doing those things this week? ABE: I do. Next, I help Abe
draw some positive conclusions about his behavior. JUDITH: What does it
mean that you were able to do these things? You weren't able to a few
weeks ago. ABE: I guess that I'm taking more control. JUDITH:
\[providing positive reinforcement\] Absolutely. CLINICAL TIPS Sometimes
clients are unsure as to why they're feeling better. If so, ask, "Have
you noticed any changes in your thinking or in what you've been doing?"
If there's a discrepancy between clients' narrative description of their
mood from the past week and the scales they filled out, you might say,
"So you've been feeling worse, but the score on this depression
questionnaire is actually lower than last week. What do you make of
that?"

Three common difficulties can arise during the mood check (you'll read
about them in the next chapter): when clients attribute positive changes
in their mood to external factors, when clients give too detailed a
description of their mood, and when clients have experienced a worsening
in mood.

Medication/Other Treatments Check We covered the medication check
previously (pp. 90--91). As a reminder, when relevant, you'll ask about
clients' adherence to their prescribed

medication (and difficulty with side effects) and other treatments. And
when relevant, you'll help clients create a list of questions for their
prescriber.

Setting an Initial Agenda The purpose of this relatively brief segment
is to set an initial agenda. Here's what to do: Ask clients for their
goal(s) for the session and find out (either next or when you prioritize
the agenda) if there's anything even more important to discuss. (Note:
In traditional CBT, we'd be more apt to start by asking, "What problems
do you want my help in solving?" or "What do you want to work on
today?") Gently interrupt clients when needed to label the goal or
issue, instead of describing it at length. Check your notes from the
previous session and inquire about items you didn't have time to cover.
Propose topics you'd like to cover.

Throughout the first part of the session, you should also ask whether
clients anticipate any other important issues in the coming week, and be
alert for other important agenda items, such as negative experiences
from the past week that are likely to recur in the coming week.

Toward the end of the initial part of the session, you'll also help the
client prioritize topics to cover in the rest of the session. JUDITH:
Let's set the agenda, if that's okay, so we can figure out what's most
important to you to talk about. What's your goal for today's session?
ABE: Well, I've made some headway in my apartment, but there's still a
lot to do to clean it up. Some of the stuff is really hard and ...
JUDITH: (gently interrupting) Okay (writing down the goal), "Cleaning
hard stuff in the apartment." Anything else? ABE: I'm wondering if I'm
in good enough shape to go volunteer again ... I don't know; I'm pretty
tired \[potential obstacle\] and ...

JUDITH: (gently interrupting) Would you like to discuss that, too?
(pause) ABE: Yeah, if we have time. JUDITH: Okay, "Volunteering and
tiredness." Anything else? ABE: Nothing I can think of right now. Rather
than having Abe provide a full description of these topics, I lightly
interrupt and name the goal/issue. Had I allowed him to provide a
lengthy description of these issues, I would have deprived him of the
opportunity to reflect on what he most wanted to talk about during the
session---which may or may not have been the first issue he brought up.
I also probe for additional agenda topics. JUDITH: You mentioned that
you felt much worse one time this week. Is that something we should talk
about? ABE: I'm not sure. I got this bad phone call from my ex-wife. She
was yelling at me for still being out of work so I can't pay her any
more alimony. I felt really bad for a while. But that was the day I took
my granddaughters to a concert, and by the time I got back, I felt
better. JUDITH: Should we put your ex-wife on the agenda? ABE: Yeah, at
some point, but not today, I don't think. She probably won't call me
again for another couple of months. JUDITH: Okay, is there anything
coming up this week that I should know? ABE: (Thinks.) Oh, yeah. My
friend, Charlie, said he had some construction work for me. But I don't
know if I'm up for it. JUDITH: Should we look at the advantages and
disadvantages of doing work for him? ABE: Yeah, that would be good. For
clients who have difficulty figuring out what they want to put on the
agenda, see pages 200--203. Next, I propose my agenda topics. JUDITH:
And along the way, I'd like to tell you some more about evaluating your
thoughts and scheduling activities again---if that's okay. ABE: Okay.

Update and Action Plan Review

Next, you draw a bridge between the previous session and the current
one. Often, you'll combine a review of the Action Plan with the update.
You'll continue to remain alert for issues or goals that could be
important for the agenda. Traditionally, we started the update by asking
clients, "What happened in the past week that's important for me to
know?" When you ask that question, particularly toward the beginning of
treatment, you'll find that clients usually report negative experiences.
If so, it's important to ask them about positive experiences or times
when they felt even a little better. In a recovery orientation, we tend
to start with the positive by asking a question (or questions) such as:
"What happened this week that was good?" "What did you do this week that
was good?" "When were you at your best this week?" "What was the best
part of the week?"

Emphasizing the positive helps clients see reality more clearly, as the
depression has undoubtedly led them to focus almost exclusively on the
negative. It helps them recognize that they didn't feel the same
unrelenting severity of distress for the entire week. Naming positive
experiences also gives you the opportunity to praise clients for
engaging in meaningful social, productive, pleasurable, or self-care
activities; to help clients draw helpful conclusions about the
activities, including the positive things they indicate about the
client; to evoke positive emotion in the session, putting clients in a
better frame of mind and making them more receptive in the remainder of
the session; to discuss whether the client thinks it's a good idea to
engage in similar activities in the coming week; and to strengthen the
therapeutic relationship by becoming briefly conversational, perhaps
using some self-disclosure.

JUDITH: When were you at your best this week? ABE: (Thinks.) When I saw
my granddaughters. I took them to a kids' concert. They really like this
singer---I forget his name; he plays the guitar and sings kids' songs.

JUDITH: \[using self-disclosure to strengthen the therapeutic bond\] I
remember taking my own kids to events like that. I really should look
into taking my grandchildren to a concert. ABE: I think this guy has
another concert this coming weekend. JUDITH: Oh, thanks. (pause) Was
taking your grandchildren out unusual for you? ABE: Yeah, I used to do
it, but I haven't done something like that for a long time. JUDITH:
\[eliciting positive conclusions\] What was good about the experience?
ABE: They were just really excited. And they were really happy I took
them. JUDITH: Well, I'm glad you were able to do that. (pause) What did
you learn? ABE: I guess that it was worth it to push myself. I was
really tired and I didn't feel like going, but I didn't want to let them
down. I should be doing things like this more often. JUDITH: That's
good. \[trying to elicit an adaptive core belief\] And what does it say
about you that even though you're so depressed and tired, you were able
to get yourself to go? ABE: I'm not sure. JUDITH: Does it show that you
really value your family, that you were willing to push yourself, that
maybe you can take more control of your mood than you thought? ABE: I
guess that's right. JUDITH: Were there any other good things that
happened this week? ABE: That was the best thing. I also got a lot done
on my Action Plan. JUDITH: Good. We'll get to that in a minute. Take
note of the positive data. You may use this information later in the
session or in future sessions, especially when planning positive
activities for clients to engage in or when helping them evaluate
relevant automatic thoughts and beliefs. Next, ask about other parts of
the client's week. JUDITH: Did anything else happen this week that's
important for me to know? ABE: (Thinks.) Umm. (Sighs.) Yeah, I think my
younger brother is annoyed with me because I told him I didn't think it
was a good idea for him to

leave his job. JUDITH: \[probing to see whether it is important enough
to add to the agenda\] Is that something we should talk about today?
ABE: No, I don't think so. It'll blow over. JUDITH: Okay, anything else?
ABE: Not that I can think of. JUDITH: Anything coming up this week I
should know? ABE: Just what I said before, you know, about Charlie, and
maybe volunteering. JUDITH: Okay. Next, you'll continue to find out what
clients accomplished on their Action Plans. JUDITH: Can we talk about
your Action Plan? Do you have it with you? ABE: Yeah. (Pulls it out;
Judith pulls out her copy too.) JUDITH: Were you able to read your
therapy notes twice a day? ABE: Maybe 90% of the time. JUDITH: That's
good. Next, I ask Abe to read his therapy notes aloud and tell me how
much he agrees with them. Then I check to see if he gave himself
positive reinforcement, and we continue with the Action Plan review.
JUDITH: Did you give yourself credit when you read the therapy notes?
ABE: Yeah. JUDITH: Good. (looking at the Action Plan) Let's see, did you
get out every day? ABE: Uh, huh. I also went to my daughter's house and
babysat Saturday night. JUDITH: Did your daughter appreciate that? ABE:
Yeah, and her husband too. Their babysitter cancelled at the last
minute. JUDITH: Might this be something you could offer to do again?
ABE: Yeah, I probably should. JUDITH: Should we put that on your Action
Plan? ABE: Maybe put it as optional. JUDITH: Okay. (pause) And did you
give yourself credit?

ABE: Yeah. It was good I did it. It helped them out, and it was better
than just sitting around with nothing to do at home. We continue to
review Abe's Action Plan. I give him positive reinforcement, ask about
the meaning of his positive experiences, and discuss whether to continue
a given Action Plan item in the coming week. He commits to continuing to
get out of his apartment daily. During our discussion, I'm also alert
for new agenda items that might take priority over the goals and issues
we have already identified.

Prioritizing the Agenda Next, you'll list the issues or goals on the
agenda. If there are too many items, you and the client will
collaboratively prioritize them and agree to move the discussion of less
important items to a future session. You may also find out whether
clients want to spend about an equal amount of time on each item or
primarily talk about one agenda topic. JUDITH: Okay, can we prioritize
the agenda now? You mentioned you have a goal to do hard stuff in your
apartment, maybe to do some work for Charlie, and to decide whether to
volunteer even though you're tired. Which one do you want to start with?
ABE: Charlie. JUDITH: Good. (pause) Should we definitely leave time to
talk about getting stuff done and the volunteering? ABE: Definitely
about getting stuff done at home. It's okay if we don't get to talk
about volunteering this week. JUDITH: Should we divide the time about
50-50 between Charlie and your apartment? ABE: That sounds fine.

THE MIDDLE PART OF THE SESSION Next, you'll work on the issue or goal
that is of greatest importance to the client. At times, though, you may
take the lead in suggesting the agenda item to start with, especially
when you judge that a particular issue should take precedence: "Is it
okay with you if we start with \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_?" In traditional
CBT, you usually collect data about a problem that has already occurred
and conceptualize the client's difficulties according to the cognitive
model. In a recovery-oriented approach, you're more likely to ask
clients what steps they want to take in the coming week toward achieving
a goal (the flip side of a problem), and you'll use the cognitive model
to conceptualize obstacles that could get in the way of taking these
steps (Beck et al., in press). In both approaches, you'll
collaboratively decide on which part of the cognitive model you will
begin working on the situation that has already occurred or a potential
obstacle to taking steps toward a goal, the automatic thoughts
associated with the situation/obstacle, and/or the reaction (emotional,
behavioral, physiological) associated with the automatic thoughts.

You'll choose an intervention, provide a rationale, elicit the client's
agreement, implement the intervention, and measure its effectiveness. In
the context of discussing either issues or goals on the agenda, you'll
be teaching clients skills and setting new Action Plans. You will also
make periodic summaries to help you and the client recall what you've
been doing in this part of the session. In discussing the first issue
(and subsequent issues), you will interweave your therapy objectives as
appropriate. Abe and I first discuss whether he should take Charlie up
on his offer of doing some construction work. I ask Abe about his
concerns. His automatic thought is "I won't have enough stamina for a
full workday." I teach him two questions to evaluate his thinking: "What
makes me think this thought is true? What makes me think it isn't true,
or not completely true?" The evaluation showed that Abe was probably
right. We discuss his options: asking Charlie either if he could work
for half a day or if he could keep Abe

in mind for a future construction job. Abe chooses the latter option,
and we role-play what he can tell Charlie. Then we discuss Abe's second
goal and proceed in the same way. It turns out that the "hard stuff" was
mostly about sorting a large pile of mail, paying bills, and completing
insurance forms. To address the obstacles that could get in the way in
the coming week, we follow these steps: 1. I collect data about the
problem and ask Abe what thoughts he believes might interfere with doing
these tasks. 2. I summarize his difficulty in the form of the cognitive
model, evaluate his automatic thoughts, and record good responses to
them. 3. We do problem solving (decided to just sort mail this week) and
skills training (sorting mail into four piles). 4. We collaboratively
set an Action Plan item. 5. We agree that Abe will set a timer, as we're
sitting in the office, to remind him to start the mail the next morning.
6. We do covert rehearsal because Abe is still uncertain that he'll be
able to get started on the task. 7. I ask Abe to imagine having
completed the task.

JUDITH: Abe, can you imagine that it's tomorrow, just before lunch?
You've been brave, tackling the stack of mail and you finished it.
You're sitting at the dining room table, looking at the four piles
you've sorted the mail into: the "keep" pile, the "do-something-with"
pile, the "throw-away" pile, and the "not-sure-what-to-do" pile. (pause)
How are you feeling as you're sitting there? ABE: Relieved. Nervous
about the "do-something-with" pile and the unsure pile, but you said we
could talk more about them next week. JUDITH: What are you saying to
give yourself credit? ABE: That it's good I finally did it. JUDITH: Are
you proud of yourself? ABE: Yes ... but I should have done it sooner
\[automatic thought\]. JUDITH: How would you like to answer that
thought? ABE: Like you said. The depression has gotten in the way.
JUDITH: Exactly. What does it say about you that even though you're
still really depressed, you got yourself to sort the mail? ABE: I guess
that I can do some things that I thought I couldn't. JUDITH: Oh, that's
so important. Can we write that down for your therapy notes?

Periodic Summaries You'll summarize in three ways throughout sessions.
One way is with the content. Clients often describe an issue with many
details. You'll summarize what they've said in the form of the cognitive
model to make sure you've correctly identified what is most important to
them and to present it in a way that is clearer and more concise. You'll
use your clients' own words as much as possible, both to convey accurate
understanding and to keep the key difficulty or goal activated in their
mind: "Let me make sure I understand, Abe. When you thought about
sorting the mail this week, you thought, 'I can't face doing this,' and
you felt really down and so you've been avoiding this job. (pause) Is
that right? (pause) Did you feel any other emotion or have any other
automatic thoughts?" I summarize using Abe's actual words. If I had
paraphrased, I might have done so incorrectly and probably reduced the
intensity of the automatic thought and emotion. Then our subsequent
evaluation of the thought might have been less effective. And when you
substitute your words, clients may perceive that they haven't been
accurately understood. You'll often ask clients to make a second kind of
summary after you've finished discussing an issue or goal, to check on
their understanding and reinforce important learning---for example: "Can
you summarize what we just talked about? \[or 'What do you want to be
sure to remember?'\]" When clients do a good job of summarizing, you or
they should record this summary so they can read it daily as part of
their Action Plan. You'll make a third kind of summary when you've
finished a section of a session, so clients have a clear understanding
of what has just been accomplished and what comes next: "Okay, so far
we've talked about \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.
Next, should we talk about \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_?"

FINAL SUMMARY, CHECK ON ACTION PLAN, AND FEEDBACK

Final Summary The goal of the final summary is to focus the client's
attention on the most important points of the session in a positive way.
You also see whether there seems to be any problem with fulfilling the
Action Plan. In early sessions, you'll generally be the one to
summarize. JUDITH: Well, we have just a few minutes left. I'd like to
summarize what we covered today, and then I'll ask you for your reaction
to the session. ABE: Okay. JUDITH: It sounds like you felt a little
better this week, and it seems to be due to reading your therapy notes,
recognizing that some of your depressed thinking isn't true, being more
active, and giving yourself credit. You did a lot of things to take
control of your life and your activities and your mood. You're also
starting to question your automatic thoughts and not immediately buy
into them. (pause) Is that right? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH: Anything else to
add to that? ABE: No, I don't think so. CLINICAL TIPS As clients
progress, you may ask them to summarize the most important points.
Summarizing is much more easily accomplished if the client has recorded
good notes during the session. You might say, "We just have a few
minutes left." Then you can ask: "What did you think was most important
about today's session?" or "What do you think is going to be most
important for you to remember this week? You can look at your notes."
"What did you learn?"

Check on Action Plan Next, I review what we discussed Abe would do
before our next session. First, I list items he has already been working
on for the past few weeks. But we've added a couple more items at this
session, and I want to make sure he's highly likely to do them and
doesn't feel overwhelmed. JUDITH: Okay, can we look at your Action Plan?
How likely are you, every day, to read your therapy notes, get out of
your apartment, and keep

your credit list? ABE: 100%. JUDITH: How about talking to Charlie?
That's a onetime thing. ABE: 100%. I will. JUDITH: Sorting the mail? You
can do it all at once or spread it out. ABE: I think I can do it.
JUDITH: If you're not sure, should we make it optional? Or set a time
limit on it, say, 10 minutes? ABE: No, no, I'll do it. JUDITH: And get
tickets and take your grandsons to a baseball game? That's another
onetime thing. ABE: Yeah, I will. JUDITH: 100%? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: And
finally, when you recognize an automatic thought, how likely are you to
ask yourself, "What makes me think this thought is true?" And also "What
makes me think this thought is not true, or not completely true." ABE: I
can do that. The rubber band will remind me. JUDITH: Does this all seem
like too much to do? ABE: (Thinks.) No, I've already been doing a lot of
it.

Feedback Following the final summary, you'll elicit feedback. By this
time in our treatment, I was pretty sure that Abe would give me negative
feedback if he had any. So I ask just one question: "What did you think
about the session today?" For the first few sessions, I added these
questions: "Was there anything I said that bothered you?"; "Anything you
think I got wrong?"; "Anything you want to do differently next time?"
Abe was already socialized to fill out a Feedback Form in the reception
area, so I didn't need to remind him to do it.

SUMMARY

The structure outlined in this chapter provides an efficient way to
accomplish the work of the session. Although various elements have been
separated for clarity, many CBT therapists interweave them. Therapists
also interweave their agenda items as they apply to the client's agenda
items. The following chapter discusses problems in instituting the
structure and how structure may need to be varied for an individual
client. REFLECTION QUESTIONS What do you think will be the most
difficult part of structuring a session? Why? What are three types of
periodic summaries that are important in sessions, and why is each
important?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Ask a peer, colleague, friend, or family member to do
a role play with you. Prepare an Action Plan that you will review toward
the beginning of the session. Do the following: 1. Conduct a mood check
(0--10). 2. Set an initial agenda. 3. Request an update and review the
Action Plan from the previous week. 4. Discuss agenda item 1. 5. Ask
client to summarize what you discussed and write down therapy notes. 6.
Collaboratively set additional items for the Action Plan, if relevant.
7. Elicit a final summary and feedback.

11

PROBLEMS IN STRUCTURING SESSIONS

clients become easily socialized to the usual structure of sessions.
Many Educating clients about the structure and providing a rationale may
be enough. But there are certainly times when you shouldn't follow the
usual structure. In this chapter, you'll find the answers to these
questions: How do you conceptualize difficulties in structuring
sessions? What are common problems for each segment of a typical therapy
session? How can you solve these problems? When should you deviate from
the agenda? What can you do when clients are distressed toward the end
of a session?

GENERAL DIFFICULTIES IN STRUCTURING When you become aware of a problem,
ask yourself: "What is the specific problem? What is the client saying
or not saying that's a problem? Or what is the client doing or not
doing?" "Do I have any responsibility for this problem?" "How do I
conceptualize why this problem arose?" "What should I do about it?"

If you've correctly diagnosed the client and developed a sound treatment
plan but still have difficulties in structuring sessions, check on the
following: Have you gently interrupted the client to direct the session?
Have you socialized the client into the structure and process of
treatment? Is the client sufficiently engaged in treatment? Is the
therapeutic relationship strong enough?

Therapist Cognitions If you are a novice therapist or a therapist
experienced in a less directive modality, you may have interfering
cognitions about gently interrupting clients and implementing the
standard structure. Monitor your discomfort and identify your automatic
thoughts during and between sessions. Here are some typical ones: "I
can't structure the session." "\[My client\] won't like the structure."
"She can't express herself concisely." "He'll get mad if I'm too
directive." "I'll miss something important." "I shouldn't interrupt
her." "He won't do Action Plans." "She'll feel invalidated."

If you're struggling, evaluate and respond to your thoughts so you can
experiment with implementing the standard structure at the next session.
I strongly recommend that you practice structuring sessions in role
plays. Then, you can structure a client session as a behavioral
experiment to see if your thoughts are accurate.

Interrupting the Client For therapy to proceed most efficiently, you
need to use gentle interruption. In one of our sessions, Maria starts
talking about holiday plans and then

brings up other problems. MARIA: And then, I couldn't believe it, but my
sister told me---told me!--- that I had to go help out Mom. She knows
that I can't do that. I mean, my mother and I have never gotten along.
If I go over, she'll just bombard me with stuff to do. And she'll
criticize me. I just can't take any more criticism. I get it all day at
work and ... JUDITH: Can I interrupt you for a minute? I want to make
sure I understand what's been going on. We started talking about holiday
plans and what you could do and then you described some other problems.
Which do you think would be most important to work on? Holiday plans,
your sister, mom, or work? Sometimes clients become upset when you
interrupt. When they do, positively reinforce them for telling you. Then
apologize for making a mistake. (You overestimated how much interruption
your client could tolerate.) Next, negotiate with the client, as I do
with Maria below. JUDITH: \[interrupting Maria for the third time\]
Sorry to interrupt. How did you feel when he did that? MARIA: (in
irritated tone of voice) You're interrupting me again. JUDITH: Oh, it's
good you told me that. You're right. I'm sorry. I have been interrupting
you too much. (pause) How does this sound? You tell me whatever you
think is most important for me to know for the next 10 minutes or so,
and I won't interrupt at all. Then I'd like to summarize what you said
because it's important to me that I understand you correctly. (pause)
Then maybe we can choose one issue to focus on next. Clients like Maria
often spontaneously tell you that you're interrupting too much. Other
clients may tell you after you note an affect shift and ask them what's
going through their minds. When you suspect that clients have had a
negative reaction to interruptions but are reluctant to tell you, you
can offer a hypothesis: "I was wondering whether you thought I was
interrupting you too much?"

Socializing the Client

A second common difficulty in maintaining the prescribed structure can
arise if you don't adequately socialize clients. Clients who are new to
CBT don't know in advance that you would like them to briefly report on
the week, describe their mood, and name agenda items. Asking clients to
think about the items on the Preparing for Therapy Worksheet (Figure
10.3, p. 178) should help. Clients also don't know that you will ask
them to summarize important points of your discussions, provide feedback
during and at the end of sessions, remember session content, and
consistently do daily Action Plans. In addition, you are essentially
teaching clients certain skills---and also a new way of relating to you
(for those who have been in another type of therapy)---or a new way of
relating to their difficulties so they can adopt a more objective,
problem-solving orientation. In the first therapy session, you should
tell them why you're structuring the session, describe each session
element and then provide a rationale and monitor with gentle, corrective
feedback.

Engaging the Client A third common difficulty arises when clients have
dysfunctional beliefs that interfere with their ability to commit to
working in treatment. They may not have clear goals that they really
want to achieve. They may have unrealistic hopes that they will somehow
get better just by showing up to therapy sessions without doing the work
of therapy. They may feel hopeless about their ability to solve
problems, affect their life, or change. They may even fear that if they
get better, their life will get worse in some way (e.g., they will lose
you as a therapist or have to return to work). You need to be aware of
clients' shifts in affect during the session so you can ask them for
their cognitions. Then you'll help clients respond to their unhelpful
thinking so they'll be more amenable to the structure and tasks of
treatment.

Addressing Dysfunctional Cognitions A fourth common difficulty involves
clients' unwillingness to conform to the prescribed structure because of
their perceptions of and dysfunctional beliefs about themselves, about
therapy, or about you. I notice a negative

affect shift when I describe the session structure to Maria in our first
therapy appointment. JUDITH: What just went through your mind when I
described what our sessions would be like? MARIA: I'm not sure I'm
comfortable with it. My old therapist just let me keep talking about
whatever was on my mind. JUDITH: Did you feel that helped you get over
your depression? MARIA: (Thinks.) Well, no, not really. That's why I
stopped seeing him after a couple of years. JUDITH: Here's my concern.
If I do exactly what he did, I think we're going to have the same
outcome. (pause) How would you feel about trying it a different way? You
might find that it's actually a lot better for you. And if you don't, we
can always change what we're doing. MARIA: (hesitantly) I guess that's
okay. JUDITH: Good. Let's give it a try, and I'll make sure to ask you
partway through today and at the end how it feels to you. At the other
end of the spectrum, you may allow the client to dominate and control
the flow of the session---initially. With most clients, however, you
will negotiate a compromise satisfactory to both of you, and you will
try, over time, to move the client toward the standard structure.
CLINICAL TIPS How do you determine whether the difficulty in adherence
to session structure is due to faulty socialization or reluctance in
complying? You first intervene by further socializing clients to the
customary structure and by monitoring their verbal and nonverbal
responses. If it's simply a problem in socialization, clients' responses
are fairly neutral (or perhaps slightly self-critical), and subsequent
compliance is good. JUDITH: Can I interrupt for a moment? Can we get
back to what happened when you called your friend? ABE: Oh, sure. When
clients react negatively, they have undoubtedly perceived your request
in a negative way, and you need to switch gears. MARIA: That reminds me.
I forgot to tell you what my mother told me I had to do. JUDITH: Should
we finish talking about David first? MARIA: (irritably) But this thing
with my mother is really upsetting. JUDITH: Okay. We can talk about your
mother. I just want to make sure that it's okay if we don't have time to
get back to talking about David today. MARIA: Yeah, the thing with David
can wait.

Problems can also arise if you impose structure in a controlling or
demanding fashion. If clients are reluctant to provide you with honest
feedback, you may not know you've made this mistake. It will be
important for you to review a recording of the session---and even
better, if a peer, colleague, or supervisor reviews it too. Then you can
model apologizing and remedy the problem at the next session. You might
say: "I think I came across as too heavy-handed last week. I'm sorry, I
do want to make sure that you agree with how the session goes."

COMMON PROBLEMS IN STRUCTURAL PARTS OF SESSIONS You could potentially
run into difficulties for each part of the session, including The mood
check, setting the agenda, eliciting an update, reviewing the Action
Plan, discussion of agenda items, and/or ending the session.

The most common problems in each of these areas are described below.

Difficulties in Doing the Mood Check Common problems involve clients'
failure to fill out forms, annoyance with forms, or difficulty in
subjectively expressing (in a concise manner) their general mood during
the week. If the difficulty is simply faulty socialization related to
completing the forms, you can ask clients whether they remember and
agree with the rationale for filling them out and determine whether
there's a practical difficulty that needs to be resolved (e.g.,
insufficient time, forgetting, or a problem in literacy).

Negative Reactions to Forms When clients are annoyed by the request to
fill out forms, you can ask for their automatic thoughts when thinking
about or actually filling them out, or you can ask for the significance
of the situation: "What's the worst part about filling them out?" or
"What does it mean to you that I've asked you to fill out these forms?"

You can then empathically respond to clients' concerns, help them
evaluate relevant thoughts and beliefs, and/or do problem solving. These
responses are provided in the three examples below. CLIENT 1: These
forms don't really seem to apply to me. Half of the questions are
irrelevant. THERAPIST: Yes, I know. But actually, they're helpful to
me---I can look at them quickly and get the overall picture, and not
bother you with lots of questions. Would you be willing to fill them out
again next week, and we can talk more about them then if they still
bother you? In the next example, the client clearly expresses his
annoyance through his choice of words, tone of voice, and body language.
CLIENT 2: These forms are a waste of time. Half the questions are
irrelevant. THERAPIST: What's the worst part about filling them out?
CLIENT 2: I'm busy. I have a lot to do. If my life fills up with
meaningless tasks, I'll never get anything done. THERAPIST: I can see
you feel pretty irritated. How long does it take you to fill them out?
CLIENT 2: ... I don't know. A few minutes, I guess. THERAPIST: I know
some of the items don't apply, but actually they save us time in our
session because I don't have to ask you lots of questions myself. Could
we try to problem-solve and see where you could fit in the time to do
them? CLIENT 2: (Sighs.) I guess it's not that big a deal. I'll do them.
Here I avoid directly evaluating the accuracy of the client's automatic
thoughts because he is annoyed and I sense that he will perceive such

questioning in a negative way. Instead, I provide a rationale and help
the client realize that the task is not as time consuming as he has
perceived it to be. In a third case, I judge that further persuasion to
fill out forms will negatively affect our tenuous therapeutic alliance.
CLIENT 3: (in an angry voice) I hate these forms. They don't apply to
me. I know you want me to fill them out, but I'm telling you, they're
worthless. THERAPIST: Let's skip them, then, at least for the time
being. I would like to get a clear idea of how you've been feeling
during the week though. Maybe you could just rate your depression on a
0--100 scale, where 0 is not feeling depressed at all and 100 is the
most depressed you've ever felt. Would that be all right?

Difficulty Expressing Mood A different problem involves clients'
difficulty in subjectively expressing their mood, either because they do
not do so concisely or because they have difficulty labeling their
moods. You might gently interrupt, and either ask specific questions or
demonstrate to them how to respond. If clients elaborate at length about
their mood, socialize them to give a concise description. THERAPIST: Can
I interrupt you for a moment? I do want to hear more about
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ in a few minutes, but first I just need to know
whether you've generally felt better, worse, or the same compared to
last week. CLIENT: Worse. THERAPIST: More anxious? More sad? More angry?
CLIENT: Angry, I guess. When clients have difficulty labeling their
moods, you might respond differently: "It sounds like it's hard to pin
down how you've been feeling. Maybe we should put on the agenda
'identifying feelings.'" During the session, you might use the
techniques described in Chapter 13 to teach clients to specify their
mood.

Attribution of Change in Mood to External Factors Sometimes clients
attribute positive changes in their mood to external factors. For
example, they might say, "I felt better because the medication started
working/my boss was out sick/my partner was nicer to me." You might then
suggest, "I'm sure that helped, but did you also find yourself thinking
differently or doing anything that was different?"

Worsening of Mood Also seek clients' attributions when their mood has
become worse: "Why do you think you're feeling worse this week? Could it
have anything to do with your thinking, or with the things you did or
didn't do?" In this way, you subtly reinforce the cognitive model and
imply that clients can take some control over how they feel. CLINICAL
TIPS You could have clients who say, "Nothing can improve my mood." It
might be helpful to create a chart such as the one in Chapter 7, page
130. Recognizing that there are things that make them feel better or
worse can help reinforce the notion that clients can affect their mood.
Through guided discovery, you can help them see that avoidance,
isolation, and inactivity generally increase their dysphoria (or at
least do not improve it), while engagement in certain activities
(usually that involve interpersonal interaction or that have the
potential for pleasure or mastery) can lead to an improvement in their
mood, even if initially the change is small.

Difficulties in Setting the Agenda Typical difficulties in setting the
agenda arise when clients ramble, fail to contribute, and/or feel
hopeless or overwhelmed.

Rambling when Contributing to the Agenda Sometimes clients digress or
are long-winded. A gentle interruption and summary can help: "Can I
interrupt for a moment? It sounds as if you have

goals this week in terms of your dad and work. Is there anything more
important than those two things?"

Failing to Contribute to the Agenda Some clients don't name problems or
goals for the agenda because they truly don't know what to say, they are
doing really well, or they're not adequately socialized. If they're not
sure what should go on the agenda, you can ask them one or more of the
following questions: (taking out a copy of the client's goals) "Is there
something on this list you'd like to talk about?" "How would you like
the next few days to be better?" "How do you want to feel next week when
you come in? What will you need to do this week to feel that way?" "Do
you want to talk about \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \[a goal\] or
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \[a specific issue\]?" "When was the past week
most difficult for you?"

You can also look at the symptom scales they filled out on that day and
see which ones are elevated. If they don't need further help in working
toward their goals, you can focus on relapse prevention (Chapter 21).
Below, I illustrate two occasions, in Sessions 2 and 3, where I have
some difficulty setting an agenda with Maria. JUDITH: What would you
like the goal for this session to be? MARIA: ... I don't know. JUDITH:
Is there a particular goal you want to work toward? How would you like
your life to be better this week? MARIA: (Sighs.) I don't know. JUDITH:
Are you feeling kind of hopeless? MARIA: Yeah. Last week was really bad.
JUDITH: \[providing a multiple choice\] Do you think you generally felt
worst in the morning, the afternoon, or in the evening? MARIA: Mornings,
I guess. JUDITH: Okay, can we put "mornings" on the agenda to see if
there's anything we can do to make them a little better?

MARIA: All right. At the end of the session, I'll ask Maria to add an
Action Plan item to her list: to think about what issues or goals she
wants help with at the next session. Sometimes clients don't contribute
to setting the agenda because they put a special negative meaning on
contributing. You can ask for their automatic thoughts or for what it
means to them that you've asked them to name agenda items. When Maria
returns to our third session, her update suggests there are important
issues for us to go over. But she doesn't put them on the agenda.
JUDITH: Were you able to think about what goals you want to work on?
MARIA: (in a slightly annoyed tone) I thought about it. But I didn't
come up with anything. JUDITH: How were you feeling when you were
thinking about it? Annoyed? MARIA: Maybe a little. JUDITH: What was
going through your mind? MARIA: I'm just not sure that this therapy is
right for me. JUDITH: \[positively reinforcing Maria\] It's good you
told me that. Do you have a sense of what might help you more? MARIA:
Sometimes I just need to talk to get things off my chest. JUDITH: So
when I ask you to set the agenda, do you feel kind of hemmed in? MARIA:
Yeah, I guess I do. JUDITH: Let's figure out together how to make it
better. Would you like to skip setting the agenda at the very beginning
of our sessions? How would it be if you came in and talked about
whatever is on your mind for the first few minutes. Then we can pick
whatever feels most important to you to work on for the next part of the
session. (pause) Does that sound okay? MARIA: It sounds better. JUDITH:
Is there anything else that bothers you about this therapy? MARIA: No, I
don't think so. JUDITH: Could you be sure to let me know if you think of
something? MARIA: Okay.

Maria's response is unusual. Most clients are much more easily
socialized into agenda setting. But in this case, I recognized that
pushing Maria further might alienate her, so I demonstrate my desire to
collaboratively "fix" the problem. She needs more flexibility in session
structure initially, but I move her toward a more standard structure as
soon as I can. Clients who ramble during agenda setting or launch into a
detailed account of an issue instead of naming it usually just require
further socialization. JUDITH: (gently interrupting) Can I interrupt you
for a moment? Should we call this goal "reconnecting with your brother"?
ABE: Yes. JUDITH: Good. Can you tell me the name of any other issue or
goal you'd like to work on? Occasionally clients persist in the next
session in describing issues rather than just naming them during agenda
setting. If so, you can ask them to jot down their agenda topics as part
of their Action Plan.

Feeling Hopeless and Overwhelmed A third problem in agenda setting
arises when clients feel hopeless and overwhelmed. Here I try to get
Maria into a problem-solving mode. JUDITH: Maria, what goals do you want
to work toward today? MARIA: (Sighs.) I don't know ... I'm so
overwhelmed. I don't think any of this is going to help. JUDITH: You
don't think talking about your problems and goals in here will help?
MARIA: No. What's the use? I mean, you can't fix the fact that I owe too
much money and I'm so tired I can't even get out of bed most mornings
---not to mention the fact that my apartment is out of control. JUDITH:
Well, it's true that we can't fix everything at once. And you do have
real problems that we need to work on together. Now, if we just have
time to work on one thing today, which do you think will help more than
the others?

MARIA: I don't know ... the tiredness, maybe. If I could sleep better,
maybe I could get more done. In this case, I give Maria the message that
her problems are real, that they can be worked on one by one, and that
she need not work on them alone. Asking her to make a forced choice
helps her select a problem and become oriented toward problem solving.
Had Maria refused to make a choice, I might have tried a different
tactic: "It sounds like you're feeling pretty hopeless. I don't know for
sure that working together will make a difference, but I'd like to try.
(pause) Would you be willing to try? Could we talk about the tiredness
for a few minutes and see what happens?" Acknowledging her hopelessness
and my inability to guarantee success increases Maria's willingness to
experiment with problem solving.

Difficulties in Eliciting an Update A common difficulty arises when
clients provide too detailed an account of their week or speak at length
in an unfocused way. After a few such sentences, you should gently jump
in: "Can I interrupt you for a moment? Right now, I just need to get the
big picture of how you've been feeling. Could you just tell me about
your week in two or three sentences? Was it generally a good week? A bad
week? Or did it have its ups and downs?" If clients continue to offer
details instead of the broader picture, you might demonstrate what you
are looking for: "It sounds to me like you're saying, 'I had a pretty
hard week. I had a fight with a friend, and I was really anxious about
going out, and I had trouble concentrating on my work.' Is that right?"

Some clients do understand and are capable of providing a succinct
review but do not choose to do so. If you have data to suggest that
questioning clients about their reluctance to comply could damage the
relationship, you may initially allow them to control the update portion
of the session. Such data might include clients' verbal and/or nonverbal
reactions to your prior attempts at structuring, their direct statements
of strong preferences in the therapeutic process, or their reports of a
strong reaction in the past when they have perceived others as
controlling or dominating. Extreme reactions to structuring are not
common, however. Usually you can matter-of-factly elicit reasons for
clients' reluctance, and then problem-solve. After asking clients to
review their week more concisely and noting a negative shift in affect,
you might say, "When I just asked you to give me the big picture, what
went through your mind?" Having identified clients' automatic thoughts,
you might then help them evaluate the validity of their thoughts, use
the downward arrow technique (see pp. 291--292) to uncover the meaning
of their thoughts, and/or make an empathic statement and move straight
to problem solving, as below: "I'm sorry you felt I cut you off again. I
can see you have a lot on your mind, and I would like to hear it.
(pause) Do you want to continue with the update now, or should we put
'update of week' on the agenda? I just want to make sure I know all the
issues you want to talk about today." This latter choice is usually
better than helping clients evaluate their thoughts at the moment if
they are particularly annoyed. By expressing your concern and
willingness to compromise, you can often modify clients' perception that
you are being too controlling.

Difficulties in Reviewing the Action Plan A typical problem arises when
therapists, in their haste to get to clients' agenda issues, fail to ask
clients about their Action Plan. You are more likely to remember to ask
about Action Plans if you keep it as a standard

agenda item and if you review your therapy notes from the previous
session before clients enter your office. The opposite problem sometimes
arises when the therapist reviews Action Plans (unrelated to the
client's distress that day) in too much detail before turning to the
client's agenda topics.

Difficulties in Discussing Agenda Items Typical problems here include
unfocused or tangential discussion, inefficient pacing, failing to make
a therapeutic intervention, and/or difficulty in knowing how to solve a
client's problem.

Unfocused Discussion This problem usually results when you fail to
structure the discussion appropriately through gentle interruptions
(guiding the client back to the issue at hand); when you fail to
emphasize key automatic thoughts, emotions, beliefs, and behaviors; and
when you fail to summarize frequently. Below, I summarize many things
Abe told me in just a few words and redirect him to identify his
automatic thoughts. JUDITH: Let me just make sure I understand. Your
mother said some unkind things to you on the phone. This reminded you of
other interactions you've had with her, and you began to get more and
more upset. Last night you called her again, and she began to criticize
you for not living up to your responsibilities. Is that right? ABE:
Yeah. JUDITH: What went through your mind as she said, "You're not
living up to your responsibilities"?

Inefficient Pacing

Pacing is often a problem when you take too much time or too little time
discussing an agenda item. Some therapists overestimate how many issues
or goals can be discussed during one therapy session. It is preferable
to prioritize and then to specify two items (or possibly a third) to be
discussed during a session, especially if you're a novice CBT therapist.
Together you and the client should keep track of the time and
collaboratively decide what to do if time is running short. In practical
terms, it's advisable to have two clocks (one for each of you to easily
see) so you can encourage clients to monitor the passage of time along
with you. You might say: "We have only 10 minutes left before we have to
start finishing up. Would you like to continue talking about this issue
with your neighbor? Or we could finish in the next minute or two so we
have time to discuss your getting more done around your apartment."
Alternatively, you can suggest how to spend the time and see if the
client agrees with you: "We have only 10 minutes left before we have to
start finishing up. I think what we're talking about is really
important. Is it okay if we postpone talking about
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ until our next session?"

Failing to Make a Therapeutic Intervention Much of the time, merely
describing a problem or goal or identifying dysfunctional thoughts or
beliefs will not result in the client's feeling better. You should be
conscious of helping clients (during the session itself) respond to
their dysfunctional cognitions, solve or partially solve a problem or
address an obstacle to a goal, and set up an Action Plan. Throughout the
session, you should ask yourself: "How can I help the client feel better
by the end of the session?" "How can I help the client have a better
week?"

Difficulty with Problem Solving

You may encounter situations in which you don't know how to help a
client solve a problem or resolve an obstacle. There are several things
you can do: Find out what the client already tried to do and
conceptualize why it didn't work. You may be able to modify the solution
or modify thoughts that got in the way. Use yourself as a model. Ask
yourself, "If I had this problem or goal, what would I do?" Ask the
client to name another person (usually a friend or family member) who
could conceivably have the same kind of problem or goal. What advice
would the client give him or her? See whether that advice could apply to
the client. Ask the client if he or she knows someone who could help
with the problem or goal.

If you're stuck, postpone the discussion: "I'd like to think more about
this issue this week. Could we put it on the agenda to talk more about
next week?"

DEVIATING FROM THE AGENDA There are times when you shouldn't follow the
agenda you and the client collaboratively set at the beginning of the
session: If you find out that clients are at risk or they are putting
others at risk, you'll need to address these problems immediately. Risky
situations might involve the client's (or others') life, health,
livelihood, employment, living situation, and so on. If you see that
clients are so distressed by a problem that they can't focus on what
you're currently discussing, you may need to talk about the distressing
problem. If you assess that following the agenda will impair the
therapeutic relationship, you'll need to collaboratively get back on
track with clients. If an issue arises that is more pressing than the
agenda items (or certain original agenda items turn out to be relatively
unimportant or not time sensitive), you'll need to address a different
problem or goal.

Clients usually go along with the structure you propose. But once in a
while, clients object, especially if you haven't provided a strong
enough rationale, you've come across as too controlling and
noncollaborative, they believe that discussing the past early in
treatment is essential, and/or they strongly prefer to spend the session
talking freely about whatever comes in their mind.

What do you do? Above all, you need to engage clients so they will
return to treatment for the next session. You may need to spend some
time talking about what they think will help most. If you judge that
trying to persuade clients to adhere to your agenda will endanger their
engagement in treatment, especially early on, you might offer to split
the therapy time. If they protest, you can spend the session doing what
they want. At the next session, you'll find out whether doing so helped
them feel significantly better during the week. If not, they may be more
motivated to spend at least part of the session discussing what you
think is important to help them feel better.

WHEN CLIENTS ARE DISTRESSED TOWARD THE END OF A SESSION When clients are
upset toward the end of a session because you haven't had enough time to
fully discuss an issue, you can change the conversation to something
more positive. JUDITH: Maria, I can see you're still upset about this.
Could we talk more about this at our next session? I don't want you to
leave the session feeling this way. MARIA: Okay. JUDITH: Would it be all
right if we talked about something lighter? Tell me about your nephew.
What is he into these days?

As discussed in Chapter 4, make sure to positively reinforce clients
whenever they give you negative feedback; then conceptualize and plan a
strategy. JUDITH: What did you think about today's session? Was there
anything I got wrong? Or did I say anything that bothered you? MARIA: I
don't think you realize how hard it is for me to get things done. I have
so many responsibilities and so many problems. It's easy for you to say
I should just concentrate on my what's going well in my life and forget
all about what's happening with my mother. JUDITH: Oh, it's good you
told me---and I'm sorry you got that impression. What I meant to get
across was that I realize you are very distressed by the problem with
your mother. I wish we had time to talk about that now. (pause) But
meanwhile, was there something I said or did that made you think I was
suggesting that you just forget all about it? I clarified the
misunderstanding, and we agreed to put the issue with Maria's mother on
the agenda at our next session.

SUMMARY Therapists at all levels of experience encounter difficulties in
structuring sessions with particular clients. It's important to specify
the problem and then conceptualize why the problem is happening. Careful
review of your session tapes can be invaluable in identifying and then
solving these problems. A more extensive account of how to conceptualize
and modify problems clients present in session, along with videos of
therapy sessions, can be found in an online course on personality
disorders (beckinstitute.org/CBTresources). REFLECTION QUESTIONS Why is
it important to interrupt clients at times? What automatic thoughts
might you have that would get in the way of gently interrupting your
clients? How can you respond to these thoughts?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Do a role play (or create a transcript) in which a
client becomes irritated when you interrupt him or her.

12

IDENTIFYING AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS

review, the cognitive model suggests that the interpretation of a
Tosituation (rather than the situation itself), expressed in automatic
thoughts or images, influences one's emotion, behavior, and
physiological response. It's important to help clients respond to their
unhelpful or inaccurate thoughts. Certain events are almost universally
upsetting, for example, a personal assault or rejection. People with
psychological disorders, however, display biased thinking. They often
see situations as much more negative than they really are. They may
misconstrue neutral or even positive situations. By critically examining
and responding to their thoughts, they often feel better. We especially
want to address automatic thoughts that pose obstacles to attaining
goals. The rest of this chapter deals with negative automatic thoughts
and answers these questions: What are the characteristics of automatic
thoughts? How can you explain automatic thoughts to clients? How do you
elicit and specify automatic thoughts? What does an extended cognitive
model look like? What are different forms of automatic thoughts? What
can you do when clients have difficulty identifying their automatic
thoughts? How do you teach clients to identify their automatic thoughts
independently?

CHARACTERISTICS OF AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS Automatic thoughts are a stream of
thinking that coexists with a more manifest stream of thought (Beck,
1964). These thoughts aren't characteristic only of individuals in
psychological distress; they are an experience common to us all. Most of
the time we are barely aware of these thoughts, although with just a
little training we can easily bring these thoughts into consciousness.
When we become aware of our thoughts, we may automatically do a reality
check if we're not suffering from psychological dysfunction. This kind
of automatic reality testing and responding to negative thoughts is a
common experience. People who are in distress often don't engage in this
kind of critical examination. CBT teaches clients tools to evaluate
their thoughts in a conscious, structured way, especially when they're
upset or engaged in unhelpful behavior. Abe, for example, has to stay
home to fix an active leak under the sink, so he can't attend his
grandson's soccer game. He thinks, "Ethan will be so disappointed." His
thinking then becomes more extreme: "I'm always letting him down." He
accepts these thoughts as true and feels quite sad. After learning tools
of CBT, however, he's able to use his negative emotion as a cue to
identify, evaluate, and respond adaptively to his thoughts. In another
situation, Abe was able to respond to a similar automatic thought in
this way: "Wait a minute, her parents are going to be at there \[at her
dance recital\]. She may be a little disappointed that I'm not. And it's
not true that I'm always letting her down. I've gone to lots of her
performances." You seek to identify automatic thoughts that are
dysfunctional---that is, those that distort reality, are associated with
an unhelpful emotional and/or physiological reaction, lead to unhelpful
behavior, and/or interfere with clients' sense of well-being and ability
to take steps to reach their goals.

As we discussed in earlier chapters, it's vital to be alert to both
verbal and nonverbal cues from clients so you can identify the most
important (or "hot") cognitions---that is, important automatic thoughts
and images that arise in the therapy session itself. These cognitions
may be about the subject under discussion ("It's not fair that I have so
much to do"). But they may be about the client ("I can't do anything
right"), the therapist ("You don't understand me"), or the process of
therapy ("I don't like giving feedback"). And they may undermine the
client's motivation, sense of adequacy or worth, or concentration.
Finally, automatic thoughts may interfere with the therapeutic
relationship. Identifying automatic thoughts on the spot gives clients
the opportunity to test and respond to their thoughts immediately, which
facilitates the work in the rest of the session. Dysfunctional automatic
thoughts are almost always negative unless the client is manic or
hypomanic ("It's a great idea to see how fast my car can go"), the
client has narcissistic traits ("I'm superior to everyone"), and/or the
client is giving him- or herself permission to engage in maladaptive
behavior ("It's okay to binge drink because all my friends are doing the
same thing").

Automatic thoughts are usually quite brief, and clients are often more
aware of the emotion they feel as a result of their thoughts than of the
thoughts themselves. Sitting in session, for example, clients may be
somewhat aware of feeling anxious, sad, irritated, or embarrassed but
may be unaware of their automatic thoughts until you elicit them. The
emotions clients feel are logically connected to the content of their
automatic thoughts. For example, Abe thinks, "Everything is such a mess.
I'm so lazy"---and feels sad. Another time he thinks, "I should be
visiting my mother more often"---and feels guilty. When he has the
thoughts "What if I run out of money?" he feels anxious. Sometimes
clients are more aware of their unhelpful behavior than they are of the
automatic thoughts that precede their action. Abe, for example,
recognizes that he has avoided connecting with his friends and doing
tasks around his apartment. This behavior is logically connected to the
content of his automatic thoughts. When I ask him what was going through
his mind in the first situation, he replies, "They might be critical of
me for not working." In the second, he thought, "I'll just mess up
anything I try to do."

Clients may also be more aware of their physiological response than of
their thoughts. Maria, for example, noticed feelings of tension, more
than her automatic thoughts, when she was anxious. Most automatic
thoughts are associated with external situations (e.g., talking to a
friend) or a stream of thoughts (e.g., thinking about an upcoming or a
past event). But a wide range of both external stimuli and internal
experiences can give rise to automatic thoughts. Clients can have
thoughts about any part of the cognitive model: Their cognitions
(thoughts, images, beliefs, daydreams, dreams, memories, or flashbacks),
Their emotion, Their behavior, or Their physiological or mental
experiences (e.g., strange ideas or a sense that their thoughts are
racing).

Any of these stimuli may lead to an automatic thought (or series of
automatic thoughts), followed by an emotional, behavioral, and/or
physiological reaction. Here are some examples from Abe: When Abe
thought, "I wish I never had to talk to my ex-wife again," he had an
automatic thought about this thought: "I shouldn't think things like
that." When Abe thought, "I'm so tired. I don't want to go to Max's
soccer game," he then thought, "I'm a really bad grandfather for not
wanting to go." When Abe had automatic thoughts in the form of memories
about his marriage, he thought, "I wish I didn't always remember the
worst parts of our life together." When Abe realized how hopeless and
sad he was feeling, he thought, "I'm always going to feel this way."
When Abe avoided going out to do errands, he thought, "I'm so lazy."
When Abe became anxious about being late, his heart started beating fast
and he thought, "What's wrong with me?"

In traditional CBT, we tend to focus on problematic situations from the
past week, determining at which point clients were most distressed and
what their automatic thoughts were. In a recovery orientation, we tend
to focus more on the thoughts clients predict will create an obstacle to
taking steps in the coming week toward achieving their goal. Clients may
have distressing or unhelpful automatic thoughts

before a situation, in anticipation of what might happen ("What if he's
upset with me?"), during a situation ("She's thinking how poorly I'm
doing this"), and/or after a situation, reflecting on what happened ("I
never should have called him up").

EXPLAINING AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS TO CLIENTS It's desirable to explain
automatic thoughts by using the client's own examples. In the context of
discussing a specific issue with a client, you will elicit the
associated automatic thoughts and then provide psychoeducation. JUDITH:
\[moving to the first agenda topic\] Maria, should we talk about your
goal of connecting better with your sister? MARIA: Yes. JUDITH: What do
you want to do this week? MARIA: (Sighs.) I really should ask her if she
wants to have lunch. JUDITH: How are you feeling? MARIA: I don't know.
Sad, down. JUDITH: What's going through your mind? MARIA: She's so
lucky. I'll never be able to have a life like hers. JUDITH: No wonder
you're feeling sad. \[providing psychoeducation\] You just identified
what we call an automatic thought: I'll never be able to have a life
like hers. Everyone has these kinds of thoughts. They just seem to pop
into our heads, even when we're trying to think about something else.
That's why we call them automatic. (pause) Most of the time, they're
very quick and we're much more aware of the emotion--- in this case, you
feel sad---than we are of our thoughts. (pause) When people are
depressed like you are, it turns out that often the thoughts aren't
true, or not completely true. But we react as if they're true. MARIA:
Oh. JUDITH: \[checking on her comprehension\] Can you tell me about
automatic thoughts in your own words?

MARIA: I think what you're saying is that I have these quick thoughts,
and because I'm depressed, they might not be true. JUDITH: Exactly. In
the next part of the session, I write down the cognitive model for this
automatic thought. Situation: Thinking about sister ↓ Automatic thought:
"I'll never be able to have a life like hers." ↓ Emotion: Sad

JUDITH: Let's get that down on paper. When you had the thought "I'll
never be able to have a life like hers," you felt sad. Do you see how
what you were thinking influenced how you felt? MARIA: Uh-huh. JUDITH:
I'll be teaching you to identify your automatic thoughts when you notice
your mood changing or you're doing something that's not helpful. That's
the first step. We'll keep practicing it until it's easy. And you'll
also learn how to evaluate your thoughts and change your thinking if
it's not completely right.

ELICITING AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS The skill of identifying automatic thoughts
is analogous to learning any other skill. Some clients (and therapists)
catch on quite easily and quickly. Others need much more guidance and
practice. The basic questions you ask clients are: "What \[is/was/will
be\] going through your mind?" "What \[are you/were you/will you be\]
thinking?"

You'll ask one of these questions when clients describe a problematic
situation, emotion, behavior, or physiological reaction they had (often
in the past week) or expect to have (often in the coming week); and/or
when clients experience a negative shift in affect or exhibit an
unhelpful behavior in the therapy session itself.

Eliciting Additional Automatic Thoughts Continue questioning clients
even after they report an initial automatic thought, to discover whether
they have had other important thoughts. JUDITH: \[summarizing\] So when
you woke up yesterday morning with a hangover, you thought, "I never
should have drunk so much last night." What else went through your mind?
MARIA: I can't believe I did that again. JUDITH: Then what? MARIA: I was
thinking, "What's the point of even trying though. Nothing will ever get
better." When clients express an automatic thought and an emotion, it's
also important to see whether they experienced additional emotions. If
so, they undoubtedly had another thought, or a stream of thoughts.
JUDITH: \[summarizing\] So you felt sad when you thought, "I've used up
most of my savings." Did you feel any other emotion? ABE: I think I felt
anxious. JUDITH: What was going through your mind that made you feel
anxious? ABE: I was thinking, "What's going to happen to me? What if I
can't make rent? Am I going to wind up on the street?"

AN EXTENDED COGNITIVE MODEL

Clients sometimes have a series of automatic thoughts and reactions
about a given issue, especially if the client ends up behaving in an
unhelpful way, such as using an impulsive behavior. It's important to
record the many steps, from the initial trigger to the final reaction
(which can take seconds to hours). Figure 12.1 demonstrates how Maria
experienced an initial upsetting situation and then ultimately drank too
much.

FIGURE 12.1. Example of an extended cognitive model.

Once you and clients have mapped out the extended scenario, you can show
them all the places where they can learn to intervene before they engage
in the dysfunctional behavior. Doing so usually makes them feel more
hopeful about solving the problem.

FORMS OF AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS Automatic thoughts are most commonly in
verbal form. Sometimes, though, they're in the form of images (Chapter
20). And sometimes clients don't state their automatic thoughts
outright. They may tell you their interpretations of their experiences,
embed their automatic thoughts in discourse, express short phrases,
and/or report automatic thoughts as questions.

If so, you need to guide clients to change their verbalizations so
they're in a form that can be evaluated.

Differentiating Automatic Thoughts from Interpretations When you ask for
clients' automatic thoughts, you're seeking the actual words or images
that go through their mind. Until they have learned to recognize these
thoughts, some clients report interpretations (as Maria does below),
which may or may not have been their actual thoughts. JUDITH: When you
saw the receptionist, what went through your mind? MARIA: I think I was
denying my real feelings. JUDITH: What were you actually thinking?
MARIA: I'm not sure what you mean. In this exchange, Maria reported an
interpretation of what she was feeling and thinking. Below, I try again,
by focusing on and heightening her emotion. JUDITH: What feelings were
you denying? MARIA: I'm not sure. JUDITH: \[supplying an emotion
opposite to the expected one to jog her recall\] When you saw her, did
you feel happy? Excited? MARIA: No, not at all.

JUDITH: Can you remember walking into the office and seeing her? Can you
picture that in your mind? MARIA: Uh-huh. JUDITH: (speaking in the
present tense) What are you feeling? MARIA: I don't know. JUDITH: As you
look at her, what's going through your mind? MARIA: \[reporting an
emotion and a physiological reaction, instead of an automatic thought\]
I feel really anxious, my heart is beating fast, and I feel all jittery.
JUDITH: What are you thinking? MARIA: What if she gives me a hard time
again about not filling out the forms? \[automatic thought\] JUDITH:
Okay. Anything else? MARIA: I guess I was thinking, "If she gives me a
hard time, I'll have to leave."

Specifying Automatic Thoughts Embedded in Discourse Clients need to
learn to specify the actual words that go through their minds in order
to evaluate them effectively. Following are some examples of embedded
thoughts versus actual words: Embedded expressions

Actual automatic thoughts

"I guess I was worried about what she would say to me."

"She's going to criticize me."

"I don't know if going to the boss would be a waste of "It'll probably
be a waste of time if I time." go." "I couldn't get myself to start
reading."

"I can't do this."

Again, you gently lead clients to identify the actual words that went
through their mind. JUDITH: So when you turned red, what went through
your mind? MARIA: I guess I was wondering if he thought I was this
really strange person. JUDITH: Can you remember the exact words you were
thinking? MARIA: (puzzled) I'm not sure what you mean.

JUDITH: Were you thinking, "I guess I was wondering if he thought I was
this really strange person," or were you thinking something like "He
probably thinks I'm really strange." MARIA: Oh, I see; the second one.

Changing the Form of Telegraphic or Question Thoughts Clients may report
thoughts that are not fully spelled out. It's difficult to evaluate
telegraphic thoughts, and you should prompt the client to express the
thought more fully by asking for the meaning of the thought. For
example, when Abe had the thought "Oh, no!" the meaning to him was "My
ex-wife is really going to be mad about this." "Damn!" was the
expression of Maria's idea "Leaving my cell phone at home was stupid."
This technique is illustrated below. JUDITH: What went through your mind
when you heard about the family reunion? ABE: "Uh-oh." I just thought,
"Uh-oh." JUDITH: Can you spell the thought out? "Uh-oh" means ... ABE:
What if my ex-wife is there? She might be pretty unfriendly. If clients
are unable to spell out their thought, you might try supplying an
opposite thought: "Did 'Uh-oh' mean, 'That's really good'?" It can be a
good idea to supply the opposite thought, instead of your guess at the
actual thought, because clients might agree with your hypothesized
thought even if it's not exactly what went through their mind. Automatic
thoughts are sometimes expressed in the form of questions, which also
aren't conducive to evaluation. When this happens, guide clients in
expressing their thoughts in a statement form prior to helping them
evaluate it. JUDITH: So you thought, "What if I don't get the job? ABE:
Yes. JUDITH: What are you concerned could happen if you don't get the
job? ABE: Probably no one will hire me. JUDITH: Could we take a look at
that thought? That if you don't get this job, probably no one will hire
you?

Here are some examples of restating clients' automatic thoughts that
were in the form of questions by asking what they were concerned about
(or what they were most afraid could happen) if they encountered a
difficult situation: Question

Statement

"Will I be able to cope?"

"I won't be able to cope."

"Can I stand it if she leaves?"

"I won't be able to stand it if she leaves."

"What if I can't do it?"

"I'll lose my job if I can't do it."

"How will I get through it?"

"I won't be able to get through it."

"What if I can't change?"

"I'll be miserable forever if I can't change."

"Why did this happen to me?"

"This shouldn't have happened to me."

DIFFICULTIES IN ELICITING AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS Sometimes clients just
don't know the answer to "What's going through your mind?" You can use
various techniques to help clients when they have difficulty (1)
identifying their automatic thoughts from a past situation, (2)
predicting their automatic thoughts in a future situation, or (3) or
identifying thoughts that arise in the session itself. First, ask
clients to describe the situation. Then try one or more of the
following: Heighten the client's response. Have the client visualize the
distressing situation. If the situation involves another person, suggest
the client re-create it in a role play with you. Inquire about images.
Supply thoughts you believe are probably opposite to the client's
thoughts. Ask for the meaning of the situation.

These techniques are illustrated below.

Heightening Emotional and Physiological Responses To help clients gain
greater access to their thoughts, try to increase their emotional and
physiological arousal. JUDITH: Abe, when it's time to go to breakfast
with your buddies on Sunday, what do you think will be going through
your mind? ABE: I'm not sure. JUDITH: How do you think you'll be
feeling? ABE: Probably anxious. JUDITH: Where will you feel the anxiety?
ABE: Here (putting his hand on his abdomen), in my stomach. JUDITH: Can
you feel the same feeling now? ABE: (Nods.) JUDITH: (speaking in the
present tense) So you're at home, you're thinking about going out ...
You're feeling anxious; you can feel it in your stomach ... What's going
through your mind? ABE: What if they don't really want to be there? What
if they don't really want to see me?

Visualizing the Situation Sometimes it helps when clients describe the
situation in detail and then see it in their mind's eye. JUDITH: Okay,
you were at your son's house earlier this week and you began feeling
really upset? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: What was going through your mind? ABE: I
don't know. I was just feeling really bad. JUDITH: Can you describe the
scene for me? What time was it? What were you doing? ABE: It was about 6
o'clock. My son hadn't gotten home from work yet. My daughter-in-law was
in the kitchen, and I was just sitting alone in the living room. JUDITH:
Where were your grandsons? ABE: They were upstairs in their room.

JUDITH: So can you see the scene as if it's happening right now? You're
in the living room. Are you sitting in a chair or on the couch? What's
your posture like? ABE: I'm on the couch, kind of slumped over. JUDITH:
Your son isn't home yet. Your daughter-in-law is in the kitchen--- can
you hear her moving around? You know your grandsons are upstairs, but
you're sitting alone, all by yourself, and you're thinking ... ABE:
\[expressing his automatic thoughts\] I used to have such a good life.
Now nothing is good about it.

Re-Creating an Interpersonal Situation through Role Play In this
re-creation, clients initially describe who said what verbally; then
they play themselves while you play the other person in the interaction.
JUDITH: So, you were feeling down as you were talking to talking to your
neighbor? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: What was going through your mind as you were
talking to him? ABE: (Pauses.) ... I don't know. I was just really down.
JUDITH: Can you tell me what you said to him and what he said to you?
ABE: (Describes verbal exchange.) JUDITH: Can we try a role play? I'll
be your neighbor, and you be you. ABE: Okay. JUDITH: While we're doing
the role play, see if you can figure out what's going through your mind.
ABE: (Nods.) JUDITH: Okay, you start. What do you say first? ABE: Uh,
can I ask you a question? JUDITH: Sure. ABE: I really need a job. Do you
think you could ask your boss if he needs someone? JUDITH: I'm not sure
... Have you looked down at the mall? One of the stores might be hiring.
ABE: I'm not sure I want to work retail. JUDITH: I wish I could help
you, but ... Okay, out of role play. Were you aware of what was going
through your mind?

ABE: Yeah. I was thinking that he doesn't want to help me. He must think
I'd do a bad job.

Inquiring about Images If you become aware of an image in your own mind
as the client is describing a situation, use it as a prompt to remind
you to ask the client about experiencing an image: "Sometimes it's hard
to identify your automatic thoughts. Let me ask you this: When you
thought that you might see your ex-wife at your son's birthday party,
did you have a picture in your mind of what she might look like?"

Suggesting an Opposite Thought Interestingly, clients sometimes have
greater access to their thoughts when you supply them with a thought
that you believe is opposite to their actual thoughts. ABE: I don't know
what's likely to go through my mind as I get ready for the job
interview. All I know is that I'll be really anxious. JUDITH:
\[summarizing\] I don't imagine you'll be thinking how great it will
probably go? ABE: No, not at all! I'll probably be thinking that I'm
going to mess it up.

Eliciting the Meaning of the Situation When clients have difficulty
accessing their thoughts, you can ask them what the situation meant to
them. JUDITH: What did it mean to you that you didn't get the job? ABE:
That I'm just not good enough. I'll probably never get a job. Be careful
about using too many techniques when clients have difficulty figuring
out their thoughts. Otherwise they may feel interrogated or view
themselves as having failed. Downplay the importance of identifying
these specific thoughts. "Well, sometimes these thoughts are hard to
catch. No big deal. How about if we move on to \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_?"

TEACHING CLIENTS TO IDENTIFY AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS As described in Chapter
6, you can begin teaching clients the skill of identifying automatic
thoughts even during the first session. Here I have just demonstrated
the cognitive model, using Maria's examples. JUDITH: Maria, when you
notice your mood getting worse or you're doing something that's not
helpful in the next week, could you stop and ask yourself, "What's going
through my mind right now?" MARIA: Yeah. JUDITH: Maybe you could jot
down a few of these thoughts on paper or in your phone? MARIA: Okay.
JUDITH: Now don't worry if you have some trouble figuring out what
you're thinking. It's a skill, and you'll get better at it over time. In
later sessions, you might also explicitly teach the client other
techniques if the basic question ("What's going through your mind right
now?") isn't effective. The handout in Figure 12.2 can be useful. 1.
What's going through my mind? or What am I thinking? 2. What am I
definitely NOT thinking? (Identifying an opposite thought can help
prompt you to identify the actual thought.) 3. What does the situation
mean to me? 4. Am I making a prediction? Or remembering something?
REMEMBER: JUST BECAUSE I THINK SOMETHING DOESN'T NECESSARILY MEAN IT'S
TRUE.

FIGURE 12.2. Questions to Identify Automatic Thoughts handout. Copyright
© 2018 Worksheet Packet. Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

"If you still have trouble figuring out what's going through your mind,
this handout might help. (Goes through the handout with the client.) How
about trying out some of these questions this week if you can't figure
out what you're thinking?"

SUMMARY Automatic thoughts coexist with a more manifest stream of
thoughts, arise spontaneously, and are not based on reflection or
deliberation. People are usually more aware of their associated emotion
or behavior. With a little training, though, they can become aware of
what's going through their minds. Automatic thoughts are associated with
specific emotions, depending on their content and meaning. They are
often brief and fleeting and may occur in verbal and/or imaginal form.
People usually accept their automatic thoughts as true, without
reflection or evaluation. Identifying, evaluating, and responding to
automatic thoughts (in a more adaptive way) usually produces an adaptive
shift in affect and/or behavior. The next chapter clarifies the
difference between automatic thoughts and emotions. REFLECTION QUESTIONS
What are some ways you can help clients identify their automatic
thoughts? How can you prevent clients from being self-critical if they
have difficulty?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Do a role play in which a client is struggling to
identify his or her automatic thoughts.

13

EMOTIONS

are of primary importance in CBT. After all, a major objective Emotions
of treatment is to help clients feel better by decreasing negative
emotion and increasing positive emotion. Intense negative emotion is
painful and may be dysfunctional if it interferes with a client's
capacity to think clearly, solve problems, act effectively, or gain
satisfaction---all of which can be obstacles to achieving their goals.
Clients with a psychiatric disorder often experience an intensity of
emotion that can seem excessive or inappropriate to the situation. Abe,
for example, felt enormous guilt and then sadness when he forgot he was
supposed to go to his daughter's house for dinner. He was also very
anxious about calling the bank to straighten out an error. Yet the
intensity and quality of Abe's emotions made sense when I recognized how
strongly he believed his automatic thoughts and beliefs and how strongly
he held certain values. In addition, it's important to recognize the
positive functions of negative emotion. Sadness can be a signal to fill
what you perceive is missing in life. Guilt can motivate you to do what
is truly important to you. Anxiety can give you energy to deal with a
challenge. Anger can provide energy to do the right thing in the right
way in the service of your values. This chapter answers the following
questions: How do you elicit and strengthen positive emotions? How do
you help clients label their negative emotions? How do you guide clients
to rate the intensity of their emotions? How are automatic thoughts
different from emotions?

How does the content of automatic thoughts match with emotion? When is
it advisable to increase negative emotion? How can you identify and help
clients test their beliefs about negative emotion? What techniques are
useful in regulating emotion?

ELICITING AND STRENGTHENING POSITIVE EMOTIONS Positive emotions promote
a sense of well-being (both psychologically and physically) and
resilience, both of which are important during treatment and after
treatment has ended. When clients have a negative emotion, they often
narrow their attention and experience autonomic arousal. Positive
emotions broaden their attention, cognitions, and behavioral tendencies
and decrease their arousal (Fredrickson, 2001). Recalling positive
memories of how they have coped with difficulties in the past allows
clients to cope better in the present (Tugade et al., 2004). You will
actively work to elicit and increase clients' positive emotions in the
session and throughout the week by discussing their interests, positive
events that occurred during the week, and positive memories; creating
Action Plans aimed at increasing positive emotions by, for example,
becoming engaged in social, pleasurable, meaningful and productive
activities and giving themselves credit; and helping clients draw
adaptive conclusions about their experiences, for example, by asking:
"What does this experience show you?" "What does it say about you that
you \[did \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\]?" "How do you think
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ views you \[as a result of this positive
experience\]?" "I think this \[experience\] points out
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ about you. Do you think I'm right?"

It's also helpful to have clients specify their positive emotions by
asking:

"How did you feel when you did \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \[or when
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ happened\]?" "How did you feel afterward?"

Many clients have an impoverished vocabulary for positive emotions.
Asking them to identify all the positive emotions they experienced in a
situation can increase their ability to label these emotions and may
also lift their mood, especially if you give them the list in Figure
13.1. If the list could be overwhelming to a client, whittle it down or
provide them with a multiple choice: "When your friend finally called,
did you feel glad? Relieved? Thankful?"; "When you watched your grandson
score a goal, did you feel happy? Proud? Excited?" To increase the
strength of their positive emotions in session, ask clients to imagine
the situation as if it's happening now, and see if they can reexperience
those emotions. Accepted, adventurous, affectionate, affirmed,
agreeable, amazed, amused, appreciative, awesome, benevolent, blessed,
bold, calm, capable, centered, cheerful, confident, content, creative,
curious, delighted, dynamic, eager, elated, empowered, energized,
enthusiastic, excited, fortunate, free, friendly, fulfilled, generous,
grateful, happy, helpful, hopeful, in awe, in control, insightful,
inspired, intelligent, interested, joyful, kindly, light, love,
motivated, open, optimistic, passionate, peaceful, playful, pleasantly
surprised, pleased, proud, reassured, relieved, resilient, respected,
reverent, safe, satisfied, secure, serene, sincere, stimulated,
supported, tender, thankful, thrilled, tranquil, understood, valuable,
vibrant, virtuous, vital, wise, worthy, youthful, zany FIGURE 13.1. List
of positive emotions.

LABELING NEGATIVE EMOTIONS When clients have difficulty identifying
their negative emotions, you can offer them a short multiple choice
("Were you feeling happy, sad, anxious, angry ...?") They can also refer
to a list of negative emotions (Figure 13.2). If clients still have
difficulty differentiating their negative emotions, you can help them
create a chart (Figure 13.3). You'll ask clients to list current or
previous situations in which they felt a particular emotion.

Sad, down, lonely, unhappy, depressed Anxious, worried, fearful, scared,
tense, afraid, suspicious, tense, unsure, panicky Angry, mad, irritated,
annoyed, frustrated, misunderstood, resentful, wronged Ashamed,
embarrassed, humiliated Disappointed, discouraged, in despair Jealous,
envious Guilty Hurt Suspicious

FIGURE 13.2. Partial list of negative emotions.

Directions: For each emotion below, fill in three situations in which
you felt that emotion. Angry

Sad

Anxious

Friend cancels plans with me

Plans for evening fall through Seeing how low my bank account is

Neighbor doesn't return my suitcase

Not enough money to go away on vacation

Hearing that there might be a hurricane

Driver plays music too loudly

Nothing to do all weekend

Finding a bump on my neck

FIGURE 13.3. Sample emotion chart for Maria.

JUDITH: I'd like to spend a few minutes talking about different emotions
so we can both understand better how you feel in different situations.
Okay? MARIA: Yeah. JUDITH: Can you remember a time when you felt angry?
MARIA: Uh, yeah ... When my friend cancelled plans to go to this
concert; I forget which one, but I really wanted to go. Anyway, she told
me she was going out with some other friends instead. JUDITH: And what
was going through your mind? MARIA: Who does she think she is? I
wouldn't do that to her. She should treat me better. JUDITH: And you
felt---

MARIA: Mad. Here I had Maria recall a specific event in which she felt a
given emotion. From her description, it sounded as if she had correctly
identified her emotion. Because I wanted to make sure, I asked her to
identify her automatic thoughts. The content of the automatic thoughts
did match her stated emotion. Next, I asked Maria to fill out the chart
with other situations when she recalled feeling angry, sad, and anxious.
I asked her to refer to the chart in session and at home whenever she
was having difficulty labeling how she was feeling.

RATING THE INTENSITY OF EMOTION At times, you'll ask clients to not only
identify their emotion but also quantify the degree of emotion they're
experiencing. For example, rating how strongly a client feels a certain
emotion before and after a therapeutic intervention helps you decide
whether to use additional interventions, so you can avoid prematurely
moving on to another cognition or issue. Or the opposite can
happen---you may continue discussing a cognition or issue, not realizing
that the client is no longer significantly distressed by it. Finally,
gauging the intensity of an emotion in a particular situation helps you
and the client determine whether it warrants closer scrutiny in the
first place. A situation that is relatively less emotionally laden may
be less valuable to discuss than one that is more distressing to the
client, where important beliefs may have been activated. Most clients
learn to judge the intensity of an emotion fairly easily. JUDITH: How
did you feel when your friend said, "Sorry, I don't have time now"?
MARIA: Pretty sad, I guess. JUDITH: If 10 is the saddest you ever felt
and 0 is not sad at all, how sad did you feel right when he said,
"Sorry, I don't have time now"? MARIA: About 7 or 8.

Some clients have difficulty with or don't like putting a specific
number to the intensity of emotion. You can ask them to rate whether
they experienced the emotion "mildly," "moderately," or "intensely." If
even that is difficult, drawing a scale can help.

JUDITH: How did you feel when your sister told you she wasn't coming to
visit after all? MARIA: Sad. JUDITH: How sad did you feel, 0 to 10?
MARIA: I'm not sure. I'm not too good with numbers. JUDITH: Do you think
you felt a little sad? Moderately sad? Intensely sad? MARIA: What were
the choices again? JUDITH: Here, let me draw a scale. Your
sadness---would you say (pointing to the scale) that you were a just a
little, a medium amount, very sad, or completely sad? MARIA: Oh, very
sad; I guess an 8. JUDITH: Okay, we've got our scale now. Let's see how
useful it is. Were you sad any other times this week? MARIA: Yeah, last
night when Tanisha didn't call me back. JUDITH: Can you use this scale
as a guide? About how sad did you feel? MARIA: A medium amount---maybe
6. JUDITH: Good. Now, do you think you could use this scale when you're
trying to figure out how distressed you are? MARIA: Yeah, I can do that.

DIFFERENTIATING AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS FROM EMOTIONS

It's important for clients to recognize (and label) their negative
emotions, especially when they pose an obstacle to taking steps to
fulfill their goals. We don't want to eliminate negative emotion.
Negative emotions are as much a part of the richness of life as positive
emotions and serve as important a function as does physical pain, often
alerting us to potential problems we may need to address. But we do want
to decrease excessive negative emotion. We don't evaluate, challenge, or
dispute clients' emotions. Rather we acknowledge, empathize, and
validate clients' emotions and then collaboratively decide whether to
evaluate the cognitions that led to their distress---or intervene in
another way, such as problem solving, turning attention to something
else, accepting the negative emotion, or using other emotion regulation
techniques. You won't discuss all situations in which clients feel
dysphoric---but you will use your conceptualization of the client to
collaboratively decide which situations are most important to address,
which goals to work toward and what obstacles could get in the way.
Often the greatest obstacles are associated with high levels of distress
or dysfunction. At the beginning of treatment, many clients don't
clearly understand the difference between their thoughts and their
emotions. You continually and subtly help clients view their experiences
through the cognitive model. When clients describe an issue or obstacle,
ask questions to organize the material into the categories of the
cognitive model: situation, automatic thought, and reaction (emotion,
behavior, and physiological response). One reason that clients confuse
thoughts and emotions is that they sometimes use the word "feel" to
indicate an emotion ("I feel anxious"). At other times, they use the
word "feel" when they report a cognition ("I feel like I can't do it";
"I feel like a failure"; or "I feel worthless"). At these times, based
on the flow of the session, their goals, and the strength of the
collaboration, you may decide to ignore the confusion, address it at the
time (either subtly or explicitly), or address it later.

Most of the time, mislabeling a thought as a feeling is relatively
unimportant in a given context, and you can make a subtle correction.
JUDITH: You mentioned when we set the agenda that you wanted to talk
about the phone call you had with your brother? ABE: Yeah. I called him
a couple of nights ago and he sounded kind of distant. JUDITH: When he
sounded distant, how did you feel? ABE: I felt like he really didn't
want to talk, like he didn't really care whether I had called or not.
JUDITH: So when you had the thoughts "He doesn't really want to talk. He
doesn't really care that I called," how did you feel emotionally? Sad?
Angry? Anxious? Something else? In another session, I viewed the
confusion as important because I wanted to teach Abe how to evaluate his
thinking, using a Thought Record (pp. 267-- 268). I deliberately decided
to distinguish thoughts from emotions. I didn't want him to think that I
was questioning what he had viewed as an emotion. I also judged that the
interruption wouldn't unduly affect the flow of the session and that we
wouldn't forget important data. JUDITH: Were there any times this week
when you thought about going to the movies? ABE: Yeah, a few times.
JUDITH: Can you remember one time specifically? ABE: Yesterday after
lunch, I was cleaning up ... I don't know. JUDITH: How were you feeling
emotionally? ABE: \[expressing thoughts\] Oh, I was feeling like it's no
use, that seeing a movie probably wouldn't help. JUDITH: Those are
important thoughts. We'll get back to evaluating them in a minute, but
first I'd like to review the difference between thoughts and feelings.
Okay? ABE: Sure. JUDITH: Feelings are what you feel
emotionally---usually they're one word, such as sadness, anger, anxiety,
and so on. (pause) Thoughts are ideas that you have; you think them
either in words or in pictures or images,

like "It's no use. It probably won't help." (pause) Do you see what I
mean? ABE: I think so. JUDITH: So let's get back to yesterday when you
thought about going out for a walk. What emotion were you feeling? ABE:
Sad, I think. JUDITH: And your thoughts were "This is no use. I'll never
get better"? ABE: Yes. In the example above, Abe initially labeled
thoughts as feelings. At times, clients do the reverse: that is, they
label an emotion as a thought. JUDITH: As you walked into your empty
apartment, Maria, what went through your mind? MARIA: I was sad, lonely,
real down. JUDITH: So you felt sad and lonely and down. What thought or
image made you feel that way?

MATCHING THE CONTENT OF AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS TO EMOTIONS You continuously
conceptualize clients' problems and the obstacles that interfere with
goal attainment. You try to understand their experience and point of
view and how their underlying beliefs give rise to specific automatic
thoughts in a specific situation, influencing their emotions and
behavior. The connection among clients' thoughts, emotion, and behavior
should make sense. You will investigate further when clients report an
emotion that doesn't seem to match the content of their automatic
thoughts. JUDITH: How did you feel when you realized you hadn't heard
back from your old boss? ABE: I was sad. JUDITH: What was going through
your mind? ABE: I was thinking, "What if he doesn't want to give me a
good recommendation? What if I don't get the job?"

JUDITH: And you felt sad? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: I'm a little confused
because those sound more like anxious thoughts. Was there anything else
going through your mind? ABE: I'm not sure. JUDITH: How about if we have
you imagine the scene? \[helping Abe vividly recall the scene in imagery
form\] You said you were home, looking online for job possibilities. Can
you see yourself? Where are you? ABE: At my desk. JUDITH: And you're
thinking, "What if he doesn't give me a good recommendation? What if I
don't get the job?" And you're feeling ...? ABE: Nervous, I guess.
JUDITH: What else is going through your mind? ABE: I think I was
remembering when my boss told me I was being laid off. I was feeling
like such a failure. JUDITH: And how were you feeling emotionally? ABE:
Sad. Real sad. This interchange started with a discrepancy. I was alert
and so was able to pick up an inconsistency between the content of Abe's
automatic thought and the emotion associated with it. I was then able to
help Abe retrieve an important image (a memory) and a key automatic
thought by using imaginal recall. Had I chosen to focus on the anxious
thoughts, I may have missed an important cognition.

INCREASING NEGATIVE EMOTION Some techniques are actually designed to
heighten negative affect. This is important when clients need to gain
greater access to their thoughts; to change their cognitions at the
emotional level; to learn that emotions aren't dangerous,
uncontrollable, or intolerable; and/or to examine the disadvantages or
consequences of some of their maladaptive behavior.

You can use imagery, exposure, or focusing on somatic sensations to
increase the intensity of clients' negative emotion.

TESTING BELIEFS ABOUT NEGATIVE EMOTIONS Some clients have dysfunctional
beliefs about experiencing emotion (Greenberg, 2002; Hofmann, 2016;
Linehan, 2015), as illustrated with Maria, below. MARIA: I didn't end up
calling my mother this weekend. JUDITH: What \[obstacle\] got in the
way? MARIA: I don't know. I guess I got nervous. JUDITH: Did you make a
prediction about what would happen if you called? MARIA: I just thought
I might get really upset. JUDITH: And then what could happen? MARIA: I
was afraid I just couldn't stand it. If she got me upset, I might start
crying and never stop. Like Maria, some clients believe that negative
emotions are unsafe: "If I get upset, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_," for
example, "it will get worse and worse until I can't stand it, I'll lose
control, it will never go away, or I'll end up in the hospital." These
kinds of beliefs can interfere with working to achieve their goals.
Clients may avoid situations in which they predict they will become
upset. They may avoid talking about or even thinking about distressing
problems. When clients have dysfunctional cognitions about experiencing
negative emotion, they may not make much progress in treatment. You can
use standard cognitive restructuring techniques to help clients evaluate
their beliefs. Doing a behavioral experiment using mindfulness
(pp. 278--279) is especially effective. When clients successfully
disengage from a thought process such as worry, you can guide them in
changing their cognitions from "Worry is uncontrollable" to "I can
choose to disengage in worry when I notice it has started."

TECHNIQUES TO REGULATE EMOTION Throughout this book, you'll learn
techniques to help clients regulate their emotions. For example: Problem
solving Evaluating and responding to negative thoughts Engaging in (and
being fully mindful of) social, pleasurable, or productive activities
Exercising Accepting negative emotion nonjudgmentally Using mindfulness
(to detach from upsetting thoughts) Doing relaxation, guided imagery, or
breathing exercises Engaging in self-soothing activities (walking in
nature, taking a bath, hugging another person or a pet, listening to
soothing music) Focusing on one's strengths and positive qualities, and
giving oneself credit

See Linehan (2015) for an extensive description of emotion regulation
and distress tolerance techniques. For more techniques and helpful
metaphors to help clients accept negative emotion, see Hayes and
colleagues (1999).

SUMMARY Emotional reactions always make sense, given what the individual
is thinking. You will seek to promote positive emotions in and outside
of sessions. When clients express significant negative emotion, you'll
conceptualize according to the cognitive model and you'll often address
the associated cognitions. Some clients need to modify dysfunctional
beliefs about experiencing negative emotion itself. It's important for
clients to differentiate between their thoughts and their emotions and
among different emotions. We empathize with clients' emotions, and we
don't evaluate them. When needed, we help them to accept their negative
emotions nonjudgmentally. A number of techniques help clients regulate
their negative emotions and, when needed, develop greater tolerance of
them.

REFLECTION QUESTION What role do emotions play in CBT treatment?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Do a role play in which you elicit a client's
dysfunctional belief about experiencing negative emotion. Also help the
same client experience positive emotion in the session.

14

EVALUATING AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS

have hundreds or thousands of thoughts a day, some Clients
dysfunctional, some not, some relevant to treatment, others not. Part of
the art of therapy is to conceptualize which thoughts are most important
to address and how to address them. In this chapter, you'll learn the
answers to the following questions: What kinds of thoughts do you
address in treatment? How do you select the most important thoughts to
work on? How do you use Socratic questioning to evaluate thoughts? How
do you assess the outcome of the evaluation process? How do you
conceptualize why evaluation might be ineffective? What are alternate
methods of addressing thoughts? What do you do when thoughts are true?

TYPES OF AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS Three kinds of thoughts are relevant to
therapy:

1. Inaccurate thoughts that lead to distress and/or maladaptive behavior
(especially those that present obstacles to achieving goals). You'll
often evaluate them verbally or test through behavioral experiments. 2.
Accurate but unhelpful thoughts. You might problem-solve, evaluate an
inaccurate conclusion stemming from the thought, and/or work toward
acceptance of an insoluble problem and changing the focus of attention.
3. Thoughts that are part of a dysfunctional thought process such as
rumination, obsession, or self-criticism. You'll often evaluate beliefs
about the thought process, use mindfulness techniques, and emphasize
valued action.

Later in this chapter, you'll learn a variety of other techniques to
address these three types of thoughts.

SELECTING KEY AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS You have identified an automatic
thought. Clients may have made a spontaneous utterance during a session
(e.g., "I just don't think anything can help me"); related an automatic
thought, often from the past week; or made a prediction of an unhelpful
thought they might have in the future.

Next you need to conceptualize whether this is an important thought on
which to focus; that is, is it currently significantly distressing or
unhelpful and likely to recur? Does it pose an obstacle to a goal? If it
was an automatic thought from the past week, you might ask: "In what
situation did you have this thought \[if the client reported a thought
and not the situation\]?" "How much did you believe it at the time? How
much do you believe it now?" \[Clients can use a 0--10 or 0--100 scale,
or words such as "a little," "a medium/moderate amount," "a lot," and
"completely."\] "How did this thought make you feel emotionally? How
intense was the emotion then? How intense is the emotion now?" "What did
you do?"

You will also ask yourself whether the client is likely to have this
kind of thought again and be distressed by it. If not, it may not be an
important enough cognition to spend time on. Why do clients bring up
problems and automatic thoughts that aren't important? Most of the time,
it's because they aren't socialized well enough to treatment. Or
sometimes they bring up problems that occurred just before the therapy
session. You will vary your questions slightly if clients spontaneously
utter the thought and/or if they are predicting a thought they're likely
to have later. You should also find out whether additional thoughts were
more central or distressing: "What else went through your mind \[in this
situation\]? Did you have any other thoughts or images?" "Did you feel
any other emotion?" \[If so,\] "What thoughts/images went along with
it?" "Which thought/image was most upsetting?"

Even if clients report an important automatic thought, you might
collaboratively decide not to focus on it, especially if it might impair
the therapeutic relationship (e.g., you perceive that clients are
feeling invalidated), their level of distress is too high to evaluate
their thinking, there's insufficient time in the session to help them
respond effectively to the thought, it seems more important to work on
another element of the cognitive model (e.g., you might focus instead on
solving the problem, teaching the client emotion regulation techniques,
discussing more adaptive behavioral responses, or addressing the
client's physiological response), you decide you should work on a
dysfunctional belief underlying the automatic thought, or you believe
it's more important to discuss something else altogether.

QUESTIONING TO EVALUATE AN AUTOMATIC THOUGHT

Having elicited an automatic thought, determined that it is important
and distressing, and identified its accompanying reactions (emotional,
physiological, and behavioral), you may collaboratively decide with the
client to evaluate it. You will not directly challenge the automatic
thought, however, for several reasons: You usually don't know in advance
the degree to which any given automatic thought is distorted (e.g.,
Abe's thought that he was going to run out of money could be valid). A
direct challenge can lead clients to feel invalidated (e.g., Maria might
think, "\[My therapist\] is telling me I'm wrong"). Challenging a
cognition violates a fundamental principal of CBT, that of collaborative
empiricism: You and the client together examine the automatic thought,
test its validity and/or utility, and develop a more adaptive response.

It's also important to keep in mind that automatic thoughts are rarely
completely erroneous. Usually, they contain at least a grain of truth
(which is important to acknowledge). Instead of challenging or disputing
automatic thoughts, we often use a gentle process of Socratic
questioning. Initially, you may need to have a summary sheet of
questions in front of you (Figure 14.1 or 14.2), a copy of which you can
give to the client. (These questions are derived from worksheets, which
you'll read about in the next chapter.) Eventually, you'll learn the
questions so well that you won't need it. At that point, done well, this
style of inquiry sounds almost conversational. Research shows that the
Socratic method is generally superior to didactic methods. (Actually,
"Socratic" is usually a misnomer; the Socratic questioning method,
derived from the philosopher Socrates, involves a dialectical
discussion.) Properly done, Socratic questioning leads to symptom change
(Braun et al., 2015). Clients prefer this method; they find it more
helpful and respectful and are more likely to engage in cognitive
restructuring (Heiniger et al., 2018). See Overholser (2018) for an
extensive discussion of the Socratic method of psychotherapy. What is
the evidence that the automatic thought is true? Not true? Is there an
alternative explanation?

What's the worst that could happen, and how could I cope? What's the
best that could happen? What's the most realistic outcome? What's the
effect of my believing the automatic thought? What could be the effect
of changing my thinking? If \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \[friend's name\]
was in the situation and had this thought, what would I tell him/her?
What should I do about it? FIGURE 14.1. Questions to evaluate automatic
thoughts 1 (from the Thought Record).

What is the situation? What am I thinking or imagining? What makes me
think the thought is true? What makes me think the thought is not true
or not completely true? What's another way to look at this? What's the
worst that could happen? What could I do then? What's the best that
could happen? What will probably happen? What will happen if I keep
telling myself the same thought? What could happen if I changed my
thinking? What would I tell my friend \[think of a specific person\] if
this happened to them? What should I do now? FIGURE 14.2. Questions to
evaluate automatic thoughts 2 (from the Testing Your Thoughts
Worksheet).

On the other hand, behavioral methods (if you help clients draw adaptive
conclusions from their experiences) can be more powerful than Socratic
questioning. Behavioral experiments are appropriate for almost every
client (and are necessary for some, including young children and
individuals with serious mental illness, brain injury, intellectual
disabilities, or autism). You may use questioning from the very first
session to evaluate a specific automatic thought. In a subsequent
session, you will begin to explain the process more explicitly, so
clients can learn to evaluate their thinking between sessions: JUDITH:
(Summarizes past portion of the session; writes automatic thoughts on
paper for both to see.) So when you considered calling Charlie, you

thought, "He probably won't want to hear from me," and that thought made
you feel sad? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH: And how much did you believe that
thought at the time? ABE: Oh, pretty much. About 90%. JUDITH: And how
sad did you feel? ABE: Maybe 80%. JUDITH: Do you remember what we've
been talking about? Sometimes automatic thoughts like these are true,
sometimes they turn out not to be true, and sometimes they have a grain
of truth. Can we look at this thought about Charlie to see how accurate
it seems? ABE: Okay. JUDITH: I'd like to show you a list of questions
that might be helpful. It's useful for clients to use one of the lists
(Figure 14.1 or 14.2) to evaluate their thoughts verbally with you in
session. If they're successful, you can suggest that they use the list
between sessions as part of their Action Plan when they identify an
automatic thought. They can then think about their responses or write
them down. But make sure it's appropriate to give them the list. Some
clients become overwhelmed by the number of questions. When you predict
this is the case, teach them just one or two questions, which you or the
client can record. Or circle a few questions on one of the lists. But
before suggesting that they use these questions at home, make sure that
they understand that evaluating their thinking can help them feel
better, they believe they will be able to use the questions effectively,
and they understand that not all questions apply to all automatic
thoughts.

You should also guide them so they'll know when and how to use the
questions. JUDITH: Abe, it would be too burdensome for you to use these
questions for every automatic thought you have this week. So, when you
notice your mood getting worse or you're doing something that isn't
helpful, try to

catch your automatic thoughts, and then think to yourself, "Do I have
therapy notes that cover this?" Okay? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: If this is a new
thought, you'll definitely want to pull out the list at least some of
the time. Now, ideally, you'd not only ask yourself the questions but
also write down your answers, if you can. How does that sound? ABE:
Fine. CLINICAL TIPS The evaluation of client's thoughts should be
evenhanded. We don't want clients to ignore evidence that supports an
automatic thought, devise an unlikely alternative explanation, or adopt
an unrealistically positive view of what might happen. Let clients know
that not all of the questions in the lists are relevant to every
automatic thought. And using all of the questions, even if they
logically apply, may be too cumbersome and time consuming. Clients may
not evaluate their thoughts at all if they consider the process too
burdensome.

You can use any set of questions to help clients evaluate their
thinking, but the lists can be helpful as they guide you and the client
to examine the validity of the automatic thought, explore the
possibility of other interpretations or viewpoints, decatastrophize the
problem situation, recognize the impact of believing the automatic
thought, gain distance from the thought, and take steps to solve the
problem.

Each question is described below.

"Evidence" Questions Because automatic thoughts usually contain a grain
of truth, clients usually do have some evidence that supports their
accuracy (which you will help them identify first), but they often fail
to recognize evidence to the contrary (which you will help them identify
next): JUDITH: What makes you think that Charlie won't want to hear from
you? \[or "What is the evidence that \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_?"\]

ABE: Well, it's been at least a month since I talked to him. JUDITH:
Anything else? ABE: Well, the last time we got together, I wasn't much
fun. JUDITH: Anything else? ABE: (Thinks.) No. I guess not. JUDITH:
Okay, now what makes you think it might not be true or not completely
true \[or "What's the evidence on the other side?"\] that maybe he would
want to hear from you? ABE: I don't know. We used to be good friends.
But I haven't seen him as much in the past few months. JUDITH: Anything
else? ABE: When I cancelled plans with him last month, he sounded
disappointed. JUDITH: What did he say? ABE: That he was sorry I wasn't
feeling well. That he hoped I'd feel better soon. JUDITH: Okay.
\[summarizing\] So, on the one hand, you haven't heard from Charlie in
over a month and you haven't seen him as often recently. You also think
that last time you did get together, you weren't much fun. On the other
hand, you've been friends for a long time, he seemed disappointed not to
get together with you, and he seemed sympathetic. Is that right? ABE:
Yeah.

"Alternative Explanation" Questions Next, I help Abe devise a reasonable
alternative explanation for what has happened. JUDITH: Good. Now, let's
look at the situation again. Is there another way to look at this? \[or
"Could there be an alternative explanation for why you haven't heard
from him in a month---other than he doesn't want to hear from you?"\]
ABE: I don't know. JUDITH: Why else might he have been out of touch?
ABE: I'm not sure. Sometimes he gets in a real crunch at work. Sometimes
his wife wants him to stay home all weekend. I guess it's possible he's
been too busy.

"Decatastrophizing" Questions Many clients predict a worst-case
scenario. Ask them how they could cope if the worst does happen. JUDITH:
Okay. Now, if the worst happens and it turns out he doesn't want to hear
from you, what could you do? \[or "How could you cope with that?"\] ABE:
Well, I wouldn't be happy about it. JUDITH: \[asking leading questions
to help him develop a robust response\] Do you have other friends you
could be in contact with? ABE: It's been a while. But I suppose I could.
JUDITH: And you still have your children and grandchildren? ABE: Yes.
JUDITH: So, would you be okay? ABE: Yeah, I guess I would. Clients'
worst fears are often unrealistic. Your objective is to help them think
of more realistic outcomes, but many clients have difficulty doing so.
You might help them broaden their thinking by next asking for the best
outcome. JUDITH: Now the worst may be unlikely to happen. What's the
best that could happen? ABE: That I'll call him and he'll want to get
together. JUDITH: I wonder whether the best would be that he'd call you
today and apologize for being out of touch and make plans to see you
right away. ABE: I guess that would be the best. JUDITH: And what do you
think will probably happen? \[or "What is the most realistic outcome?"\]
ABE: It's possible that he's only a little annoyed with me or that he's
been busy and maybe he will want to get together. CLINICAL TIPS When
clients' worst fears are that they'll die, you obviously won't ask the
"How would you cope?" question. Instead, you might ask for the best and
most realistic outcomes. You might also decide to ask what the worst
part of dying would be: fears of the process of dying, fears of what
they imagine an afterlife might be like, or fears of what would happen
to loved ones after the client's death.

"Impact of the Automatic Thought" Questions Below, I help Abe assess the
consequences of responding and not responding to his distorted thinking.
JUDITH: And what will happen if you keep telling yourself that Charlie
doesn't want to hear from you? \[Or "What is the effect of your thinking
that he doesn't want to hear from you?"\] ABE: It makes me sad. And I
end up not calling him. JUDITH: And what could happen if you changed
your thinking? \[or "What could be the effect of changing your
thinking?"\] ABE: I'd feel better. I'd be more likely to call.

"Distancing" Questions Clients often benefit from getting some distance
from their thoughts by imagining what they would tell a close friend or
family member in a similar situation. JUDITH: Abe, let's say your son
had a friend whom he was out of touch with for a month. If he thought,
"My friend doesn't want to hear from me," what would you tell him? ABE:
I guess I'd tell him that a month isn't too long a time. That there may
be a good reason they were out of touch. That it's worth it to contact
his friend. JUDITH: Does that apply to you? ABE: Yes, I guess it does.

"Problem-Solving" Questions The answer to "What would be good to do
now?" may be cognitive and/or behavioral in nature. Sometimes clients
should remind themselves of something you've just discussed---for
example: "I guess if I think \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, I need to remember
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_." Abe said, "I guess if I think he doesn't want
to hear from me, I need to remember that I'm

probably wrong. He's probably just been busy." Abe and I also come up
with a behavioral plan. JUDITH: And what would you like to do about this
situation? ABE: Uh ... I guess I should just go ahead and text him. I
would then ask how likely Abe was to text him and respond to obstacles
that could get in the way. If I were unsure of Abe's social skills, I
might have asked him, "What do you think you should say in the text?" If
Abe thought it would be helpful, we might role-play what to say to his
friend when they got together. We might evaluate the pros and cons of
his disclosing his depression. We might brainstorm things to talk about
to lighten the mood. I might ask Abe if he wants to text Charlie right
then in my office.

ASSESSING THE OUTCOME OF THE EVALUATION PROCESS In the last part of this
discussion, I assess how much Abe now believes the original automatic
thought and how he feels emotionally, so I can decide what to do next in
the session. JUDITH: Good. Now, how much do you believe this thought:
"Charlie doesn't want to hear from me"? ABE: Not that much. Maybe 30%.
JUDITH: Okay. And how sad do you feel? ABE: Not much either. JUDITH:
Good. It sounds like this exercise was useful. Let's go back and see
what we did that helped. You and the client won't use all the questions
in the lists for every automatic thought you evaluate. Sometimes none of
the questions seems useful, and you might go in a different direction
altogether. Also, don't expect that clients' belief in the automatic
thought to go down to 0% or that their negative mood will go away
completely.

CONCEPTUALIZING WHEN COGNITIVE RESTRUCTURING IS INEFFECTIVE When mood
and/or behavior don't improve, you need to conceptualize why this
initial attempt at cognitive restructuring hasn't been sufficiently
effective. Common reasons to consider include the following: 1. There
are more central automatic thoughts and/or images you haven't yet
identified or evaluated. 2. The evaluation of the automatic thought is
implausible, superficial, or inadequate. 3. The client hasn't
sufficiently expressed the evidence that seems to support the automatic
thought. 4. The automatic thought itself is also a broad,
overgeneralized cognition: a core belief (such as "I'm helpless/I'm
unlovable/I'm worthless"). 5. The client understands intellectually that
the automatic thought is distorted but not on an emotional level. 6. The
automatic thought is part of a dysfunctional thought pattern.

My supervisee, Andrew, was a novice therapist. He made some mistakes
when he was treating Margaret, a woman with social anxiety. In the first
situation, the client didn't verbalize the most central automatic
thought or image. Margaret had several automatic thoughts but verbalized
only one. When Andrew helped her evaluate this automatic thought, she
experienced only a mild decrease in the intensity of her anxiety. He
should have questioned her more carefully before jumping in to evaluate
the first thought she expressed. In a second situation, the client
responded to an automatic thought superficially. Margaret thought, "My
coworker might criticize me." Instead of carefully evaluating the
thought, she merely responded, "He probably won't." This response was
insufficient, and her anxiety didn't decrease. In a third situation, the
therapist didn't thoroughly probe for, and therefore the client didn't
fully express, the evidence that the automatic thought was true,
resulting in an ineffective adaptive response, as seen here: THERAPIST:
Okay, Margaret, what evidence do you have that your friend doesn't want
to bother with you? MARGARET: Well, she hardly ever calls me. I always
call her.

THERAPIST: Okay, anything on the other side? That she does care about
you, that she does want a good relationship with you? Had Andrew asked
her additional questions, he would have uncovered other evidence that
Margaret has to support her automatic thought: that her friend has
turned down several invitations to spend time with her, that she sounded
impatient on the phone the last few times when she called, and that she
had not sent Margaret a birthday card. Having elicited this additional
data, Andrew could have helped Margaret weigh the evidence more
effectively. In a fourth situation, the client identified an automatic
thought that was also a core belief. Margaret often thinks, "There's
something wrong with me." She believes this idea so strongly that a
single evaluation doesn't alter her perception or the associated affect.
In an early session, she lists many situations in which she feels
anxious and then she reports this cognition to Andrew. Andrew starts
helping her evaluate it. But he should have focused on a specific
situation in which she had this thought---for example: "Can we talk
about the party you went to over the weekend when no one came up to you
and you thought, 'There's something wrong with me'? Could there have
been another reason that no one came up to you?" Andrew will need to use
many techniques over time to alter the client's overgeneralized core
belief (see Chapter 18). In a fifth situation, the client indicated that
she believes an adaptive response "intellectually," in her mind, but not
"emotionally," in her heart, soul, or gut. She discounts the adaptive
response. In this case, Andrew and Margaret should have explored an
unarticulated belief that lay behind the automatic thought: THERAPIST:
How much do you believe that Christina probably has other reasons for
not putting you on her work team? MARGARET: Well, I can see it
intellectually. THERAPIST: But? MARGARET: I still think if she really
liked me, she would have included me. THERAPIST: So what does it mean
that she didn't include you? MARGARET: It means I'm not good enough.

Here, Andrew discovers that Margaret doesn't really believe the adaptive
response because of her belief "If people don't include me in something,
it means I'm not good enough." To summarize, having evaluated an
automatic thought, ask clients to rate how much they believe the
adaptive response and how they feel emotionally. If their belief is low
and they are still distressed, conceptualize why examining the thought
didn't alleviate their distress, and plan a strategy for what to do
next.

ALTERNATE METHODS TO ADDRESS AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS There are many other
techniques to help clients assess their thinking (Dobson & Dobson, 2018;
Leahy, 2018; Tolin, 2016). To name just a few, you can vary your
questions, identify the cognitive distortion, design a behavioral
experiment, use self-disclosure, and/or ask clients to compose a helpful
response.

These strategies are described below.

Using Alternative Questions When you predict that standard questions
won't be effective enough, vary your line of questioning. JUDITH:
\[summarizing\] So you called your ex-wife to try to get her to sign the
papers. What went through your mind when she got angry? ABE: I should
have known she'd get angry. I should have waited to call her. JUDITH:
What makes you think you shouldn't have called? ABE: Well, she's usually
in a bad mood on Sunday nights.

JUDITH: Had that occurred to you? ABE: Well, yeah, but I wanted to let
my daughter know right away if she could count on us to help her out
with her car loan. She really needed to know. JUDITH: So you actually
had a reason for calling when you did, and it sounds as if you knew it
might be risky, but you really wanted to let Kaitlyn know as soon as you
could? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH: Is it reasonable to be so hard on yourself for
taking the risk? ABE: No ... JUDITH: You don't sound convinced. How bad
is it anyway, in the scheme of things, for your ex-wife to be mad at
you? I followed up these questions with others: "How reasonable was it
for you to bring this up with your ex-wife? How reasonable was it for
her to get angry? How does she probably feel now? Is it possible for you
to always avoid getting her angry? Can you possibly do what is good for
you and your children and grandchildren without getting her angry?"
These nonstandard questions helped Abe adopt a more functional
perspective. Although I started out questioning the validity of the
thought, I shifted the emphasis to the implicit underlying belief (which
we had previously discussed in other contexts): "I should be able to
avoid having others get upset with me." At the end, I asked Abe an
open-ended question ("How do you see the situation now?") to see whether
he needed more help in responding to his thoughts. Note that many
questions I asked were a variation of the Socratic question "Is there an
alternative explanation \[for why you called when you did and for why
your ex-wife was angry, other than that you were at fault\]?"

Identifying Cognitive Distortions Clients tend to make consistent errors
in their thinking. Often there is a systematic negative bias in the
cognitive processing of clients who suffer from a psychiatric disorder
(Beck, 1976). The most common errors are presented in Figure 14.3 (see
also Burns, 1980). It sometimes helps to label distortions and to teach
clients to do the same. Be sure to tell them that the categories overlap
and they may find that some automatic thoughts contain

more than one distortion. Before providing the client with a list, you
might start by making mental notes of his or her most common distortions
and then point out a specific distortion when you spot a pattern: "Abe,
this idea that either you're a total success or you're a failure---
that's what we call all-or-nothing thinking. Does it seem familiar? I
remember you also had the idea that because you hadn't been able to do
all your new job responsibilities at work it meant you had completely
failed. And that if you're not doing everything you can for your
grandchildren, then you're a failure as a grandfather. Do you think it
could be helpful to watch out for this kind of thinking?" All-or-nothing
thinking

Also called black-and-white, polarized, or dichotomous thinking. You
view a situation in only two categories instead of on a continuum.

Example: "If I'm not a total success, I'm a failure."

Catastrophizing (fortunetelling)

Also called fortune-telling. You predict the future negatively without
considering other, more likely outcomes.

Example: "I'll be so upset, I won't be able to function at all."

Disqualifying or discounting the positive

You unreasonably tell yourself that positive experiences, deeds, or
qualities do not count.

Example: "I did that project well, but that doesn't mean I'm competent;
I just got lucky."

Emotional reasoning

You think something must be true because you "feel" (actually believe)
it so strongly, ignoring or discounting evidence to the contrary.

Example: "I know I do a lot of things okay at work, but I still feel
like I'm a failure."

Labeling

You put a fixed, global label on yourself or others without considering
that the evidence might more reasonably lead to a less extreme
conclusion.

Examples: "I'm a loser"; "He's no good."

Magnification/minimization

When you evaluate yourself, another person, or a situation, you
unreasonably magnify the negative and/or minimize the positive.

Example: "Getting a mediocre evaluation proves how inadequate I am.
Getting high marks doesn't mean I'm smart."

Mental filter

Also called selective abstraction. You pay undue attention to one
negative detail instead of seeing the whole picture.

Example: "Because I got one low rating on my evaluation \[which also
contained several high ratings\], it means I'm doing a lousy job."

Mind reading

You believe you know what others are thinking, failing to consider
other, more likely possibilities.

Example: "He's thinking that I don't know the first thing about this
project."

Overgeneralization

You make a sweeping negative conclusion that goes far beyond the current
situation.

Example: "Because I felt uncomfortable at the meeting, I don't have what
it takes to make friends."

Personalization

You believe others are behaving negatively because of you, without
considering more plausible explanations for their behavior.

Example: "The repairman was curt to me because I did something wrong."

"Should" and "must" statements

Also called imperatives. You have a precise, fixed idea of how you or
others should behave, and you overestimate how bad it is that these
expectations are not met.

Example: "It's terrible that I made a mistake. I should always do my
best."

Tunnel vision

You only see the negative aspects of a situation.

Example: "My son's teacher can't do anything right. He's critical and
insensitive and lousy at teaching."

FIGURE 14.3. Thinking errors. Adapted with permission from Aaron T.
Beck.

Identifying distortions can help clients gain distance from their
thoughts. But as with all techniques, make sure it's helpful to clients,
they understand the rationale, and they don't feel overwhelmed by the
list. I see it as a helpful strategy for many clients, but it's not
essential. It's especially important to review the list in session so
you can make sure clients understand how to use it before you ask them
to label their distortions as part of their Action Plan. At our next
session, I gave Abe the list, and together we identified his typical
automatic thougvhts and the distortions they represented. For

example: Catastrophizing: "I'll never get another job." All-or-nothing
thinking: "Since my apartment is messy, it means it's completely out of
control." Mind reading: "My friend doesn't want to be around me."
Emotional reasoning: "I feel like such a failure; I must be a failure."
I circled these four distortions on the list and suggested Abe see
whether any of his automatic thoughts in the coming week contained one
or more of these errors. Abe kept this list handy and referred to it
when he was evaluating his automatic thoughts. Doing so helped him
believe more strongly that perhaps an automatic thought was not true, or
not completely true.

Designing Behavioral Experiments Discussing the validity of clients'
ideas that are in the form of predictions can help them change their
thinking, but the change may be significantly more effective if the
client has an experience that disconfirms its validity (Bennett-Levy et
al., 2004). Socratic questioning may be insufficient, but it can help
you decide whether it might be desirable to do a behavioral experiment.
Abe had the automatic thought "I don't have enough energy to go to the
homeless shelter \[to volunteer\]." First, we examined that thought and
found that it was probably inaccurate. Then we did problem solving; we
decided that Abe could plan to go for just 30 minutes and then leave if
he ran out of energy. Next, we set up a behavioral experiment to see
whether he would be able to follow through with this plan. You design
behavioral experiments collaboratively. When feasible, suggest that
clients do the experiment right in the session to test cognitions such
as the following: "If I tell you about how I was abused, I'll get so
upset that I'll go crazy." "If my heart starts to pound and I'm short of
breath, I'll have a heart attack." "If I try to read, I won't be able to
concentrate."

Other experiments need to be done outside of session:

"If I ask my sister for help, she'll turn me down." "If I stay in bed
all day, I'll feel better." "If I try to pay my bills, I'll make too
many mistakes." "If I ask my boss a question, he'll get annoyed and fire
me."

Make sure to help clients draw adaptive conclusions after having done a
successful behavioral experiment. Here are some questions you can ask:
"What did you make of that experience?" or "What did you learn?" or
"What do you conclude?" "What does this experience mean about you \[or
about other people or about how other people view you\]?" "What does
this experience probably mean about the future?"

Using Self-Disclosure At times, you might use judicious self-disclosure
instead of or in addition to Socratic questioning or other methods, to
demonstrate how you were able to change similar automatic thoughts of
your own, as illustrated below: "You know, Abe, sometimes I have
thoughts like yours: 'I have to do the responsible thing.' But then I
remind myself that I have a responsibility to take care of myself and
that the world probably won't end if I can't do everything someone else
wants me to. (pause) Do you think that applies to you too?"

Asking Clients for a Helpful Response Finally, there are times when you
can simply ask clients how they'd like to respond to an automatic
thought. Sometimes they can come up with an effective response early in
treatment. Sometimes you'll need to wait until they've made more
progress. ABE: When it's time to go to the reunion, I'll probably want
to skip it. JUDITH: Can you think of a more helpful way to view this?
ABE: Yeah. That it's better for me to go, even if I have to push myself.
I could reconnect with people that were important to me. JUDITH: Good.
What do you think will happen if you say that to yourself?

ABE: I'll be more likely to go. Here's another example: JUDITH: Anything
you can think of that might get in the way of telling your ex-wife that
you don't want to change your holiday plans? ABE: I don't want her to
get her angry. JUDITH: Okay, if you do have the thought "I don't want to
get her angry," what do you want to be able to tell yourself? ABE: That
if this doesn't get her angry, something else will. And I should do
what's good for me---not accommodate her all the time. JUDITH: Good!
Will that be enough, do you think, to go ahead and tell her you're not
changing the plan?

WHEN AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS ARE TRUE Sometimes automatic thoughts turn out
to be true, and you may choose to do one or more of the following: Focus
on problem solving. Investigate whether the client has drawn an invalid
or dysfunctional conclusion. Work on acceptance and refocus on valued
action.

These strategies are described below.

Focus on Problem Solving If a client's perception of a situation appears
to be valid, you might investigate whether the problem it's associated
with can be solved, at least to some degree. In one session, Abe and I
evaluate his automatic thought "If I don't get a job soon, I won't have
enough money to pay my rent," and the evidence does indicate that this
is a possibility.

JUDITH: So even if you're careful, it looks as if you might not be able
to come up with rent toward the end of the year. Is it possible that
you'll have a job by then? ABE: It's possible, but what if I don't?
JUDITH: Have you thought of what you could do if that happened? ABE:
Well, I don't want to have to move in with one of my kids. JUDITH: But
you might be able to, as a last resort? ABE: I suppose so ... JUDITH:
Have you thought of anything else? ABE: No, I don't think there's
anything else I can do. JUDITH: Have you considered getting any kind of
job now? It could be part time or full time. Just until you find one
that you really want? ABE: No, I've been pretty focused on getting the
kind of job I used to have. JUDITH: What do you think of the idea? ABE:
I don't know. I'm so tired these days. JUDITH: Do you think you'd need
as much energy if the job were just part time? What's the worst that
could happen if it turns out you are too tired? ABE: I guess it wouldn't
be a big deal. I could just quit. JUDITH: Do you want to make that part
of your Action Plan this week? If it turns out you can't work at all, we
can brainstorm other ideas: maybe you could get a roommate or a less
expensive apartment, or move in with someone else temporarily; maybe you
could borrow money from your brother, even though I know you don't want
to. (pause) And there might be other things you could do that you
haven't thought of because you've been so depressed.

Investigate Invalid Conclusions While an automatic thought might be
true, the meaning of the thought to the client may be invalid or at
least not completely valid (as illustrated below), and you can examine
the underlying belief or conclusion. JUDITH: So it looks as if you
really can't concentrate well enough to do your taxes. ABE: Yeah, I feel
so bad about it.

JUDITH: What does it mean about you that you can't? Or what are you
afraid will happen? ABE: It shows there's something wrong with my brain.
I might never get my concentration back. JUDITH: Okay, can we look at
that first? Is there another explanation for your difficulty in
concentrating?

Work toward Acceptance and Valued Action Some problems can't be solved
and may never be solved, and clients may need help in accepting that
outcome. They are likely to feel miserable if they have unrealistic
expectations that an unresolvable problem will somehow, almost
magically, improve. Meanwhile, they usually need assistance in learning
to focus on their core values, pursue valued action, emphasize the more
rewarding parts of their lives, and enrich their experience in new ways.
Multiple strategies designed to enhance acceptance can be found in Hayes
and colleagues (2004).

SUMMARY It's important to address key automatic thoughts that lead to
significant negative emotion or dysfunctional behavior. These thoughts
are either inaccurate or unhelpful or both. Evaluating automatic
thoughts is a specific skill, one at which both therapists and clients
improve with repeated practice. Refrain from challenging clients'
automatic thoughts and become adept at using several techniques to help
clients assess the accuracy and utility of their thoughts. When
automatic thoughts are true, you can evaluate clients' conclusions about
a problem, do problem solving, or employ acceptance strategies with a
focus on valued action to reduce clients' distress. REFLECTION QUESTIONS
What would you like to tell yourself if you become frustrated when
learning the skill of evaluating automatic thoughts? What would you want
a client to believe?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Write down the answers to the list of questions in
Figure 14.1 to evaluate one of your own automatic thoughts. Then record
your answers to the questions in Figure 14.2 to evaluate another
thought.

15

RESPONDING TO AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS

previous chapter demonstrated how to help clients evaluate important
Thenegative automatic thoughts and determine the effectiveness of their
evaluation in session. But when these same thoughts arise in their minds
during the week, clients may not remember their responses. They will
also experience additional important automatic thoughts between sessions
that you didn't identify. You will find the answers to these questions
in this chapter: How do you help clients compose therapy notes to read
between sessions? How do you teach clients to use a worksheet to address
other automatic thoughts between sessions? What should you do if a
worksheet isn't helpful enough?

Make sure that clients have recorded robust responses in writing (on
paper or an index card, in a therapy notebook, or on a smartphone) or in
an audio format (using a recording device or an app) to automatic
thoughts you've addressed in session. To respond to other automatic
thoughts between sessions, you can teach clients how to use questions
from the previous chapter (Figures 14.1 and 14.2). Or you can use the
Testing Your Thoughts Worksheet (Figures 15.1 and 15.2) or a Thought
Record (Figures 15.3 and 15.4) or another technique described later in
this chapter.

COMPOSING THERAPY NOTES

Having evaluated an automatic thought with clients, you'll ask them to
summarize. You might pose one of the following questions: "Can you
summarize what we've just been talking about?" "What do you think would
be important for you to remember this week?" "If the situation comes up
again, what do you want to tell yourself?"

When clients express a strong summary, you might say, "That's good.
Would you like to write it down or would you like me to? I want to make
sure you remember it this week." You will most likely ask their
preference in Sessions 1 and 2 and then assume their preference hasn't
changed unless they indicate it has. Abe and I evaluated his thought "I
can't do it" using Socratic questioning. Then I ask him to summarize.
JUDITH: Okay, Abe, if you think about filling out the insurance forms
this week and again you have the thought "I can't do it," what do you
want to remind yourself? ABE: That it's probably not true. My
concentration was good enough to fill out a couple of job applications
so I can probably at least get started on the forms. JUDITH: That's
good. (Writes it down.) Anything else? ABE: I could ask my son for help.
JUDITH: (writing) That's important too. And how about that just getting
started might be the hardest part? ABE: Yeah, that's good to remember.
To make sure that what Abe writes down will be most helpful, I first ask
him to express his summary verbally. This gives me a chance to add to or
suggest changes to his summary. CLINICAL TIPS When clients' responses
are superficial, confused, too brief, or too wordy, you might say:
"Well, I think that's close, but I wonder if it would be more helpful to
remember it this way: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_." As above, if clients'
answers are reasonable but incomplete, you might ask, "Do you also want
to remind yourself that \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_?" If they agree, you or
they can record the addition.

It's desirable for clients to read their therapy notes each morning and
pull them out, as needed, during the day. They tend to integrate
responses into their thinking when they have rehearsed them repeatedly.
Reading notes only when encountering difficult situations is usually
less effective than reading them

regularly in preparation for difficult situations. Below are some of
Abe's therapy notes. They contain responses to dysfunctional thinking
and behavioral Action Plans items. When I think "I'll never get
everything done," I'll remind myself: I should focus on what I need to
do right now. I don't have to do everything perfectly. I can ask for
help. It's not a sign of weakness.

Then I should figure out what's easiest to do and set a timer for 10
minutes. At the end of 10 minutes, I can decide whether to keep going or
not.

When I think "I'd rather stay inside," I'll tell myself that I've
already done the experiment of staying inside lots and lots of times and
my mood doesn't get better. Chances are I'll feel better if I do go out,
to get some sun, to exercise, or to do an errand. It might feel as if
I'm letting my kids down, but that's all-or-nothing thinking. I'm not
doing as much for them physically, like helping them with yard work, as
I did before I was depressed. But I'm still going to my grandchildren's
soccer games and driving them when their parents get stuck. I should
call them right now and make plans to see them.

When I want to ask Gabe for help looking online for a new job: 1. I'll
remind myself it's just not a big deal. The worst that'll happen is
he'll say he's too busy and then I can ask Kaitlyn instead. 2. Asking
him to help is an experiment. Even if it doesn't work this time, it's
good practice for me. 3. If he says he's too busy, he probably really
is. 4. I should call him now and ask if I can come over today or
tomorrow or vice versa.

Strategies for When I'm Anxious 1. Read my therapy notes and/or do a
Testing Your Thoughts Worksheet.

2. Call Ethan and talk about sports. 3. Accept the anxiety. I don't like
the feeling, but it's a normal human emotion. I can do anything with
anxiety that I can do without anxiety. It will likely decrease once I
turn my attention to something else. 4. Practice the mindfulness
exercise. 5. Go for a walk.

CLINICAL TIPS On a practical note, you should keep copies of your
clients' therapy notes. You can photocopy them, take a picture of them
and print them out, or use carbonless copy paper. You'll refer to these
therapy notes when planning the next session (usually immediately before
that session), when reviewing clients' Action Plans, and when
reinforcing ideas you had discussed with clients in prior sessions.
Also, you can provide clients with a photocopy of your notes if they
lose their notes.

Audio-Recorded Therapy Notes Ensuring that clients have written therapy
notes is ideal. They can carry around a notebook or index cards to read
as needed, or they can read their therapy notes on their smartphone. But
some clients can't or don't like to read. Or they find it's more
effective to listen to their notes. In any case, you can turn on an
audio recorder or have clients use an app on their phones when
developing responses to automatic thoughts; or you can note what the
responses are and turn on the recorder for the last few minutes of a
session, recording all responses at once. Recording and then having
clients listen to an entire therapy session is often less useful. They
are likely to review the recording only once during the week, instead of
repeatedly listening to the most important points of the session. They
may also have self-critical thoughts as they listen. When clients aren't
literate, you can ask them how they could remember what you've talked
about. For example, could they draw a picture? Could they get someone to
read the notes to them? Could they listen to an audio recording?
CLINICAL TIPS To motivate clients to read their therapy notes, use the
same techniques you'd use for any Action Plan item (Chapter 8),
especially linking it to their aspirations, values, and goals. Be sure
to ask about obstacles that could get in the way. If they're not sure
they'll have enough time, ask them how long they think it will take to
read their notes. If they overestimate, you might ask them to read the

notes aloud in session while you time them, so they can see that it
actually takes a much shorter amount of time (usually 20--60 seconds).

USING WORKSHEETS The Testing Your Thoughts Worksheet (Figures 15.1 and
15.2) and the Thought Record (Figures 15.3 and 15.4), also known in an
earlier version as the "Daily Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts" (Beck et
al., 1979), prompt clients to evaluate their automatic thoughts when
they feel distressed or engage in unhelpful behavior. The worksheets
elicit more information than just responding to the lists of Socratic
questions in the previous chapter. It's not necessary for clients to use
these worksheets if thinking about these questions is helpful enough,
but many clients find a worksheet organizes their thinking and responses
better. The worksheets aren't particularly useful for clients who are
relatively low functioning, dislike writing, are unmotivated, or who
have a low level of literacy. Remember, thoughts may be 100% true or 0%
true or somewhere in the middle. Just because you think something
doesn't necessarily mean it's true. 1. When you notice your mood getting
worse, or you find yourself engaging in unhelpful behavior, ask yourself
the questions on the reverse side of this worksheet and write down the
answers. It will probably take about 5--10 minutes. 2. Not all questions
apply to all automatic thoughts. 3. If you'd like, you can use the list
below to identify cognitive distortions. You may find that more than one
distortion applies. 4. Spelling, handwriting, and grammar don't count.
5. It was worth doing this worksheet if your mood improves by 10% or
more. Cognitive Distortions All-or-nothing thinking

Example: "If I'm not a total success, I'm a failure."

Catastrophizing (fortunetelling)

Example: "I'll be so upset, I won't be able to function at all."

Disqualifying or discounting the positive

Example: "I did that project well, but that doesn't mean I'm competent;
I just got lucky."

Emotional reasoning

Example: "I know I do a lot of things okay at work, but I still feel
like I'm a failure."

Labeling

Examples: "I'm a loser"; "He's no good."

Magnification/minimization Example: "Getting a mediocre evaluation
proves how inadequate I am. Getting high marks doesn't mean I'm smart."
Mental filter

Example: "Because I got one low rating on my evaluation \[which also
contained several high ratings\], it means I'm doing a lousy job."

Mind reading

Example: "He's thinking that I don't know the first thing about this
project."

Overgeneralization

Example: "Because I felt uncomfortable at the meeting, I don't have what
it takes to make friends."

Personalization

Example: "The repairman was curt to me because I did something wrong."

"Should" and "must" statements

Example: "It's terrible that I made a mistake. I should always do my
best."

Tunnel vision

Example: "My son's teacher can't do anything right. He's critical and
insensitive and lousy at teaching."

FIGURE 15.1. Testing Your Thoughts Worksheet, side 1. Copyright © 2018
CBT Worksheet Packet. Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 1. What is the situation? You might be
having thoughts about something that just happened in the environment or
something that happened inside of you (an intense emotion, a painful
sensation, an image, a daydream, a flashback, or a stream of
thoughts---e.g., thinking about my future). I got a parking ticket. 2.
What am I thinking or imagining? I'm so stupid.

3.  What is the cognitive distortion? (optional) Labeling,
    overgeneralizing

4.  What makes me think the thought is true? I shouldn't have lost track
    of time.

5.  What makes me think the thought is not true or not completely true?
    Other people get parking tickets. It doesn't necessarily mean
    they're stupid.

6.  What's another way to look at this? I just made a mistake.

7.  If the worst happens, what could I do then? Just keep paying parking
    tickets, but it would be better to set an alarm on my phone so it
    doesn't happen again.

8.  What's the best that could happen? I'll never get a parking ticket
    again.

9. What will probably happen? I could get another ticket, but I'll
probably remember what happened this time and make sure I don't. 10.
What will happen if I keep telling myself the same thought? I'll keep
being upset with myself. 11. What could happen if I changed my thinking?
I'd feel better.

12. What would I tell my friend or family member \[think of a specific
    person\] Gabe if this happened to him or her? It's not that big a
    deal. So you forgot and made a mistake. You know how to avoid doing
    this in the future.
13. What would be good to do now? Get my mind off of this. Go for a
    walk.

FIGURE 15.2. Testing Your Thoughts Worksheet, side 2. Copyright © 2018
CBT Worksheet Packet. Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Remember, thoughts may be 100% true or 0% true or somewhere in the
middle. Just because you think something doesn't necessarily mean it's
true. Spend just 5--10 minutes to complete the Thought Record. Note that
not all questions will apply to every automatic thought. Here's what to
do. 1. When you notice your mood getting worse, or you find yourself
engaging in unhelpful behavior, ask yourself the questions on the
reverse side of this worksheet and write down the answers. It will
probably take about 5--10 minutes. 2. Not all questions apply to all
automatic thoughts. 3. If you'd like, you can use the list below to
identify cognitive distortions. You may find that more than one
distortion applies. 4. Spelling, handwriting, and grammar don't count.
5. It was worth doing this worksheet if your mood improves by 10% or
more. Cognitive Distortions All-or-nothing thinking

Example: "If I'm not a total success, I'm a failure."

Catastrophizing (fortunetelling)

Example: "I'll be so upset, I won't be able to function at all."

Disqualifying or discounting the positive

Example: "I did that project well, but that doesn't mean I'm competent;
I just got lucky."

Emotional reasoning

Example: "I know I do a lot of things okay at work, but I still feel
like I'm a failure."

Labeling

Examples: "I'm a loser"; "He's no good."

Magnification/minimization Example: "Getting a mediocre evaluation
proves how

inadequate I am. Getting high marks doesn't mean I'm smart." Mental
filter

Example: "Because I got one low rating on my evaluation \[which also
contained several high ratings\], it means I'm doing a lousy job."

Mind reading

Example: "He's thinking that I don't know the first thing about this
project."

Overgeneralization

Example: "Because I felt uncomfortable at the meeting, I don't have what
it takes to make friends."

Personalization

Example: "The repairman was curt to me because I did something wrong."

"Should" and "must" statements

Example: "It's terrible that I made a mistake. I should always do my
best."

Tunnel vision

Example: "My son's teacher can't do anything right. He's critical and
insensitive and lousy at teaching."

FIGURE 15.3. Thought Record, side 1. Copyright © 2018 CBT Worksheet
Packet. Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.

Date/time Situation

Automatic thought(s)

Emotion(s)

Adaptive response

Outcome

1.  What
2.  What
3.  What emotion(s)
4.  (optional) 1. How much event thought(s) (sad/anxious/angry, What do
    you (external and/or etc.) did you feel cognitive now or internal)
    image(s) (before, during, or distortion believe is went after the
    event or did you each associated through unhelpful make? automatic
    with the your mind behavior)?
5.  Use thought? unpleasant (before,
6.  How intense (0%-- questions 2. What emotion? during, or 100%) was
    the below to emotion(s) Or what after the emotion? compose do you
    unhelpful event or a feel now? behavior unhelpful response How did
    you behavior)? to the intense just
7.  How much automatic (0%-- engage did you thought(s). 100%) is in?
    believe the
8.  How much the thought(s)? do you emotion? believe
9.  What each would be response? good to do? 6/23

Thinking I'll be so about the job nervous, I interview won't know what
to say,

Anxious (75%)

(Fortunetelling) I'm nervous now, but I

1.  AT (50%)

Date/time Situation

Automatic thought(s) and then I won't get the job. (80%)

Emotion(s)

Adaptive response Outcome can practice 2. Anxious more with (50%) \[my
3. Practice therapist\]. When I was nervous in the past, like when I got
a new boss, I didn't have trouble talking. (80%) If I don't get the job,
I can apply for other ones. The best outcome would be that the
interviewer will offer me the job on the spot. The most realistic
outcome is that I'll have to apply for several jobs before I get one.
(90%) Thinking I won't get the job just keeps me anxious. Realizing that
it's not the end of the world if I don't get it makes me feel better.
(100%) I'd tell Gabe that it isn't the end of the world if

Date/time Situation

Automatic thought(s)

Emotion(s)

Adaptive response Outcome he's nervous and doesn't get the job. But the
more he practices, probably the less nervous he'll be. (100%) I should
practice what I want to say and then act as if I'm not nervous (100%)

Questions to help compose an alternative response: (1) What is the
evidence that the automatic thought is true? Not true? (2) Is there an
alternative explanation? (3) If the worst happened, how could I cope?
What's the best that could happen? What's the most realistic outcome?
(4) What's the effect of my believing the automatic thought? What could
be the effect of my changing my thinking? (5) If \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\[person's name\] was in this situation and had this thought, what would
I tell him/her? (6) What would be good to do? FIGURE 15.4. Thought
Record, side 2. Copyright © 2018 CBT Worksheet Packet. Beck Institute
for Cognitive Behavior Therapy, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. CLINICAL
TIPS Both worksheets contain similar questions, but the Testing Your
Thoughts Worksheet has an easier readability level, and its more
structured format is simpler and easier to complete. As you read in the
previous chapter, first, you'll identify an important automatic thought
and use one of the lists of questions with the client. If the intensity
of the client's automatic thoughts and emotions decrease, you can then
demonstrate how to write the answers and other information on one of the
two worksheets. Note that you could pull out a worksheet immediately
after identifying an important automatic thought. But if the evaluation
of the thought is ineffective, clients may believe the worksheet won't
be helpful to them.

In the following section, Abe and I have used the list of Socratic
questions from the Testing Your Thoughts Worksheet to evaluate his
thought "Gabe won't want to go with me," and he feels better. Next, I
introduce that worksheet. JUDITH: Good. Now I'd like to show you a
worksheet \[Figures 15.1 and 15.2\] that I think will help you at home.
It's called Testing Your Thoughts. It's just an organized way of writing
down what we just did. Okay?

ABE: Sure. JUDITH: (showing it to Abe) It may take some practice for you
to get really good at it. So, expect to make some mistakes along the
way. These mistakes will actually be useful---we'll see what was
confusing, so I can prepare you better the next time. Okay? ABE: Yeah.
JUDITH: (showing side 1 to Abe) Here at the top, it reminds you that
your thoughts might or might not be true. Then it tells you when to use
it. (Reads aloud.) "When you notice your mood getting worse, or you find
yourself engaging in unhelpful behavior, ask yourself the questions on
the reverse side of this worksheet and write down the answers." I think
it'll take you about 5 minutes to do it, maybe a little more. It also
lets you know that not every question may apply, that spelling,
handwriting, and grammar don't count, that if you feel 10% better, it
was worth doing, and it also lists cognitive distortions. ABE: Okay.
JUDITH: (turning to the other side) This side is self-explanatory. You
just read a question, and if seems to apply, you write the answer next
to it. Do you have any questions? ABE: No, I think I understand. JUDITH:
What do you think? Is it okay if we take another automatic thought and
see if you can use the worksheet? ABE: Yeah. Make sure that clients can
successfully complete one of the worksheets in session before you
suggest it as an Action Plan assignment. For some clients, it's better
to introduce the Thought Record in two stages. In one session, you might
teach clients to fill in the first four columns and ask them to do the
same at home when they're feeling upset. If it goes well, you can then
teach them to use the final two columns at the following session.

WHEN A WORKSHEET ISN'T HELPFUL ENOUGH As with any technique in CBT, it's
important not to overemphasize the importance of worksheets. Most
clients, at some point, find that completing a

particular worksheet did not provide much relief. If you emphasize its
general usefulness and "stuck points" as an opportunity for learning,
you help clients avoid automatic thoughts critical of themselves, the
therapy, the worksheet, or you. As described in the previous chapter,
evaluation of an automatic thought (with or without a worksheet) may be
less than optimal if clients fail to respond to their most upsetting
thoughts or images, if their automatic thought is a core belief, if
their evaluation and response are superficial, if they discount their
response, or if the automatic thought is part of a dysfunctional thought
process. CLINICAL TIPS If you're not highly confident that clients will
be able to use a list of questions or a worksheet effectively at home,
ask them to predict what might happen. JUDITH: If you have trouble
evaluating your thoughts this week, how are you likely to feel? MARIA:
Frustrated, I guess. JUDITH: What's likely to go through your mind?
MARIA: I don't know. I'll probably just quit. JUDITH: Can you imagine
looking at the sheet of paper and not being able to figure out what to
do? MARIA: Yeah. JUDITH: What's going through your mind as you look at
the paper? MARIA: "I should be able to do this. I'm so stupid." JUDITH:
It's good you told me that. Do you think it would help to have a
reminder that it's just a skill you'll get better at? And that I can
help you at the next session? MARIA: Yes. (Records it in the therapy
notes.) JUDITH: Do you think this response will help enough? Or do you
think we should put off this Action Plan item until we have more time to
practice together? MARIA: No, I think I can try it. JUDITH: Okay, now if
you do get frustrated and have automatic thoughts, be sure to jot them
down. Okay? Here I make the Action Plan into a no-lose proposition:
Either Maria does it successfully, or we'll collaboratively work on it
at the next session. If frustrated, she either reads her therapy notes
(and probably feels better) or keeps track of her thoughts so we can
address them together.

Finally, as described in the previous chapter (p. 256), clients may be
able to take a shortcut without the structure of a list of Socratic
questions or a worksheet---but be careful that their responses aren't
superficial. You can use two formats. One, described on pages 256--257,
takes the following form: "When I think \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, I should
remind myself \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_." Another form is the two-column
technique (automatic thoughts and responses), shown below.

Automatic thought

Response

"I want to skip the reunion."

"It's better for me to go. I could reconnect with people. And someone
might have a lead for a job."

"If I tell Rita I don't want to change the holiday plan, she'll get
angry."

"If this doesn't get her angry, something else will. I should do what's
good for me---not accommodate her all the time."

SUMMARY There are two major ways that clients respond to their unhelpful
thinking between sessions. They can read their therapy notes, if you've
previously evaluated the thought with them in session. Or they can use a
list of Socratic questions or a worksheet to evaluate new automatic
thoughts. It's better to use the questions on a worksheet verbally with
clients. If you successfully help clients evaluate an automatic thought,
then you can show them how to use a worksheet that contains the same
questions. When a worksheet isn't sufficiently helpful, conceptualize
the difficulty so you'll know what to do. REFLECTION QUESTIONS What
problems could arise in introducing a worksheet to a client? What can
you do when a worksheet isn't helpful enough? How can you reduce the
likelihood that clients might become self-critical if they can't
successfully complete a worksheet?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Identify an automatic thought that could interfere
with your doing a Thought Record yourself. Then evaluate and respond to
this thought using a Thought Record. Next, identify one of your
dysfunctional thoughts about any situation, and use the Testing Your
Thoughts Worksheet. Also, do a role play in which you introduce a client
to one of the worksheets. Remember, start by helping the client
successfully evaluate an automatic thought verbally, using the questions
on the worksheet. Then pull out the worksheet and show the client how to
fill it in.

16

INTEGRATING MINDFULNESS INTO CBT

has been studied intensively, sometimes as a standalone Mindfulness
intervention and sometimes as part of a psychotherapeutic modality. In
fact, mindfulness has been practiced for thousands of years. Many
researchers have studied the effectiveness of mindfulness for a host of
problems, including psychiatric disorders, medical conditions, and
stress (see, e.g., Abbott et al., 2014; Chiesa & Serretti, 2011; Hofmann
et al., 2010; Kallapiran et al., 2015), as well as relapse prevention
for depression (Segal et al., 2018). In this chapter, you'll find the
answers to the following questions: What is mindfulness? Why use it with
clients? What is formal versus informal mindfulness practice? Why should
you practice mindfulness yourself? Which techniques do you use before
introducing mindfulness? How do you introduce mindfulness? How do you do
mindfulness of the breath, and what do you do afterward? What is the
AWARE technique for worry?

WHAT IS MINDFULNESS?

One definition of mindfulness, reached through consensus by experts, is
maintaining attention on immediate experience while taking an
orientation of openness, acceptance, and curiosity (Bishop et al.,
2004). It teaches you to focus on what's currently happening, either
externally (such as talking to someone) or internally (such as your
thoughts, emotions, or bodily or mental sensations), and you practice
being willing to experience whatever is happening in a nonjudgmental
way. Mindfulness is particularly useful when clients are engaged in a
maladaptive thought process, such as obsessing, ruminating, worry, or
self-criticism. It is also quite useful when clients are fearful of
experiencing certain internal stimuli such as negative emotions,
thoughts, images, cravings, or pain. Mindfulness helps you develop a
different relationship to your thoughts. Instead of engaging with them
by, for example, questioning their validity, you note their presence
(without judgment) and allow them to come and go on their own. The goal
is not to eliminate the unhelpful thought or eliminate distressing
internal stimuli---that is usually impossible and quite maladaptive.
Instead, mindfulness helps you nonjudgmentally observe and accept your
internal experiences, without evaluating or trying to change them. In
other words, you learn to focus on the present moment while being open,
accepting, and curious. There are several kinds of mindfulness. Here are
three of them: 1. Mindfulness of thoughts: for clients who excessively
ruminate, worry, or try to suppress intrusive thoughts or images. 2.
Mindfulness of internal stimuli: for intense emotion and other
distressing internal experiences. 3. Mindfulness for self-compassion:
for clients who experience a great deal of self-criticism.

In this chapter, we'll cover mindfulness of thoughts, using a focus on
the breath, specifically for clients who engage in depressive
rumination.

Abe's Ruminating Here's a typical scenario in which Abe ruminates. He's
sitting on the couch in his living room, watching television. But a
series of depressive thoughts runs through his head and interferes with
his concentration. "Why am I watching TV? I should be looking for a job.
I'm wasting my life. What a

failure I am. I used to have a good life, but everything has turned bad.
There's no hope. I'll never feel better." These thoughts repeat over and
over. They lead to sadness and hopelessness and a heavy feeling in his
body, they undermine his confidence and motivation, and he continues to
sit on the couch instead of engaging in valued action. Initially we
evaluated these thoughts, and Abe felt some relief in the session. But
despite practicing strong responses to them at home, the thoughts kept
coming back. Abe, like a certain percentage of depressed clients, was
engaged in the unhelpful thought process of rumination and had trouble
disengaging from it. He believed: "If I think hard enough about why I
lost my job and my wife, I can figure out how to avoid bad things like
this in the future." "If I can figure out how I got depressed in the
first place, I'll feel better." He also worried to some degree and held
the following belief: "If I predict problems, maybe I can prevent them
from occurring." These beliefs may be functional in certain situations
but become highly dysfunctional when they lead to the recurrence of the
same negative thoughts over and over again. After a period of time, Abe
developed another dysfunctional idea: "Once I start thinking this way, I
can't stop." Mindfulness helped him change that belief. Responding to
his thoughts was important, but it just wasn't effective enough. After
learning mindfulness, Abe was able to recognize when he was ruminating,
accept the experience and his negative emotion, and then choose not to
engage with his thoughts. Initially, he learned to do this by focusing
on his breath and later was able to focus on his external experience.

FORMAL AND INFORMAL MINDFULNESS PRACTICES There are two types of
mindfulness practices: formal and informal. In a formal mindfulness
meditation, you set aside a period of time (e.g., 5 to 60 minutes), go
to a quiet place, and focus your attention on a particular experience
(e.g., the breath, different parts of the body, movement, thoughts,
emotions, external objects, or sounds); you notice when your attention
has wandered from the specified experience and nonjudgmentally bring it
back to the experience. We recommend that many clients practice formal
meditation for 5 minutes or so initially. They are much more likely to
keep up a formal mindfulness practice if it's brief. We also recommend
informal practice, which is applying the principles of mindfulness to
your day-to-day experiences, focusing on what you're doing or what is
happening at the moment in an accepting, open, and nonjudgmental way.
When your mind wanders to the future or past and it's not helpful to
think more into it, bring it back to your current experience. Also, upon
noticing an unwillingness to experience unwanted thoughts, emotions,
and/or sensations, take note of the experience(s), allow them to be
present without trying to control them, and bring your attention back to
the task at hand.

SELF-PRACTICE I'd like to encourage you to do what I do, that is, to use
mindfulness yourself. I do a formal, 5-minute mindfulness exercise most
mornings (focusing on my breathing). I do informal mindfulness at
various times during the day, for example, when eating, brushing my
teeth, or taking a break at work. Looking at nature and experiencing it
through my senses helps me let go of anything on my mind, like work or
current stressors in my life and appreciate my surroundings. When my
mind wanders, I bring it back to my immediate experience. You can be
mindful of almost any experience, such as walking, driving, doing tasks
or chores, or engaging in self-care activities. I also do formal (if
it's feasible to meditate for 5 minutes

at the time) or informal mindfulness when I find that I'm caught up in a
cycle of unhelpful thinking. I would advise you to take up the practice
of mindfulness yourself too for three reasons: 1. It can help reduce
stress and enhance your sense of well-being. 2. It can help you
understand and describe the technique to clients. 3. It can help
motivate clients to practice it when you use self-disclosure about the
benefits you've experienced.

TECHNIQUES BEFORE INTRODUCING MINDFULNESS Some CBT therapists teach
mindfulness as a standalone skill. But we've found that integrating it
into CBT treatment is much more effective for clients. Here are
important strategies to use with clients before you introduce
mindfulness, using depressive rumination as the example: 1. Educate
clients about the cognitive model. 2. Examine advantages and
disadvantages of rumination versus the advantages and disadvantages of
focusing on the present moment (and using alternative skills like
problem solving and mindfulness, when needed). 3. Use Socratic
questioning to test the accuracy of what they see as the advantages of
rumination. 4. Discuss how rumination interferes with their ability to
live life according to their values. 5. Educate clients about how
mindfulness can be helpful for their thought process. 6. Have them start
the thought process right in session. 7. Ask them to rate the intensity
of their negative emotion.

Then guide clients through the mindfulness exercise, for about 5
minutes, while recording it (so they can practice at home). After the
mindfulness exercise, use the following strategies: 1. Ask clients to
re-rate the intensity of their negative emotion. 2. Guide them in
drawing conclusions about the experience (to further modify their
dysfunctional beliefs about the thought process).

3. Collaboratively set an Action Plan item, typically practicing the
formal mindfulness for about 5 minutes every morning, and then briefly
using the strategy as informal mindfulness to disengage from rumination
during the day.

There are two reasons we want clients to engage in the unhelpful thought
process before starting an exercise such as mindfulness of the
breath: 1. The exercise can serve as a behavioral experiment to test
dysfunctional beliefs---for example: "Rumination is uncontrollable."
Clients learn that the mindfulness exercise gives them a degree of
control over their rumination--- which motivates them to practice
between sessions. 2. It's important to replicate the conditions clients
will experience when using this strategy outside of session. If I had
taught Abe mindfulness during a therapy session when he was somewhat
relaxed, he may have returned the following week reporting that
mindfulness didn't help throughout the week when he was distressed and
ruminating.

INTRODUCING MINDFULNESS TO CLIENTS Next, I start a mindfulness of the
breath practice with Abe. JUDITH: It sounds as if rumination isn't
actually helpful. Is that right? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: I'd like to tell you
about mindfulness. It's a technique that helps you reduce rumination by
noticing your thoughts nonjudgmentally and disengaging from the thought
process by letting the thoughts come and go while turning your attention
to other things in the present moment. ABE: Okay. JUDITH: First, we need
to get the rumination going so you can experience the same thoughts
right now that you have at home. Can you sit back and close your eyes?
If you'd rather, you can keep them open though. ABE: (Sits back and
closes his eyes.) JUDITH: (Pauses for 5 seconds.) I'd like you to start
thinking about your life and your future again, either to yourself or
out loud, just like you did when you were sitting on the couch this
weekend: how you should be looking for a job, how you're wasting your
life, what a failure you are, how you used to have a good life but
everything has turned bad, and

how there's no hope and you'll never feel better. (Pauses for 30
seconds.) How are you feeling? ABE: Pretty sad. JUDITH: On a 1 to 10
scale? ABE: About an 8. Next, I turn on the audio recording app on his
phone. JUDITH: Now, keep your eyes closed. I want you to focus on your
breathing, on the sensations you feel as you breathe. (Pauses for 10
seconds.) Notice how the air feels going in and out of your nostrils;
how your lungs, chest, and abdomen feel as they expand and contract.
(Pauses for 15 seconds.) You can notice the sensations as a whole
(pause) or focus on a specific sensation like the air going in and out
of your nostrils, whichever is most comfortable to you. (Pauses for 30
seconds.) As you do this, you'll notice that your mind is going to
wander, various thoughts will show up, or you'll get caught up in
rumination from a minute ago. As you become aware of this, gently bring
your focus back to the breath. (Pauses for 45 seconds.) No matter how
many times your mind wanders, every time, just become aware that it's
happened, and gently bring that focus back to the breath. (Pauses for 30
seconds.) There's no need to criticize yourself or get frustrated when
your mind wanders because that's what our minds do; all you have to do
is notice it's happened and gently bring that focus back to the breath.
(Pauses for 40 seconds.) It's okay if you notice thoughts in the back of
your mind. You don't need to force them away or make them any different.
Just notice they're there and let them fade on their own, as your main
focus is on those breathing sensations (60-second pause).

TECHNIQUES AFTER A MINDFULNESS EXERCISE Next, I stop the recording, tell
Abe he can open his eyes, and then ask him a series of questions.

"How intense is the sadness now, 0--10?" "How was that for you?" "What
did you notice?" "Did your mind seem to wander?" "Were you able to bring
your attention back to the breath?" (If yes, ask) "What does that tell
you about your ability to let go of rumination?" "What happened to your
emotion as you practiced mindfulness?" "What do you make of that?" "Was
this helpful?" "Do you think it would be good to practice this for your
Action Plan?"

You should encourage your clients to use either formal (if feasible in
the moment) or informal mindfulness exercises when they find themselves
stuck in an unhelpful thought process or caught up in an uncomfortable
internal experience. It's useful to learn a variety of formal
mindfulness exercises so you can select the one that looks as if it will
be most effective for an individual client (see, e.g., Hayes et al.,
2004; Kabat-Zinn, 1990; Linehan, 2018; McCown et al., 2010; Segal et
al., 2018). To more fully learn about integrating mindfulness into CBT,
step by step, and view videos, visit beckinstitute.org/CBTresources.

THE AWARE TECHNIQUE This mindful technique was designed to be used when
clients worry excessively (Beck & Emery, 1985) and/or experience
excessive anxiety. You can adapt it for angry or depressive rumination.
Here are the steps: 1. Accept the anxiety (or other emotion). 2. Watch
it. 3. Act constructively with it. 4. Repeat the steps. 5. Expect the
best.

These steps are described in Appendix C. To teach clients to use this
technique, ask them to briefly describe an upcoming situation in which
they predict they'll feel anxious. Then ask them to imagine the
situation as if it's happening now and visualize themselves using the
five steps.

SUMMARY Mindfulness is maintaining your attention on your immediate
experience while being open, accepting, and curious. Research shows that
mindfulness can make treatment more effective, especially when clients
are engaged in rumination, worry, obsessive thinking, continual
self-criticism, or avoidance of internal experiences. Integrating
mindfulness into therapy is likely to be more effective than teaching it
as a standalone technique. Encourage clients to practice mindfulness
daily, using formal and informal strategies. REFLECTION QUESTION In what
ways could adopting a mindfulness practice be helpful to you?

PRACTICE EXERCISES Do a formal mindfulness practice exercise yourself.
Read the mindfulness script from earlier in this chapter into a
recording device or an app on your phone. Then find a quiet space and
get comfortable. You can sit on the floor or in a chair, lie down, or
stand in one spot. Close your eyes (unless you'd prefer to keep them
open). If you worry or ruminate too much, if you criticize yourself, if
you try to avoid internal experiences such as negative emotion or
negative thoughts, or if you're experiencing pain or craving, then try
to reproduce the thought process or uncomfortable internal experience.
(If you don't have one of those problems, then you can just start the
mindfulness exercise.) As you listen to the recording, remember that
it's normal to have your attention wander. Don't criticize or judge
yourself. Just bring your attention back to your breath whenever you
notice your mind has wandered. See how you feel after the meditation as
compared to before. Also, take 5 minutes now to do an informal practice.
Look out the window or at a painting or take a walk (or engage in
another activity). Use your senses to become fully aware, accepting,
open, and curious about the experience. Every time your mind wanders,
avoid criticizing yourself, and gently bring your focus back to the
experience.

17

INTRODUCTION TO BELIEFS

previous chapters, you learned how to identify and modify automatic
Inthoughts, the actual words or images that go through a client's mind
in a given situation and lead to distress or unhelpful behavior. This
chapter, and the next, describes the deeper, often unarticulated ideas
or understandings depressed clients have about themselves, others, their
world, and their future that give rise to specific automatic thoughts.
These ideas are often not expressed before therapy, but for the most
part, you can easily elicit or infer and then test them. Traditional CBT
puts a greater emphasis on the maladaptive (negative, unhelpful,
dysfunctional) beliefs clients have when they're in the depressed mode.
In a recovery orientation, adaptive (positive, helpful, functional)
beliefs are emphasized to move clients to the adaptive mode (Beck,
Finkel, & Beck, 2020). As described in Chapter 3, beliefs may be
classified in two categories: intermediate beliefs (composed of rules,
attitudes, and assumptions) and core beliefs (global ideas about
oneself, others, and/or the world). Maladaptive intermediate beliefs,
while not as easily modifiable as automatic thoughts, are still more
malleable than core beliefs. As you will learn in the next chapter,
you'll use similar techniques to modify beliefs at both levels. This
chapter answers the following questions: What are adaptive (positive)
and maladaptive (negative) core beliefs, schemas, and modes? How do you
identify adaptive and maladaptive core beliefs and intermediate beliefs?
How do you decide whether and when to modify a maladaptive belief?

How do you educate clients about maladaptive beliefs? How do you
motivate clients to change their beliefs?

CORE BELIEFS, SCHEMAS, AND MODES Core Beliefs and Schemas Core beliefs
are one's most central ideas about the self, others, and the world.
Adaptive beliefs are realistic and functional and not at an extreme.
Dysfunctional core beliefs are rigid and absolute, maintained through
maladaptive information processing. Some authors refer to these beliefs
as schemas. Beck (1964) differentiates the two by suggesting that
schemas are cognitive structures within the mind. Schemas, in the
Piagetian sense, have various characteristics: permeability (receptivity
to change), magnitude (size compared to the individual's general
self-concept), charge (low to high, indicating levels of strength), and
content (Beck, 2019). The content of schemas may be cognitive (expressed
in beliefs), motivational, behavioral, emotional, or physiological.
People start developing core beliefs from a very early age, influenced
by their genetic predisposition, their interaction with significant
others, and by the meaning they put to their experiences and
circumstances. Then, when a thematically related situation arises, the
schema containing one of these core beliefs becomes activated (Figures
17.1 and 17.2). In a depressed state, clients' negative schemas can be
continuously activated. For example, before the onset of his acute
episode, Abe had seen himself as a reasonably competent person. But as
he was becoming depressed, he started to see himself as incompetent.

FIGURE 17.1. Impact of adaptive schema activation.

FIGURE 17.2. Impact of maladaptive schema activation.

Once a schema is activated, three things generally happen: 1. The client
interprets this new experience in accordance with the core belief. 2.
The activation of the schema strengthens the core belief. 3. Other kinds
of schemas become activated too.

One reason we emphasize modifying dysfunctional cognitive (and also
behavioral) schemas in traditional CBT is their impact on the other
schemas.

Modes Clusters of interrelated and co-occurring schemas are termed
"modes." At every session, we seek to deactivate the depressive (or
"client/patient") mode and activate the adaptive mode (Beck et al.,
2020).

The Adaptive Mode For much of their lives, most people maintain
primarily realistic and balanced core beliefs that are at least somewhat
positive (e.g., "I am substantially in control"; "I can do most things
competently"; "I am a functional human being"; "I can protect myself
when I need to"; "I am generally likable"; "I have worth"). When clients
are in an adaptive mode, schemas are more functional; their beliefs more
realistic (see Figure 3.1, p. 31) and flexible. Their negative core
beliefs tend to be relatively latent. The adaptive mode has cognitive
schemas such as effectiveness, lovability, and worth; motivational
schemas to promote activity; affective schemas of hope, optimism, sense
of well-being and purpose, and satisfaction; behavioral schemas of
approach (and sometimes healthy avoidance); and physiological schemas of
normal levels of energy, appetite, libido, and so forth. When clients
operate in this mode, they tend to interpret their experiences clearly,
without a great deal of distortion. They may have ups and downs in their
moods, but they function more highly than when they are in a depressive
mode.

The Depressive Mode When clients are in the depressive mode, their
schemas are dysfunctional, their beliefs more distorted and extreme
(Figure 3.2, p. 33). Their positive beliefs tend to be latent. The
depressive mode has cognitive schemas such as helplessness,
unlovability, and worthlessness; motivational schemas to conserve
energy; affective schemas of sadness, hopelessness, and sometimes
irritability, guilt, anger, and/or anxiety; behavioral schemas of
avoidance and withdrawal; and physiological schemas of fatigue,
decreased (or increased) appetite, and decreased libido, among others
(Clark et al., 1999). Beck (1999) theorized that negative core beliefs
about the self fall into two broad categories: those associated with
helplessness and those associated with unlovability. A third category,
associated with worthlessness (Figure 3.2), has also been described (J.
S. Beck, 2005). When clients are depressed, their negative core beliefs
may primarily fall into one of these categories, or they may have core
beliefs in two or all three categories. Some have just one belief within
a category; others have multiple beliefs within one category. Sometimes
it's clear in which category a given negative core belief belongs,
especially when clients actually use words such as "I am helpless" or "I
am unlovable." At other times, it's not as clear. For example, depressed
clients may say, "I'm not good enough." You need to find out the meaning
of cognitions like these to determine whether clients believe they are
not good enough because they haven't achieved enough (helpless
category), or if they believe they're not good enough for others to love
them (unlovable category). Likewise, when clients say, "I'm worthless,"
they may mean that they don't achieve highly enough (helpless category)
or that they won't be able to gain or maintain love and intimacy with
others because of something within themselves (unlovable category). The
cognition "I'm worthless" falls in the worthlessness category when
clients

are concerned with their immorality or toxicity, not their effectiveness
or lovability.

Core Beliefs about Others, the World, and the Future Clients without
psychological problems generally have balanced views of other people and
the world (e.g., "I can trust many people but not everyone"; "Most
people will be either neutral or benign toward me, though some might
not"; "Many parts of my world are safe enough but other parts can be
dangerous"; "The world is complex, with good, neutral, and bad parts").
Individuals with psychological difficulties, though, may have negative
and relatively absolutistic core beliefs about other people and their
worlds: "Other people are untrustworthy/superior to me/critical"; "Other
people will hurt me"; "The world is a rotten place"; "The world is
dangerous." When individuals aren't depressed, they generally have a
balanced view of the future, understanding that they will have many
positive, neutral, and negative experiences. When clients are depressed,
though, they usually see their future as dark, as unremittingly unhappy,
as having little or no satisfaction or pleasure, and as being beyond
their control. Fixed, overgeneralized negative ideas often need to be
evaluated and modified, in addition to negative core beliefs about the
self. Ideas that are more reality based often need to be strengthened
by, for example, asking clients to draw conclusions about their neutral
and positive experiences ("What does this experience show about you?
About others? About the world? What does it say about what your future
could be like?").

Abe's Core Beliefs Before Abe became depressed, he recognized when he
was acting competently and being effective. He encountered some
situations that were similar to those he faced during his depression.
But the schemas containing his adaptive beliefs were activated and so he
interpreted those situations differently. He viewed signs of possible
incompetence as situation specific; for example, when he made a minor
error, he thought, "Oh, I shouldn't have made that mistake. Oh, well,"
and his mood didn't drop. When he forgot his

daughter's anniversary, he thought, "No wonder I forgot. Things have
been so busy recently." As Abe was becoming depressed, his positive
schemas became deactivated and his negative schemas containing the
cognitions "I am incompetent/a failure" and "I am helpless/out of
control" became almost fully activated. When he was firmly in the
depressive mode, he interpreted situations in a highly negative, global
way, as confirming these negative beliefs. Seeing himself as incompetent
or ineffective was very distressing to Abe; it violated his important,
strongly held values. He had always prided himself on being responsible
and productive and doing a good job. He perceived that he could no
longer fulfill those important values. As illustrated by the
information-processing model on page 34, Abe began to overemphasize and
overgeneralize negative data, contained in negative rectangles,
continually reinforcing his belief that he was incompetent and a
failure. For example, he got an overdue notice for a bill in the mail.
He immediately understood this information as confirming his
incompetence. At the same time, Abe failed to recognize a significant
amount of positive data related to his schema of relative
effectiveness---such as continuing some of his usual activities even
though the depression made it very difficult to do so (e.g., researching
which appliance his daughter should buy for her kitchen). Note that had
he become overwhelmed by the choices, he would have interpreted that
experience in a negative light, as confirming his maladaptive core
belief. These positive triangles "bounced off" the schema and did not
get incorporated. Abe also discounted much positive information through
his "Yes, but ..." interpretations of his experiences ("Yes, I finally
got rid of all the papers that had piled up in the living room, but I
should never have let it get so bad"). When he successfully negotiated a
reduction in his cable bill the next day, his mind automatically
discounted this positive evidence too ("I should have done this months
ago"). These two experiences were contrary to his negative core beliefs.
Their positive triangles were, in essence, changed into negative
rectangles. Abe was not consciously processing information in this
dysfunctional way. This kind of information processing is a symptom of
depression and arises automatically. I recognized that it would be
important to work directly on modifying Abe's negative core beliefs, not
only to alleviate his

current depression, but also to prevent or reduce the severity of future
episodes. CLINICAL TIPS We usually work both indirectly and directly on
strengthening positive core beliefs early in treatment. Most clients
aren't ready to directly evaluate their negative core beliefs though
until somewhat later in treatment. If you try to evaluate a negative
belief too early, the client might think, "\[My therapist\] doesn't
understand me. If she did, she would know \[that my core belief is
true\]." Eliciting strong, negative beliefs can trigger intense negative
emotion that could lead to early dropout from treatment.

IDENTIFYING ADAPTIVE CORE BELIEFS You start identifying core beliefs
that are more realistic and adaptive as early in treatment as possible.
At the evaluation or first session, you can ask clients to describe the
best period in their life. Then ask them how they viewed themselves
during that period, and if relevant, how they viewed others and the
world. Also ask how other people viewed them. JUDITH: Abe, looking back
at your history, when were you at your best? ABE: I guess that would
have been after high school. JUDITH: Why was that your best time? ABE: I
had moved out of the house. I liked living independently. My best friend
was my roommate. I was working in construction and the foreman really
liked my work. JUDITH: What else? ABE: (Thinks.) Well, I was in really
good shape, I had a lot of girlfriends--- until I met my wife, that is.
I liked hanging around with my buddies ... JUDITH: How did you see
yourself? ABE: As a good guy. JUDITH: As likeable, helpful, worthwhile?
ABE: Yeah. JUDITH: As competent? In control? ABE: Yeah, pretty much.
JUDITH: Did other people see you that way too? ABE: (Thinks.) Yeah, they
probably did.

JUDITH: So, you had a pretty healthy view of yourself and so did others;
sounds like it was pretty accurate too. ABE: I guess so. JUDITH: Is that
how you see yourself now? ABE: Not at all. I just feel like I can't do
anything right. I'm a failure. JUDITH: Part of what we're going to do in
therapy is to find out whether this idea, that you're a failure, is
accurate, or whether it's actually a depressed idea. Maybe you're a
competent person who is currently depressed. At a future session, you
can ask clients about their view of themselves before they became
depressed. (The list of positive qualities on page 47 can help.) It's
useful to attribute their deterioration in functioning as due to their
condition, instead of to their innate characteristics. JUDITH: Can we
talk about the time before Joseph was hired, when you were doing well at
your job? How did you see yourself? Did you think you were incompetent,
a failure? ABE: No; I mean, I wasn't perfect, but I did a good job.
JUDITH: So was your belief "I'm basically competent"? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH:
Good. Now the depression is interfering with your being able to act as
competently as you'd like. And I'll help you with that. But I want you
to know that you haven't lost your competence. You haven't become an
incompetent person. It's your depression. Okay? ABE: (Nods.) JUDITH: Am
I right about this? Even though your depression is strong, you're still
getting up every day? You're getting dressed and taking care of your
basic needs? You're going to your grandsons' games and helping your
cousin? (pause) Do these things show you're competent at least in these
ways? ABE: Yeah, I guess so. JUDITH: And as you recover, you'll be able
to act more and more competently and productively. CLINICAL TIPS When
clients can't express their former adaptive beliefs, you mentally devise
a new, more realistic, and functional belief and guide clients toward
it. This belief should be balanced. For

example: Old core belief

New core belief

"I'm (completely) unlovable." "I'm generally a likable person." "I'm
bad." "I'm okay." "I'm powerless." "I have control over a lot of
things." "I'm defective." "I'm normal, with both strengths and
weaknesses."

IDENTIFYING MALADAPTIVE CORE BELIEFS Several strategies are useful in
eliciting clients' negative core beliefs, including looking for central
themes in their automatic thoughts, using the "downward arrow"
technique, and watching for core beliefs expressed as automatic
thoughts.

Looking for Central Themes in Automatic Thoughts Whenever clients
present data (problems, automatic thoughts, emotions, behavior,
history), you "listen" for the category of core belief whose schema
seems to have been activated. For example, when Abe expresses negative
thoughts about being unable to apply for jobs, about wasting his time by
watching television, and about making mistakes in paying bills, I
hypothesize that a core belief in the helpless category has been
operating. When Maria expresses anxiety about calling a friend, when she
consistently expresses thoughts of others not caring about her, and when
she fears there's something wrong with her and so she won't be able to
sustain a relationship, I hypothesize that a core belief in the
unlovable category has been activated. (Actually, it's more correct to
say that the schema that contains the core belief has been activated.)
Early in treatment, you may hypothesize just to yourself. Sharing your
hypotheses about clients' core beliefs may evoke strong emotion, and
they may begin to feel unsafe. Later in treatment, you might review with
clients related automatic thoughts they've had in a variety of
situations and then

ask them to draw a conclusion as to an underlying pattern ("Abe, do you
see a common theme in these automatic thoughts?"). When confirming a
hypothesis you've made with clients, it's important to figure out which
category a core belief falls into and which word or words clients
themselves use. It's also important to ascertain whether the client is
using different words to express the same belief. JUDITH: Abe, when you
say you're a failure, is that the same idea as when you say you're
incompetent? Or are they different? ABE: It's really the same. I'm a
failure because I'm so incompetent.

The Downward Arrow Technique The downward arrow technique helps you
identify clients' negative core beliefs. It involves asking clients to
assume their automatic thoughts (ones with recurrent themes) are true
and then questioning them about the meaning of their automatic thoughts.
Doing so can arouse increased negative emotion though, so you usually
wouldn't use this technique in the first few therapy sessions. First,
identify a key automatic thought whose theme is recurrent; then find out
what clients believe this thought means about them. JUDITH: Okay, to
summarize, you were looking around your apartment and you thought, "It's
so messy. I should never have let it get this way?" ABE: Yes. JUDITH: We
haven't looked at the evidence to see if these thoughts are true. But
I'd like to see if we can figure out why you had those thoughts. Let's
assume for a moment that your apartment is too messy and you shouldn't
have let it get like that. What would that mean about you? ABE: I don't
know. I just feel so incompetent. You can phrase the downward arrow
question in different ways: "If that's true, so what?" "What's so bad
about ...?" "What's the worst part about ...?"

Worded in these ways, clients may respond with another automatic thought
or an intermediate belief. If so, you can ask what this new cognition
means about them if you want to get to the negative core belief about
the self.

Core Beliefs Expressed as Automatic Thoughts A client may actually
articulate a belief as an automatic thought, especially when depressed.
JUDITH: What went through your mind when you realized you got a late fee
because you had forgotten to pay the bill? ABE: I can't do anything
right. \[automatic thought\] I'm so incompetent. \[automatic thought and
core belief\] CLINICAL TIPS When clients have difficulty identifying
their negative core beliefs, these techniques may help. You can
hypothesize about a belief and ask the client to reflect on its
validity: "Maria, in a bunch of situations you seem to think, 'People
won't want to be with me' or 'What if I say the wrong thing?' I wonder
whether you believe that you are somehow unlovable or unlikable?" Or you
can present them with the list of core beliefs on page 33. JUDITH:
Maria, what did it mean to you when you realized the whole day had gone
by and you hadn't gotten much done? What did that say about you? MARIA:
I'm not sure. I was just so upset. JUDITH: Could you look at this list
of core beliefs and tell me whether any of the words capture how you
were feeling about yourself? CLINICAL TIPS The problematic situation
itself is not always a good guide to what clients' core beliefs are. For
example, a client is frustrated by her inability to get others to listen
to her. Although her distress occurs only in interpersonal situations,
she doesn't believe she is unlovable; she believes she is powerless to
get what she wants from others. Another client feels like a worthless
human being, not because he cannot achieve or be useful (helpless
beliefs) and not related to his relationships (which otherwise could
have indicated an unlovable belief). He believes he is a bad, immoral
person, a sinner (which is in the worthless category) because of his
highly negative innate qualities.

IDENTIFYING MALADAPTIVE INTERMEDIATE BELIEFS In Chapter 3, we discussed
three categories of intermediate beliefs: assumptions, attitudes, and
rules. There are several techniques you can use to identify them.
Recognizing when intermediate beliefs are expressed as automatic
thoughts. Directly eliciting an intermediate belief. Reviewing a belief
questionnaire.

Recognizing When Intermediate Beliefs Are Expressed as Automatic
Thoughts Most automatic thoughts are situation specific---for example:
"I shouldn't have let my friend down when he asked me to help him with
his mother"; "It's really bad that I forgot my niece's birthday"; "If I
try to help my daughter with her class project, I'll do a poor job." But
some automatic thoughts express more general ideas---for example: "It's
terrible to let people down"; "I should always do my best"; "If I try to
do anything difficult, I'll fail." These latter cognitions are relevant
across multiple situations and so are both automatic thoughts and
intermediate beliefs.

Directly Eliciting an Intermediate Belief Many intermediate beliefs
contain a dysfunctional coping strategy. You can identify these beliefs
by asking clients directly about these behavioral patterns. The general
question focuses on the meaning or outcome of using the behavior or not
using the behavior. Or you can start with a rule or attitude and ask
questions to change it into an assumption. We often do this to find out
why the client holds this rule or attitude; assumptions link the
behavior to the core belief. Here are a few examples of the kinds of
questions you can ask: THERAPIST: What's your belief about asking for
help? \[Avoiding asking for help is a coping strategy.\]

CLIENT: Oh, asking for help is a sign of weakness, incompetence.
THERAPIST: What's the worst that could happen if you don't try to look
your best? \["I should always look my best" is the client's rule.\]
CLIENT: People will think I'm unattractive; they won't want me around.
THERAPIST: What would it mean to you if you didn't achieve highly? \["I
have to achieve highly" is the rule; "It's terrible to be mediocre" is
the client's attitude.\] CLIENT: It shows I'm inferior to other people.
THERAPIST: What's bad about experiencing negative emotion? \["I
shouldn't let myself get upset" is the rule; "It's bad to experience
negative emotion" is the attitude.\] CLIENT: If I do, I'll lose control.
THERAPIST: What are the advantages of not sticking out in a crowd?
\[Avoiding sticking out in a crowd is a coping strategy.\] CLIENT:
People won't notice me. They won't see that I don't fit in. THERAPIST:
How would you fill in this blank? If I even try to make plans with other
people, then \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_? \[Avoiding making plans is a coping
strategy.\] CLIENT: They'll turn me down because I have nothing to offer
them. Evaluation of conditional assumptions through questioning or other
methods often creates greater cognitive dissonance than does evaluation
of the rule or attitude. It is easier for Abe to recognize the
distortion and/or dysfunctionality in the assumption "If I please other
people, they won't hurt me" than the related rule ("I should please
others all the time") or attitude ("It's bad to displease others").

Reviewing a Belief Questionnaire Questionnaires can also help you
identify clients' beliefs (see, e.g., the Dysfunctional Attitude Scale
\[Weissman & Beck, 1978\] or the Personality Belief Questionnaire \[Beck
& Beck, 1991\]). Many clients in particular hold important beliefs about
experiencing negative emotion (see Leahy, 2002).

Careful review of items that are strongly endorsed can highlight
problematic beliefs.

DECIDING WHETHER TO MODIFY A DYSFUNCTIONAL BELIEF Having identified an
intermediate or core belief, you need to figure out whether it's worth
spending time on. You usually work on beliefs linked with an issue a
client has put on the agenda or with an obstacle to reaching a goal.
Here are some questions to ask yourself: "What is the belief?" "Does it
lead to significant emotional distress or significant maladaptive
behavior?" "Does the client believe it strongly and broadly?" "Does it
significantly interfere with achieving his/her goals and aspirations or
engaging in valued action?"

When clients strongly endorse more than one negative belief about an
issue or obstacle, you usually focus on the one that is associated with
the greatest degree of negative emotion or dysfunctional behavior.

DECIDING WHEN TO MODIFY A DYSFUNCTIONAL BELIEF At the beginning of
treatment, you work on automatic thoughts whose theme is indicative of a
dysfunctional core belief. You begin to work directly on modifying the
negative core belief as early in treatment as possible. Once clients
change these beliefs (or decrease the intensity of these beliefs),
they're able to interpret their experiences in a more objective,
functional way. They begin to view situations more realistically, feel
better, and act more adaptively. But you may need to wait until the
middle of treatment to do this with some clients, especially those with
beliefs that are long-standing, rigid, and overgeneralized.

In this latter case, you'll teach clients the techniques of identifying,
evaluating, and adaptively responding to automatic thoughts before using
the same tools for dysfunctional beliefs. Note that you may unwittingly
try to evaluate a core belief early in treatment because it has been
expressed as an automatic thought. Such evaluation may have little
effect. Having identified an important dysfunctional belief, you can ask
yourself these questions to figure out whether to work on the belief at
the time: "Does the client believe that cognitions are ideas and not
necessarily truths, and that evaluating and responding to these kinds of
ideas helps them feel better and/or act in a more functional way?" "Will
the client be able to cope with the distress she is likely to feel when
the core belief is exposed?" "Will the client be able to evaluate the
belief with at least some objectivity?" "Is the therapeutic relationship
strong enough? Does the client trust me and perceive me as understanding
who he really is? Do I have credibility with the client?" "Will we have
enough time in the session today to make at least a little progress in
evaluating the belief?"

EDUCATING CLIENTS ABOUT DYSFUNCTIONAL BELIEFS You've identified an
intermediate or core negative belief, determined that it is
significantly distressing to the client and is associated with
significant impairment, and collaboratively decided that the time is
right for you to start working on it. Next, you may decide to educate
the client about the nature of beliefs in general, using a specific
belief as an example.

Important Concepts about Beliefs It is important for clients to
understand the following: Beliefs, like automatic thoughts, are ideas,
not necessarily truths, and can be tested and changed. Beliefs are
learned, not innate, and can be revised. There is a range of beliefs
that the client could adopt.

Beliefs can be quite rigid and "feel" as if they're true---but be mostly
or entirely untrue. Beliefs originated through the meaning clients put
to their experiences as youth and/or later in life. These meanings may
or may not have been accurate at the time. When relevant schemas are
activated, clients readily recognize data that seem to support their
core beliefs, while discounting data to the contrary or failing to
process the data as relevant to the belief in the first place.

Posing a Hypothesis about the Problem When I educated Abe about his core
belief, I suggested two possibilities about the problem. (He had
previously confirmed the conceptualization I had presented.) JUDITH:
\[summarizing\] It sounds as if this idea, that you're incompetent,
could get in the way of your applying for jobs. Is that right? ABE:
Yeah. JUDITH: Can we talk about that idea for a moment? I'd like to
figure out what's going on. Either the problem is that you really are
incompetent, and if so, we'll work together to make you more competent
... or maybe that's not the problem at all. Maybe the problem is that
you have a belief that you're incompetent, when you're really not. And
sometimes the belief is so strong that it prevents you from even finding
out whether you could do something well. ABE: I don't know. JUDITH: I
think there are two things we need to do. One is to have you recognize
when you are being competent and set up more experiences where you can
use your competence. The second is to see whether you really are
incompetent when you feel incompetent.

Using a Metaphor to Explain Information Processing Later I explain core
beliefs to Abe, in small parts, making sure he understands as I proceed.
I use the metaphor of a screen.

JUDITH: This idea, "I'm incompetent," is what we call a negative core
belief. If it's okay, I'd like to tell you about core beliefs. They're
more difficult to change than automatic thoughts. ABE: Okay. JUDITH:
First of all, a negative core belief is an idea that you may not believe
very strongly when you're not depressed. On the other hand, we'd expect
you to believe it almost completely when you are depressed, even if
there's evidence that it's not true. (pause) Follow me so far? ABE: Yes.
JUDITH: When you get depressed, this idea becomes quite strong.
(motioning with my hands) It's as if there's a screen around your head.
The idea that you're incompetent is written on it a billion times.
Anything that fits in with the idea that you are incompetent goes
straight through the screen and into your mind. But any information that
contradicts it doesn't fit through. So you don't even notice the
positive information, or you discount it in some way so it will. (pause)
Do you think you might be screening information like this? Next, I
question Abe to see whether the metaphor seems to fit his experience.
JUDITH: Well, let's see. Looking back at the past few weeks, what
evidence is there that you might be competent? Or what would I think you
did competently? ABE: Umm ... I figured out how to fix my grandson's
robot. JUDITH: Good! And did that evidence go right through the screen?
Did you tell yourself, "I figured out how to fix the robot. That means
I'm competent"? Or anything like that? ABE: No. I guess I thought, "It
took me a long time to figure it out." JUDITH: Oh, so it looks like the
screen was operating. Do you see how you discounted the evidence that
contradicted your core belief "I'm incompetent"? ABE: Hmm. JUDITH: Can
you think of any other examples from this week? Situations where a
reasonable person might think something you did showed you were
competent, even if you didn't?

ABE: (Thinks for a moment.) Well, I helped out at the church. They're
fixing up the basement. But that doesn't count; anyone could have done
it. JUDITH: Good example. Again, it sounds as if you didn't recognize
evidence that didn't fit with your idea "I'm incompetent." I'm going to
let you think about how true the idea is that anyone could have done
what you did. Maybe this is another instance of not giving yourself
credit, when another person might have thought it was evidence that
you're competent. ABE: Well, the minister thanked me a lot. JUDITH: And
how many times this week did you take care of your basic needs:
showering, brushing your teeth, eating meals, getting to bed at a
reasonable hour? ABE: Every day. JUDITH: And how many times this week
did you say something like "Brushing my teeth shows I'm competent";
"Getting my meals shows I'm competent"; and so on? ABE: None. JUDITH:
What would you have said to yourself if you hadn't done those things?
ABE: Probably that I was incompetent. JUDITH: So do you think the screen
was operating, discounting what you did or not even registering what you
did?

Determining When the Belief Originated or Became Maintained Next, I ask
Abe about prior experiences in which he recalled having this belief.
JUDITH: Do you remember feeling incompetent like this at other times in
your life too? As a child? ABE: Yeah, sometimes. I remember my mother
yelling at me because the house was messy or my brothers were out of
control. JUDITH: Any other times? ABE: (Thinks.) Yeah, when I got my
first job after high school. And, I guess, when I started the next job.
But that was just for the first few weeks.

JUDITH: Okay, just to summarize: "I'm incompetent" seems to be a core
belief that started when you were a kid. But you didn't believe it all
the time. I'm guessing that for most of your life, until the depression
set in, you've believed you're reasonably competent. But now the screen
is operating.

Explaining Beliefs Using a Diagram Next, I hand drew the diagram in
Figure 17.2 to summarize what we had discussed in this session. JUDITH:
Abe, can I show you how all this looks on a diagram? ABE: I think that
would help. JUDITH: Okay, we start with childhood experiences. It sounds
as if you felt incompetent at times when your mother yelled at you.
(Draws partial diagram.) Is that right? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: And now, when
you're depressed, is this how you understand what's going on? If you
don't do something as well as you think you should have, it means to you
that you're incompetent? For example, this week you saw the bills on the
table and you had the thought, "I can't believe I haven't paid them
yet." Is that right? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: Just to confirm, what did it mean
to you that you hadn't paid them? ABE: That I was incompetent. JUDITH:
So, I think the experience looks like this. (Adds to diagram and shows
it to Abe.) Now can you see why you had this automatic thought?

MOTIVATING CLIENTS TO MODIFY DYSFUNCTIONAL BELIEFS Even suggesting that
a dysfunctional belief may not be true, or not completely true, can be
anxiety provoking for some clients. If so, you can draw a chart (see
p. 328) and ask clients to identify advantages and disadvantages of
maintaining their dysfunctional core belief and advantages

and disadvantages of believing the more adaptive belief. Ask them what
they conclude from this analysis. When clients need additional
motivation, you can ask them to visualize a day in their life several
years from now, first having maintained their negative core belief as
is, and then believing their new core belief for quite a long time. You
can say something like this: "I'd like you to imagine a day in your life
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ years from now; so it's the year
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. You haven't changed your core belief that you
are \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. So you've believed it day in and day out for
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ more years. It's gotten stronger and stronger
with each passing day, and week, and month, and year. (pause) Now I'd
like to ask you some questions. (pause) See how well you can picture
yourself and your experience in your mind's eye. "How do you feel about
yourself?" "How far along are you in achieving \[each of your
aspirations and goals\]?" "To what degree are you living in accordance
with your values?" Next, tell clients: "I'd like you to imagine how your
belief has affected various parts of your life. Remember, your core
belief is so much stronger than it is today. Really try to picture each
part of your life, as I ask you about it. And think about how much
enjoyment or satisfaction you'll likely be experiencing ... Where do you
see yourself waking up? In the same place as today? Or someplace
different? ... What does it look like? ... How much enjoyment or
satisfaction do you get from where you live?" Then you can ask about
other relevant areas---for example: specific relationships, their job,
how they spend their leisure time, their sense of spirituality, their
creativity, their physical health, and their household management. Make
sure to find out how much or how little enjoyment or satisfaction they
get from each. Finally, ask them:

"What is your general mood like? What do you conclude from having
believed that you are \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ for such a long time?" Now
repeat the same questions for a second scenario, but start out by
saying: "Now I'd like you to imagine that you've believed your new core
belief, that you are \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. You've believed it more and
more strongly day after day, week after week, month after month, and
year after year for \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ years. See how well you can
picture yourself and your experience in your mind's eye. Tell me about
these same areas, and how much enjoyment and satisfaction you get from
each." Then ask: "What is your general mood like? What do you conclude
from having believed that you are \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ for so many
years?"

SUMMARY You begin to formulate a hypothesis about clients' core beliefs
whenever they provide data in the form of their automatic thoughts (and
associated meanings) and reactions (emotions and behaviors). You
hypothesize whether cognitions seem to fall in the helpless, unlovable,
or worthless categories. You identify both intermediate and core beliefs
in many ways. You can look for the expression of a belief in an
automatic thought, provide the conditional clause ("If ...") of an
assumption and ask the client to complete it, directly elicit a rule,
use the downward arrow technique, recognize a common theme among
automatic thoughts, ask clients what they think their belief is, or
review the client's belief questionnaire. REFLECTION QUESTIONS

How can you identify positive core beliefs? Negative core beliefs? How
can you explain a maladaptive core belief to a client? How can you
motivate the client to change the belief?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Imagine that you have a core belief that you are
(emotionally) vulnerable. Imagine at least one lifetime experience that
might have led to the development or strengthening of this belief and
how this belief affects your perception of a particular situation. Write
down this imagined conceptualization using Figure 17.2 as a guide.

18

MODIFYING BELIEFS

previous chapter, we discussed how to identify important positive
Inandthenegative beliefs, how to explain beliefs to clients, and how to
motivate them to modify their beliefs. When clients are in a maladaptive
mode such as depression, it's important to develop and strengthen
realistically positive beliefs to activate the adaptive mode (which is
emphasized to a greater degree in a recovery orientation), and modify
their unrealistic, negative beliefs to deactivate the depressive mode
(which is emphasized to a greater degree in traditional CBT).

In this chapter, you'll read about strengthening positive beliefs first
and weakening negative beliefs second. In practice, you'll work on both
kinds of beliefs at most sessions, either directly or indirectly. The
techniques apply to both intermediate and core beliefs. Here are the
questions that you'll find answers to in this chapter: How do you
strengthen adaptive beliefs? How do you modify intermediate and core
beliefs?

STRENGTHENING ADAPTIVE BELIEFS

Most people, unless they have strong personality disorder traits, have
reasonably balanced, adaptive, realistic beliefs. But the schemas
containing some of these positive beliefs become deactivated when
clients are in the depressive mode. It's important to reinforce these
more positive beliefs (Ingram & Hollon, 1986; Padesky, 1994; Pugh, 2019)
throughout treatment by helping clients engage in activities that could
bring them a sense of mastery, pleasure, connection, and empowerment.
Other important strategies include eliciting positive data and drawing
helpful conclusions about their experiences, eliciting the advantages of
believing adaptive beliefs, pointing out the meaning of positive data,
referencing other people, using a chart to collect evidence, inducing
images of current and historical experiences, and acting "as if."

Eliciting Positive Data and Drawing Conclusions I started identifying
and working to strengthen Abe's positive, adaptive beliefs from the
beginning of treatment, in many ways. In the following examples, I
primarily address Abe's core belief of incompetence/failure. Here's what
I did when we initiated therapy and throughout our treatment: At the
beginning of each session, I asked Abe, "What positive things happened
since I saw you last? What positive things did you do? \[or "When this
week did you feel even a little better?"\] Then I asked, "What do you
conclude about \[these experiences\]? What do these experiences say
about you?" I asked Abe to keep a credit list of everything he did each
day that was even a little difficult but that he did anyway. Once we
identified an important adaptive belief ("I'm competent, with strengths
and weaknesses like everyone else"), I added a question at the beginning
of each session: "How strongly do you believe today that you're
competent? When did you believe that most strongly this week? What was
going on?"

Examining Advantages of the Adaptive Belief I also helped Abe examine
the advantages of seeing himself as competent. We identified several
advantages: It would be more reality based, increase his
self-confidence, make him feel better about himself, improve his mood,
motivate him to try things that seemed difficult, and help him
accomplish tasks.

Pointing Out the Meaning of Positive Data Early in treatment, when we
identified one of Abe's adaptive behaviors, I praised him and often
characterized these actions as showing evidence of competence and other
related qualities: "It's so good you helped your neighbor. I think it
shows you have a lot of skills---plus I think it's another example of
how competent you are---do you agree?" "It sounds like your grandson's
soccer coach saw you as a real asset. Do you think that's right?"
"Persevering like that, until you finished the forms, shows how hard
working you are, doesn't it?" "Getting your apartment in order really
indicates you're taking control; do you think so too?" As therapy
progressed, I elicited the meanings from Abe. "What does it say about
you that you were so helpful at the homeless shelter?" "What does it say
about you that Charlie wants you to keep working for him?"

Referencing Other People One way to help clients get some distance from
their beliefs is to ask them to think about how the adaptive belief
might apply to other people or what others' perspective about them might
be. Here are several ways to do that: Ask clients about people who
historically viewed them in a favorable light: "Who in your life
believed most strongly that you were competent? Why? Could this person
have been right?"

Ask them to think of a specific person and how they would evaluate this
person in terms of the adaptive belief: "Abe, who is someone whom you
view as competent in most ways? What have you done this week that you
would say shows that \[this person\] is competent if he or she had done
it?" Ask them to reflect on whether they would discount positive
evidence if they compared what they did to a hypothetical negative
model: "Abe, you don't believe that paying all your bills is a sign of
competence. But would a truly incompetent person have been able to do
that?" Ask them to name another person who views them positively: "Abe,
who's someone who knows you pretty well, whose judgment you trust? What
would \[this person\] say you had done this week that's evidence you're
competent?" or "Abe, what have you done this week that I would consider
a sign of competence?"

Using a Chart to Collect Evidence An important Action Plan item was for
Abe to remind himself to look for data that supported his positive
beliefs. Once we agreed to work on his belief that he was competent, we
converted his "credit list" into an "Evidence of Competence Chart"
(Figure 18.1). I made this chart in session for him. We started it
together so I could be sure he understood what to do. I asked him to
include evidence about things that not only were even a little difficult
but also were easy but nevertheless indicated competence. The chart also
elicited his conclusions about these experiences and, especially, what
these experiences showed about him. He filled out the chart at home and
brought it to therapy so he could add additional examples we discovered
during our sessions. A little later in treatment, we used the same chart
to collect historic evidence of competence. Event/Experience

Conclusion, or what this says about me

I finished going through all the bills and paying them.

I can concentrate better than I thought.

Soccer coach thanked me several times again after the game.

I can organize people pretty well.

I helped Jim fix a leak.

I can figure things out.

FIGURE 18.1. Abe's Evidence of Competence Chart. He also took
photographs of the pile of bills he had just finished paying, of the
soccer coach and team, and of Jim's leaky pipe.

I asked Abe to take a photograph of as many of these positive
experiences as he could (or to look online for an image that represented
the experience) to show me at subsequent sessions. Reviewing the
photographs gave me the chance to respond to his discounting cognitions;
they were a potent reinforcer that his new core belief was accurate.

Inducing Images of Current and Historical Experiences Imagery tends to
reinforce adaptive beliefs at both the intellectual and the emotional
level, especially when clients experience positive affect as they
visualize a scene. I asked Abe to tell me about and then visualize both
recent and historic memories. Here's one example: JUDITH: Can you think
about your history? What was a situation in which you felt really
competent? ... Can you imagine this scenario, as if it's happening right
now? ... Tell me what you see, what you're thinking, how you're feeling
... ABE: (Visualizes and describes the experience of finding out he was
getting a promotion at work.) JUDITH: You know, you're still the same
person now, with the same level of competence. It's just partially
covered over by the depression, which affects what you do, what you
think, and how you feel.

Acting "As If" Clients are often willing to act as if they believe their
adaptive belief---and doing so strengthens this belief. Abe and I were
discussing an upcoming job interview. I asked Abe to visualize this
situation, as if it were happening right now, and to imagine acting as
if he believed his positive belief. His Action Plan was then to act that
way in the actual situation. "Abe, can you imagine what it would be like
if you completely believed you were competent when you went for your job
interview? Can you visualize it? ... How do you feel when you enter the
reception area? ... What are you thinking? ... Remember, you completely
believe you're competent. When you walk up to the receptionist, what
does your posture look like? ... What does your face look like? ...

What do you say to the receptionist? ... How are you feeling? ... What
do you do when you meet the interviewer? ... What do you look like
sitting in the chair? ... What do you say when he asks you about your
previous job?" CLINICAL TIPS When clients have difficulty identifying
positive data, you can use the metaphor of the screen from Chapter 17 to
remind them that they may be missing or discounting positive evidence.
Then discuss what they could do in the coming week to get better at this
skill.

MODIFYING MALADAPTIVE BELIEFS The degree of difficulty in modifying
negative beliefs varies from client to client. In general, it's far
easier to modify the negative beliefs of clients with acute disorders
whose counterbalancing adaptive beliefs have been activated throughout
much of their lives---as compared to clients with personality disorders
(J. S. Beck, 2005; Beck et al., 2015; Young et al., 2003). The beliefs
of some clients change easily, at least at the intellectual level, but
the beliefs of others require considerable effort over time to change at
both an intellectual and an emotional level. Clients vary widely in the
degree to which they're able to modify their core beliefs. It's not
possible or realistic for some clients to reduce the strength of these
beliefs to 0%. Generally, beliefs have been sufficiently weakened when
clients are likely to continue modifying their dysfunctional behavior
despite still holding on to a remnant of the belief. Beliefs usually
change at the intellectual level first, especially if you've been
employing only intellectual-level techniques. Clients may need
experiential techniques (including using imagery, doing role playing,
using storytelling or metaphors, and engaging in behavioral experiments)
to change their beliefs at the emotional level. Cognitions change in the
presence of affect, so the best time to work on negative beliefs is when
their schemas are activated in session. Clients then generally
experience change at both levels as corrective information is received.
Gestalt-type techniques, such as empty-chair work (Pugh, 2019), can be
quite useful in exposing clients to painful beliefs and emotions or

distressing interpersonal situations. Clients generally learn that they
don't need to protect themselves from upsetting situations; they don't
need to use coping behaviors, such as escape, avoidance, or distraction.
Techniques using an extended metaphor of a trial are also helpful in
helping clients identify and modify entrenched core beliefs (De
Oliveira, 2018).

Techniques to Modify Negative Beliefs To change a negative belief, you
will educate clients about core beliefs, monitor the activation of their
schemas, explain their contribution to clients' current difficulties,
and motivate clients to change them (as described in Chapter 17). You'll
use both intellectual- and emotional-level techniques, as described
below. Many of the techniques are also used to modify automatic
thoughts. Socratic questioning Reframing Behavioral experiments Stories,
movies, and metaphors Cognitive continuum Using others as a reference
point Self-disclosure Intellectual--emotional role plays Historical
tests Restructuring the meaning of early memories

Socratic Questioning When evaluating Abe's beliefs, I use the same kinds
of questions as I used in evaluating his automatic thoughts. Even when I
identify a general belief, I help Abe evaluate it in the context of
specific situations. This specificity helps make the evaluation more
concrete and meaningful, and less abstract and intellectual. JUDITH:
\[summarizing what Abe learned from the just-completed downward arrow
technique\] Okay, so you believe about 90% that if you ask for help, it
means you're incompetent. Is that right?

ABE: Yes. JUDITH: Could there be another way of viewing asking for help?
ABE: I'm not sure. JUDITH: Take therapy, for example. Are you
incompetent because you came for help here? ABE: A little, maybe.
JUDITH: Hmm. That's interesting. I usually view it in the opposite way.
Is it possible it's actually a sign of strength and competence that you
came to therapy? Because what would have happened if you hadn't? ABE:
I'd probably be much worse. JUDITH: Are you suggesting that asking for
appropriate help when you have an illness like depression is a more
competent thing to do than remaining depressed? ABE: Yeah ... I guess
so. JUDITH: Well, you tell me. Let's say we have two depressed people.
One seeks treatment, works hard, and overcomes his depression. The other
person refuses therapy and continues to have depressive symptoms. Whom
do you consider more competent? ABE: Well, the one who goes for help.
JUDITH: Now how about another situation you've mentioned, volunteering
at the homeless shelter? Again, we have two people. They're not sure how
to deal with an aggressive person because they've never had to do it
before. One asks the staff what to do. The other doesn't and continues
to struggle. Who's the more competent? ABE: (hesitantly) The one who
goes for help? JUDITH: Are you sure? ABE: (Thinks for a moment.) Yeah.
It's not a sign of competence to just struggle if you could get help and
do better. JUDITH: How much do you believe that? ABE: Pretty much.
JUDITH: And do these two situations---therapy and help at the shelter---
apply to you? ABE: I guess they do. Here I used Socratic questioning in
the context of two specific situations to help Abe evaluate his
dysfunctional belief. I judged that the standard questions of examining
the evidence and evaluating outcomes would be less

effective than asking leading questions. Note that when you're
evaluating beliefs, you may need to ask questions that are more
persuasive and less evenhanded than when evaluating more malleable
cognitions at the automatic thought level.

Reframing You can hand draw a chart to help clients track and reframe
evidence that seems to support their dysfunctional beliefs (Figure
18.2). Event/Experience

Reframe

Asking for help at homeless shelter

Competent people ask for help when they need it.

Going to therapy

It's a sign of strength and competence to get treatment.

Lost my job

Boss changed my job and didn't provide training.

FIGURE 18.2. Abe's Reframes of Competence Belief Chart.

JUDITH: \[summarizing\] So it was difficult for you to come to therapy
and talk to a supervisor at the homeless shelter because of your belief
"If I ask for help, it shows I'm incompetent or a failure." Is that
right? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: Now that we've discussed it, how do you see it?
ABE: If I ask for help, I'm not incompetent? JUDITH: You don't sound
convinced. Let's see. Do you want to phrase it like this: "Asking for
help when I need it is a sign of competence"? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: How much
do you believe this new idea now? ABE: A lot ... (Reads and ponders the
new belief.) JUDITH: Would you be willing to keep a chart in which you
write down evidence that you initially think supports the idea that
you're incompetent? ABE: Yes.

JUDITH: Then you can counter it with a more realistic perspective, which
we can call the "alternative view" or "reframe" or something else. What
do you want to call it? ABE: I like "reframe." I then draw the chart in
Figure 18.2. I ask Abe to think of another item that belongs on the
chart, and he writes it down. He agrees to an Action Plan item to
continue filling in the chart at home. I advise him that it may be
difficult at first to think of a reframe but that we can fill in the
right side of the chart together at subsequent sessions. I also ask him
to keep this chart in front of him during our sessions, so he can add to
it when the topic we're discussing is relevant to his negative core
belief. Next, I suggest an Action Plan to help reinforce the new, more
adaptive belief. (You read about this acting "as if" technique earlier
in this chapter.) JUDITH: Also, could you be on the lookout for other
situations this week where you could reasonably ask for help? That is,
let's imagine that you believe the new belief 100%, that asking for
reasonable help is a sign of competence. When during this coming week
might you ask for help? Can you think of anything now? ABE: Well,
yesterday I tried to rewire a lamp, but I couldn't. I was going to keep
trying ... but I suppose I could ask my neighbor for help. JUDITH:
Perfect. If you can think of any other reasonable opportunities to ask
for help, could you do that? ABE: Okay. JUDITH: And when you do ask,
make sure to give yourself enormous credit ---because you'll be doing
something hard, something that goes against your grain but is really,
really important. Once you've introduced both the Evidence of \[the
Adaptive Belief\] Chart and the Reframes of \[the Negative Belief\]
Chart, you can consolidate them into the Belief Change Worksheet (Figure
18.3). Event/experience that supports my new belief "I am competent ."
What does this say about me?

Event/experience with reframes of my old belief "I am incompetent ."

Event/experience that supports my new belief "I am competent ."

Event/experience with reframes of my old belief "I am incompetent ."

What does this say about me? Figured out how to work \[son's\] drone,
which shows I'm competent. Fixed bookshelf for daughter when my
son-in-law couldn't--- evidence of competence. Balanced checkbook---most
people can do this, but it's still a sign of competence. Helped put up
drywall for Charlie ---I was competent.

Had trouble understanding article on economic trends, but most people
probably would. Couldn't figure out how to fix the brakes in my car, but
I'm not a trained mechanic. Got a parking ticket, but the sign was
ambiguous. Dinner I made tasted terrible, but that means I'm incompetent
at cooking that meal, not that I'm incompetent as a person.

FIGURE 18.3. Abe's Belief Change Worksheet. Copyright © 2018 CBT
Worksheet Packet. Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Behavioral Experiments As with automatic thoughts, you can help clients
devise behavioral tests to evaluate the validity of a belief. Behavioral
experiments, when properly designed and carried out, can modify a
client's beliefs more powerfully than verbal techniques, at both the
emotional and the intellectual level. JUDITH: \[summarizing\] It sounds
as if this belief, "If I ask others for help, they'll be critical of
me," got in the way this week? ABE: Yeah, that's why I didn't ask my
neighbor. JUDITH: How much do you believe that? ABE: I don't know---a
lot. JUDITH: Well, you came to me for help, and I haven't actually
criticized you, have I? ABE: No, of course not. But that's your job, to
help people. JUDITH: True, but it would be useful to find out if other
people, in general, are more like me or not. How could you find out?
ABE: I'd have to ask them for help. In the next part, I find out whether
asking his neighbor for help would be a good behavioral experiment.

JUDITH: Okay, can we talk about your neighbor? What evidence do you have
that he'd be critical of you if you ask for help to wire the lamp? ABE:
(Thinks.) Well, he's a nice guy. I guess he wouldn't criticize me.
JUDITH: Has he helped you before? ABE: You know, I almost forgot about
this. But yeah, there was one time when my grandson brought his dog over
and the dog ran away. My neighbor helped us look for him, and he was
actually the one who found him. JUDITH: Did he seem to be critical? ABE:
No, he seemed happy to help. JUDITH: Then he might not criticize you now
either? ABE: No, no, I guess he wouldn't. I don't know why I didn't
think of that. JUDITH: Well, I think your depression is still affecting
you. ABE: I think I'll go knock on his door after dinner tonight.
JUDITH: Good. We can add that to your Action Plan. (pause) Next, we
discuss how Abe could cope if it turned out his neighbor was critical.
Then I ask, "Now, is there anything else you've avoided asking for help
with---because you thought you might be criticized?" It's very important
that clients change their behavior by decreasing their avoidance and
entering into situations they've been avoiding. Otherwise, they won't
have the actual experience of having their beliefs disconfirmed. For an
extensive description and discussion of behavioral experiments, see
Bennett-Levy and colleagues (2004).

Using Stories, Movies, and Metaphors You can help clients develop a
different idea about themselves by encouraging them to reflect on their
view of characters or people who share the same negative core belief
that they themselves have. When clients experience vivid examples of how
others' very strong beliefs are invalid, or mostly invalid, they begin
to understand how they too could have a powerful core belief that isn't
accurate. Maria was sure she was bad because her mother had been
physically and emotionally abusive to her, often telling Maria how bad
she was. It was helpful for Maria to reflect on the story of Cinderella,
in which a wicked stepmother treats a youth quite badly without the
youth's being at fault.

For additional common metaphors used in CBT, see Stott and colleagues
(2010) and De Oliveira (2018).

Cognitive Continuum This technique is useful to modify both automatic
thoughts and beliefs that reflect polarized thinking, that is, when the
client sees something in all-ornothing terms. A cognitive continuum
helped Abe see that there's a middle ground between being a success and
a failure. JUDITH: \[summarizing\] So when you found out that you had
bounced a check, you thought, "I'm a failure." Can we see how that looks
on a scale? (Draws a number line.) So 100%---that would represent
someone who's a complete success. And 0%---that's someone who's 0%
successful, in other words, a failure. (pause) Now, where on this scale
do you belong?

ABE: Well, I'm almost out of money, and I don't have a real job. I'm at
0. JUDITH: Though you do volunteer---even though you're depressed. And
you are looking for work, right? ABE: I guess so. Maybe I'm 20%. JUDITH:
Is there anyone else who's between you and someone who isn't working at
all? ABE: Umm ... Maybe this guy, I know. Jeremy. He works as little as
he possibly can. He'd much rather just sit back and collect
unemployment. JUDITH: Okay. Where does Jeremy go? ABE: About 20%.
JUDITH: And you? ABE: About 30%. At least I'm trying to get a job.
JUDITH: And when you did work, what was your work ethic like? ABE: Oh, I
always worked hard.

JUDITH: Let's take a look at another guy who never works. Let's say he
keeps borrowing money from family members. He could work, but he never
wants to, so he never does. Is this the kind of guy who's at zero? ABE:
Probably. JUDITH: Now, how about a person who never works, lives off his
family's money, and actually does harm to others. ABE: That person would
be a worse failure. JUDITH: So if he's 0%, where is the guy with family
money who isn't hurting anyone? ABE: (Thinks.) Oh, I guess 20%. He's not
a failure in every way. JUDITH: And Jeremy and you? ABE: Let's see. He'd
be 40%, and I'd be ... I'm not sure. JUDITH: Well, if you were working
now, where would you be? ABE: Hmm. Maybe 90%? Because I don't think I
could ever be 100% successful. JUDITH: So does that put you now between
40% and 90%? ABE: (sounding unconvinced) I guess so ... JUDITH: Let me
ask you this: Why don't you have a paid job? Is it because you're just
lazy or because you have a bad work ethic? Or is it because the
depression has been affecting you? ABE: It's the depression. JUDITH: Are
you sure? ABE: Well, I know I'm not lazy when I'm not depressed, and I
do have a good work ethic---and I'm looking for a job now ... So I guess
I'd be at 60%. JUDITH: How accurate is it to call someone a failure---0%
successful---who is at the 60% mark? ABE: Not very. JUDITH: Maybe the
worst thing you can say is that he or she is 60% successful. ABE: Yeah.
(Brightens visibly.) JUDITH: And once you've been in a new paid job for
say 6 months, where do you think you'll be? ABE: It depends on the job,
but I hope I'll be 90% successful. JUDITH: Let me ask you another
question: What has been the effect of labeling yourself as a failure?
ABE: It makes me feel more depressed.

JUDITH: Yes. And according to your own scale, it's not even true. So can
you put in your own words what you've learned from this scale? ABE: That
I'm not a failure. I guess at worst, I'm a 60% success and I'm working
my way back to being a 90% success. JUDITH: That's excellent. Let's get
that down in writing. And I'd like you to look at this scale every
morning and whenever you start feeling like a failure again.

As with many of these belief modification techniques, you will probably
find that clients change their thinking at both an emotional and an
intellectual level if their negative emotions are heightened in the
session. If their distress is low, you may get some change, but it will
probably be only at the intellectual level. And you can directly teach
clients how to use this kind of technique themselves between sessions.
"Abe, let's review what we did here. We identified an all-or-nothing
error in your thinking. Then we drew a number line to see whether there
were really only two categories---success and failure---or whether it's
more accurate to consider degrees of success. Can you think of anything
else that you see in only two categories, something that distresses
you?"

Using Other People as a Reference Point When clients consider other
people's circumstances and beliefs, they often obtain psychological
distance from their own dysfunctional beliefs. They begin to see an
inconsistency between what they believe is true or right for

themselves and what they more objectively believe is true about other
people. In this first example, Abe disagrees with his cousin's core
belief, and I help him apply this perspective to himself. JUDITH: Abe,
you mentioned last week that you think one of your cousins is depressed
too? ABE: Yeah. She called me last week. She's had a lot of trouble.
First, she got fired from her job. Then her boyfriend broke up with her,
and she had to move in with my aunt. JUDITH: How do you think she sees
herself? ABE: When she called the other night, she said she feels like a
failure. JUDITH: What did you say to her? ABE: That she's not a failure.
That she's just going through a hard time right now. JUDITH: Could that
be true for you too? ABE: (Thinks.) I'm not sure. JUDITH: Is there
something different about your cousin that makes her okay if she's
depressed and doesn't have a job, but not you? ABE: (Thinks for a
moment.) No. I guess not. I hadn't really thought of it that way.
JUDITH: Do you want to write something down about this? Finally, many
clients can get distance from a belief by using a child as a reference
point, someone they feel compassion for. This may be their own child or
grandchild or another child they feel close to. Or they can imagine that
they themselves have a child. JUDITH: Abe, so you believe that if you
don't do as well as everyone else, then you've failed? ABE: Yeah.
JUDITH: I wonder, can you imagine that your granddaughter is now grown
up? She's 50 years old and she's very upset because she's just lost her
job. Would you want her to believe that she's a failure? ABE: No, of
course not. JUDITH: Why not? ... What would you like her to believe?
(Abe responds.) Now how does what you've just said apply to you?

Using Self-Disclosure Using appropriate and judicious self-disclosure
can help some clients view their problems or beliefs in a different way.
The self-disclosure, of course, needs to be genuine and relevant:
JUDITH: You know, Abe, when I started working full time, I was
overloaded. And so was my husband. But I was hesitant to ask anyone for
help at home. I thought I should be able to manage on my own.
Ultimately, I did get someone to help me. What do you think it meant
about me that I needed help? Did it mean I was incompetent? ABE: No, not
at all. You probably did have too much to do. JUDITH: So, someone can
need help but not be incompetent? ABE: I see what you mean. JUDITH: Can
you spell it out? ABE: Maybe the fact that I need help now doesn't
necessarily mean I'm incompetent. JUDITH: What could it mean? ABE: Like
we talked about last week. That I'm depressed. That I wouldn't judge
myself so harshly if I were on crutches and needed help.

Intellectual--Emotional Role Plays This technique, also called
"point--counterpoint" (Young, 1999), is usually employed after you have
tried other techniques, such as those described in this chapter. It's
particularly useful when clients say that intellectually they can see a
belief is dysfunctional but that emotionally or in their gut it still
"feels" true. You first provide a rationale for asking clients to play
the "emotional" part of their mind that strongly endorses the
dysfunctional belief, while you play the "intellectual" part. Then you
switch roles. Note in both segments you and clients both speak as the
client; that is, you both use the word "I." JUDITH: It sounds from what
you're saying that you still believe to some extent that you're
incompetent. ABE: Yeah.

JUDITH: I'd like to get a better sense of what evidence you still have
that supports your belief, if that's okay. ABE: Sure. JUDITH: Can we do
a role play? I'll play the "intellectual" part of your mind that
intellectually knows you're not incompetent through and through. I'd
like you to play the emotional part of your mind, that voice from your
gut that still believes you are incompetent. I want you to argue against
me as hard as you can, so I can really see what's maintaining the
belief. Okay? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH: Okay, you start. Say "I'm incompetent
because ..." ABE: I'm incompetent because I lost my job. JUDITH: No, I'm
not. I have a belief that I'm incompetent, but I am reasonably competent
most of the time. ABE: No, I'm not. If I were truly competent, I would
have done really well in the job. JUDITH: That's not true. I didn't do
well on the job because my boss changed my responsibilities and didn't
train me well enough. ABE: Well, Emilio had done well in inventory. That
shows I was incompetent. JUDITH: That's not right either. Emilio had
strengths in the skills needed for inventory, and I had other strengths.
The worst thing you can say is that I was incompetent in doing
inventory. But I am competent in lots of other things. ABE: But I
haven't been acting very competently in the last year or two. JUDITH:
That's true; though as my depression has gotten better, I've been acting
a lot more competently recently. ABE: But a truly competent person
wouldn't become depressed in the first place. JUDITH: Actually, even
truly competent people get depressed. There isn't a connection between
those two things. And when truly competent people get depressed, their
concentration and motivation definitely suffer, and they don't perform
as well as usual. But that doesn't mean they're incompetent through and
through. ABE: I guess that's true. They're just depressed. JUDITH:
You're right, but you're out of role. Any more evidence that you're
completely incompetent?

ABE: (Thinks for a moment.) No, I guess not. JUDITH: Well, how about if
we trade roles now, and this time you be the "intellectual" part who
responds back to my "emotional" part? And I'll use your same arguments.
ABE: Okay. JUDITH: I'll start. "I'm incompetent because I because I lost
my job." Switching roles provides clients with an opportunity to speak
with the intellectual voice that you've just modeled. You use the same
emotional reasoning and the same words that they used. Using their own
words and not introducing new material help clients to respond more
precisely to their specific concerns. CLINICAL TIPS If clients are
unable to formulate a response while in the intellectual role, you can
either switch roles temporarily or come out of role to discuss the stuck
point. As with any belief modification technique, you will evaluate both
its effectiveness and the degree to which clients need further work on
the belief. You do so by asking clients to rate how strong their belief
is before and after the intervention.

Many clients find the intellectual--emotional role play useful. A few,
however, feel uncomfortable doing it. As with any intervention, the
decision to use it should be collaborative. Because it is a slightly
confrontational technique, take special note of clients' nonverbal
reactions during the role play. Also take care to ensure that clients do
not feel criticized or denigrated by the elevation of the intellectual
part of their mind over the emotional part.

Historical Tests Modifying dysfunctional beliefs by reframing relevant
current experience or using current material as examples is sufficient
for many clients. Others benefit from discussing how and when a negative
core belief originated and became maintained and why it made sense for
the client to believe it at the time. Maria's belief that she was
unlikeable stemmed from childhood. I asked her, "What memories do you
have in which you believed you were unlikeable? Let's start with your
elementary school years, so when you

were about 6 to 11." Next, I asked her for relevant memories when she
was an adolescent. (She didn't have any pertinent memories as a very
young child.) Then we used Socratic questioning to reframe the meaning
she put to each of these experiences. Finally, I asked Maria to record a
summary of her new understanding of herself from the most salient time
periods. Here's what she concluded about elementary school: "I was
basically likeable. I had a best friend, and I was friendly with some
other girls. I was bullied by a group of kids who picked on people to
make themselves feel superior. That says something negative about them
but not about me." I asked Maria to read this therapy note every day.

Restructuring the Meaning of Early Memories To modify the meaning of
significantly negative events (from childhood or later) at the emotional
level, some clients may also need experiential techniques in which they
"relive" the experiences in session with you and, in the presence of
significant affect, use role play or imagery to reframe the meaning at
the emotional level. (See Appendix D.)

SUMMARY Strengthening adaptive beliefs and restructuring maladaptive
beliefs require consistent, systematic work over time. Techniques
applicable to restructuring automatic thoughts and intermediate beliefs
may be used along with more specialized techniques oriented specifically
toward core beliefs. Additional strategies to modify core beliefs can be
found in multiple sources, including J. S. Beck (2005), Beck and
colleagues (2015), McEvoy and colleagues (2018), Pugh (2019), and Young
(1999). REFLECTION QUESTIONS How can you strengthen adaptive beliefs and
modify maladaptive beliefs? How do beliefs become strengthened over
time?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Imagine that you have a core belief that you are
inferior, unlovable, or worthless. Think of a corresponding adaptive
core belief and fill out the Belief Change Worksheet.

19

ADDITIONAL TECHNIQUES

already covered many basic CBT techniques in this book, among We've
them, psychoeducation, focusing on aspirations, values, and strengths;
monitoring mood and behavior; cognitive restructuring; worksheets;
behavioral experiments; and mindfulness. These techniques may influence
clients' thinking, behavior, and/or physiological arousal, in addition
to their mood. Some increase positive affect, some decrease negative
affect, and some do both. As described in Chapter 9, you collaboratively
choose techniques using your conceptualization of the client as a guide.
As described in Chapter 2, CBT adapts techniques from many evidencebased
psychotherapeutic modalities: acceptance and commitment therapy,
compassion-focused therapy, dialectical behavior therapy,
emotion-focused therapy, Gestalt therapy, interpersonal psychotherapy,
meta-cognitive therapy, mindfulness-based cognitive therapy,
motivational interviewing, psychodynamic psychotherapy, schema therapy,
solution-focused brief therapy, well-being therapy, and others, within
the context of a cognitive conceptualization. You will also invent your
own techniques as you become more proficient as a CBT therapist. This
chapter answers the following questions: How do you help clients
regulate their emotions (e.g., through refocusing, distraction,
self-soothing, and relaxation exercises)? How do you know when to do
skills training? How do you help clients become better problem solvers?
How do you help clients make decisions?

How do you create graded task assignments? How do you do exposure? When
might you use role playing? When are "pie" techniques useful? How can
you change unfavorable self-comparisons?

EMOTION REGULATION TECHNIQUES The goal of CBT is not to eliminate
negative emotion. All emotions are important. Negative emotions
frequently point to a problem that needs to be solved (which may or may
not include changing one's thinking)---or, if it can't be solved,
accepted. The goal of CBT is to reduce the degree and duration of
negative emotion that doesn't seem to be proportionate to the situation
(given the client's culture and circumstances), usually related to
distorted or unhelpful perceptions. Acceptance of negative emotion
(instead of avoidance) is key for some clients (Linehan, 2015; Segal et
al., 2018). Acceptance and commitment therapy (Hayes et al., 1999)
describes useful metaphors for accepting negative emotion and turning
one's attention to valued action. You've read about emotion regulation
techniques throughout this book, especially modifying dysfunctional
cognitions and maladaptive behavior; engaging mindfully in social,
pleasurable, productive, and self-care activities; exercising; focusing
on one's strengths and positive qualities; and cultivating positive
cognitions and adaptive behavior. Below are some additional techniques.

Refocusing, Engaging in Valued Behavior, and SelfSoothing Most of the
time when I feel distressed, I check the accuracy of my thinking and do
problem solving. But occasionally I get stuck thinking in an unhelpful
way. For example, this sometimes happens to me when I have a problem I
can't fix, at least at the moment, or when I'm feeling irritated by
something I can't change. If examining my thinking doesn't help, I
change

my focus. I tell myself, "Thinking about this right now isn't helpful.
It's okay that I'm feeling \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (nervous, irritated,
etc.). I should just refocus on what I'm doing (or engage in a valued
action)." I assume you do this too, and you can teach your clients to do
the same. Help them monitor their negative affective responses, noticing
where their attention is, and then shift their focus to something else.
Multiple websites list pleasant, self-soothing activities, relaxation,
or mindfulness exercises. To name just a few, clients can refocus on the
task at hand, their immediate experience (using all their senses,
especially if they're ruminating about past events or obsessing about
future events), their bodies or their breath, or their aspirations and a
plan to work toward those aspirations. They can engage in various
activities: valued action, talking to other people, surfing the net,
playing a video game, posting or viewing posts on social media, doing
chores, exercising, taking a bath or shower, interacting with children
or pets, or practicing gratitude. Abe often ruminated and became quite
self-critical about perceived mistakes he had made in the past, and he
worried about finances and his future. I taught him mindfulness of the
breath and helped him compose a written list of things he could do to
engage his attention elsewhere since we determined that rumination and
self-criticism caused more harm than good.

Relaxation Many clients, especially those who experience bodily tension,
benefit from learning relaxation techniques, described in detail
elsewhere (Benson, 1975; Davis et al., 2008; Jacobson, 1974). There are
several kinds of relaxation exercises, including progressive muscle
relaxation (PMR), imagery, and slow and/or deep breathing. PMR teaches
clients to alternately tense and then relax muscle groups in a
systematic way. Imagery involves having clients create a vision in their
minds of feeling relaxed, calm, and safe in a particular environment,
such as lying on a beach. There are several breathing exercises you can
teach clients too. Search online for scripts, and have clients try one
or more of these exercises in session, while you make an audio recording
on the client's phone, followed by daily home practice. CLINICAL TIPS
Some clients experience a paradoxical arousal effect from relaxation
exercises; they actually become more tense and anxious (Barlow, 2002;
Clark, 1989). You can use this as a learning

experience. Ask clients, "What are you most afraid could happen if you
continue with this exercise?" Then encourage them to continue the
relaxation techniques to find out to what degree, if at all, their fears
come true.

SKILLS TRAINING Many depressed clients show deficits in certain skills,
including communication, effective parenting, job interviewing,
budgeting, household or time management, organization, and
relationships. When you uncover a skill deficit, give a rationale for
working on it and then make a collaborative decision to do so. Describe
the skill and demonstrate it during the session. CBT self-help books and
workbooks can also be useful in teaching clients some skills; you can
find a list at www.abct.org/SHBooks. When you uncover an obstacle or
problem, however, you'll need to see whether clients have an actual
skill deficit or whether they have cognitions that interfere with their
using a skill they already possess. You can ask them, "If you were sure
that you'd get a good outcome, then what would you do or say?" If they
give you a reasonable response, they may not need skills training, just
cognitive restructuring. For example, the thought "What if I make a
mistake?" might lead clients to avoid doing a task they know how to do.
"If I put limits on my child, he won't listen to me anyway" might lead
to overly permissive parenting. Yet these clients may have adequate
skills. CLINICAL TIPS When clients are unsure about what to say to
another person, give them the choice of whether to play themselves or
the other person in a role play. If they play themselves, and do a good
job, give them positive feedback and ask them if they want to record
what they said, to remember it better. If they don't do a good job, ask
them if they'd like you to demonstrate another approach. If so, you'll
play the client but then switch roles so the client gets a chance to
practice. If needed, interrupt the role play to give feedback and have
the client practice again. Collaboratively set an Action Plan to use the
communication skill in particular circumstances or with specific people.

PROBLEM SOLVING

Associated with or in addition to their psychological disorders, clients
face real-life obstacles to taking steps toward valued action or
fulfilling their aspirations. At every session, you'll encourage clients
to look ahead to the coming week or weeks, think about what they can do
to improve their experience, and identify potential obstacles or
problems. There are several approaches you can take, depending on the
nature of the predicted difficulties.

Difficulty Solving Problems You can focus on encouraging clients to
devise solutions to the problem, in accordance with their values and
aspirations. When clients are deficient in problem-solving skills, they
may benefit from direct instruction in problem solving, where they learn
to specify a problem, devise solutions, select a solution, implement it,
and evaluate its effectiveness (see, e.g., D'Zurilla & Nezu, 2006). You
can also ask clients how they've solved similar problems in the past, or
how they might advise a close friend or family member to solve the same
kind of problem. Or you can offer potential solutions yourself. You can
also use judicious self-disclosure, when relevant. Some problems are
facilitated by a change in the environment. Maria realized that her
overconsumption of high-calorie junk food was related to not having
enough healthy food around. She decided to make it a priority to go to
the supermarket twice a week. This change helped significantly. Some
problem solving may involve significant life changes. After careful
evaluation of a situation, you might encourage battered spouses to seek
refuge or take legal action. If you have clients who are chronically
dissatisfied with their jobs, you might guide them in analyzing the
advantages and disadvantages of staying in their current job versus
looking for another job. When dysfunctional cognitions interfere with
problem solving, you'll help clients identify and respond to interfering
cognitions and then return to problem solving. Abe, for example, wanted
to buy clothes for a special event. He knew how to ask his cousin to go
with him, but his belief that he shouldn't ask for help inhibited him.
After evaluating his cognitions about this specific situation, Abe
implemented the solution he himself had initially conceived.

When Problems Can't Be Solved Not all problems, of course, can be
solved. When problems aren't leading to much distress, clients may be
able to accept them without much help from you. You might teach them the
"Oh, well" technique (J. S. Beck, 2007). "Oh, well" is shorthand for "I
don't like this situation or problem. But there's nothing I can do to
change it, not if I want to reach my goal. So, I might as well stop
struggling, accept it, and change my attention to something else." Abe
found this technique useful when he didn't get a job he had interviewed
for. When clients have unhelpful cognitions associated with an
unsolvable problem, cognitive restructuring is often called for (see
pp. 258--259). Abe had a problem with his ex-wife. She was highly
critical of him. He had tried to talk to her several times about having
more productive conversations, but she just criticized him more. It
seemed unlikely that she would change. What made the problem worse
though were Abe's cognitions when he was depressed. He often thought,
"She's right. I am good for nothing." Evaluating and responding to that
cognition made it easier for Abe to accept her behavior, to turn his
attention elsewhere, and to work toward increasing life satisfaction in
other ways. Although he couldn't fix the problem, he was able to change
his response to the problem.

When Problems Have a Low Probability of Occurrence When problems are
unlikely to occur, you might help clients assess the probability that
the problem will occur, look for best and most realistic outcomes,
discuss how to cope if the problem does arise, distinguish between
reasonable and unreasonable precautions, accept uncertainty, decrease an
overinflated sense of responsibility, recognize and expand their
personal and external resources, and/or increase their sense of
self-efficacy.

MAKING DECISIONS Many clients, especially those who are depressed, have
difficulty making decisions. When clients want your help in this area,
ask them to list the advantages and disadvantages of each option and
then help them devise a system for weighing each item and drawing a
conclusion about which option seems best (see Figure 19.1). Advantages
of Volunteering

Disadvantages of Volunteering

1.  Get me out of the apartment

2.  Make me feel useful, productive

3.  Help people

4.  Good step before I get a paying job

5.  Learn new skills?

6.  Might be too tired

7.  Might not like it

8.  Thinking about it makes me anxious

Advantages of Not Volunteering

Disadvantages of Not Volunteering

1.  Don't have to feel anxious about it

2.  Can save my energy for other things

3.  Don't have to face potential failure

4.  Doesn't help my depression

5.  Doesn't get me out of the house

6.  Doesn't give me potential opportunity to feel useful and productive

7.  Doesn't help me practice for a paying job

8.  Doesn't increase my skill set

FIGURE 19.1. Abe's advantages--disadvantages analysis.

JUDITH: You mentioned that you wanted help in deciding whether to
volunteer at the homeless shelter? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: Okay. (Pulls out a
piece of paper.) If it's okay, I'd like to show you how to weigh
advantages and disadvantages. Have you ever done that? ABE: No. At least
not in writing. I've been going over some of the pros and cons in my
head. JUDITH: Good. That'll help us get started. I think you'll find
that writing them down will make the decision clearer. Which one do you
want to start with, volunteering or not volunteering? ABE: Volunteering,
I guess.

JUDITH: Okay. Write "Advantages of Volunteering" at the top left of this
paper and "Disadvantages of Volunteering" on the top right, and
"Advantages of Not Volunteering" and "Disadvantages of Not Volunteering"
at the bottom. ABE: (Does so.) Okay. JUDITH: What have you been
thinking? Could you jot down some advantages and disadvantages of
volunteering there? (Abe writes down the ideas he has had so far. I ask
some questions to guide him.) How about the fact that you'd be getting
out of your apartment---is that an advantage too? ABE: Yeah. (Writes it
down.) Abe and I continue this process until he feels he has recorded
both sides fairly and thoroughly. We repeat the process with the second
option. Examining advantages and disadvantages of one option reminds Abe
of additional items to add to the other option. Next, I help Abe
evaluate the items: JUDITH: Okay, this looks pretty complete. Now you
need to weigh the items in some way. Do you want to circle the most
important items---or rate the importance of each one on a 1--10 scale?
ABE: Circle the items, I guess. JUDITH: Okay, let's look at each list
now. Which items feel the most important to you? (Abe circles items in
each column in Figure 19.1.) Just looking over what you've circled, what
do you think? ABE: I'd like to volunteer because I'd be helping people
and I think I'd feel productive, and it would be good to get out. But I
don't think I'd know what to do. JUDITH: Do you think everyone who
volunteers there knows what to do beforehand? Can you find out if
there's an orientation? And who is the person you should find if you
have questions? Maybe you need a little more information before you make
the decision. At the end of the discussion, I increase the probability
that Abe will use this technique again:

"Did you find this \[process of listing and weighing advantages and
disadvantages\] useful? Can you think of any other decisions you might
have to make where it would be good to do the same thing? How can you
remember to do it this way?"

GRADED TASK ASSIGNMENTS AND THE STAIRCASE ANALOGY Depressed clients get
easily overwhelmed by tasks they need to accomplish. It's important to
break down larger tasks into manageable parts (Beck et al., 1979). To
reach a goal, you usually need to accomplish a number of tasks or take a
number of steps along the way. Clients tend to become overwhelmed when
they focus on how far they are from a goal, instead of focusing on their
current step. A graphic depiction of the steps is often reassuring
(Figure 19.2).

FIGURE 19.2. Using a staircase metaphor.

JUDITH: Maria, it sounds like you get nervous just thinking about
moving, though it's something you really want to do. MARIA: Yeah.
JUDITH: I wonder how we could break it down into steps; for example,
could you start by deciding which neighborhoods you might want to move
to? MARIA: Yeah. I was thinking of asking my new neighbor for advice.
She did a lot of investigating before she moved next door.

JUDITH: What could the next step be? (Guides Maria in identifying
several additional steps.) Are you still anxious about moving? MARIA:
Yeah, some. JUDITH: (Draws a staircase.) Okay, here's what I want you to
remember. You're going to go step by step, like going up a staircase.
You're not going to move right away. You'll start here (pointing to the
bottom), talking to your neighbor. Then you'll figure out how much you
can afford in rent. Then you'll start looking online for apartments.
Then you can make an appointment to visit the first apartment. Then
you'll visit the first potential apartment. And then the second one.
You'll start here (pointing to bottom step) and just move up one step at
a time (drawing arrow from bottom step to next step). You'll feel more
comfortable at each step before you take another one. You won't jump
from here (pointing to bottom step) all the way up to here (pointing to
the top step). Okay? MARIA: Uh-huh. JUDITH: So every time you start
thinking about the final goal, how about reminding yourself of this
staircase, especially of the step you're now on, and how you're going to
take just one step at a time. Do you think that'll help bring down the
anxiety?

EXPOSURE Depressed and anxious clients often engage in avoidance, a
coping strategy. They may feel hopeless about engaging in certain
activities ("It won't do any good to call my friends. They won't want to
see me") or fearful ("If I \[do this activity\], something bad will
happen"). The avoidance may be quite apparent (e.g., clients who spend a
great deal of time in bed, avoiding selfcare activities, household
tasks, socializing, and errands). Or the avoidance may be more subtle
(e.g., socially anxious clients who avoid making eye contact, smiling at
others, making small talk, and volunteering their opinions). These
latter avoidances are safety behaviors (Salkovskis, 1996). Clients
believe that these behaviors will ward off anxiety or feared outcomes.

While avoidance tends to bring immediate relief (and so is quite
reinforcing), it perpetuates the problem. Clients don't get the
opportunity to test their automatic thoughts and receive disconfirmatory
evidence. When clients are anxious and significantly avoidant, you'll
provide a strong rationale for exposure. Here's what you'd say using a
traditional CBT approach: THERAPIST: Can we talk now about decreasing
your avoidance of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \[the feared situation\]?
Research has shown us that the way to get over a fear of
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ is to expose yourself to it, either in gradual
steps or all at once, whichever you'd like to do. For example, I know
you have cats, so you must not have a fear of them. But if you did, how
would you get over it? We could start by having you look at pictures or
videos of cats and do that until you realized your predictions weren't
accurate, and it's likely that your anxiety would decrease. (pause) Do
you follow me so far? CLIENT: Yes. THERAPIST: Then maybe you'd visit
someone you know who has a cat and is willing to put it in a carrier
bag. Then maybe we'd have you get close to a kitten and work up to
petting it, and so on. The idea is to reduce avoidance so you can learn
whether your beliefs and predictions about cats are accurate. And you
can also learn if you're able to tolerate anxiety. As noted above,
you'll create a hierarchy of avoided situations with clients. Have them
rate how anxious they believe they would be in each situation, 0--100
(or 0--10), and write down the list, with the less anxietyprovoking
activities first; and the most, last. Then find out which activity
clients want to work on in the coming week. Clients usually want to
start with less anxiety-provoking exposures. We usually look for
situations in which they predict they'll be about 30% anxious. But
occasionally a client chooses to engage in the most anxiety-provoking
activity. When they successfully expose themselves to this situation, it
usually speeds up treatment. In a recovery orientation, you would link
exposures to the client's values and aspirations. Here's what you might
say:

"I know it's important to you to be able to visit your grandmother, but
it sounds like your coping strategy of avoidance is getting in the way.
Do you want to take a step toward taking long car rides this week? You
could go somewhere that you think will raise your anxiety only a little
or you can really go for it and choose a place that could lead to much
more anxiety." Whether you formally or informally identify an exposure,
ask clients to engage in the activity every day (if feasible) and stay
in the situation until they find out that the feared outcome doesn't
happen (Craske et al., 2014). We want clients to believe, "This activity
isn't dangerous. I don't need to avoid it. Even if there's a bad
outcome, I can still handle it." If at all possible, have clients engage
in an exposure right in your office or accompany them to another place.
It's important for you and clients to be alert for their use of safety
behaviors. We don't want them to think, "It's good I \[used that safety
behavior\] or something bad really might have happened." Suggest that
they ask themselves during exposures, "Am I doing anything to try to
avert \[the feared consequence\] or to make \[the feared outcome\] less
likely?" Also ask them to monitor their automatic thoughts after each
exposure. They need to be alert for unhelpful cognitions such as "I was
able to tolerate the anxiety this time but next time, I won't be able
to." At the following session, if clients have successfully exposed
themselves to the activity and drawn helpful conclusions, they can
choose a new exposure for the coming week. Imaginal exposure is often
helpful. You can ask clients to imagine entering a situation or engaging
in an activity, especially in two conditions: 1. When clients are too
fearful to do even mild exposures. 2. When it's impractical to do
regular exposures. You can also have clients do virtual reality
exposures in which they enter a "virtual" scenario to test their fears.
Clients are more likely to do daily work on a graded exposure hierarchy
if you ask them to fill out a daily monitor (Figure 19.3). It can be
simple, listing just the date, activity, and level of anxiety. You can
also ask clients to record and then cross off predictions that didn't
come true, which further reminds them of the inaccuracy of many of their
thoughts.

Date

Activity

Predicted level of anxiety (1--100)

Actual level of anxiety (1--100)

90%

60%

12/12 Going to church services

Predictions I won't be able to stand the anxiety. I'll have to leave
services early.

FIGURE 19.3. Exposure monitor.

Clients may also fear, and then avoid, internal stimuli: Experiencing
strong emotion Thinking about upsetting or feared situations Having
painful memories Becoming physiologically aroused Facing physical pain

These clients usually benefit from mindfulness exercises (see Chapter
16) in which they do behavioral experiments to expose themselves to
these stimuli and test their fears. CLINICAL TIPS When clients are quite
fearful of doing exposures, you may need to allow them to use safety
behaviors at first, for example, having someone in the car with them
when they drive across a bridge. But the next step should be entering
the situation without using the safety behavior.

I've given you a broad outline of exposure, but you'll need additional
instruction. Detailed descriptions of the process used to develop
agoraphobic hierarchies can be found in various sources (e.g., Goldstein
& Stainback, 1987). Dobson and Dobson (2018) describe plans for
effective exposure sessions, possible targets, and factors that decrease
the effectiveness of exposure.

ROLE PLAYING

Role playing is a technique that can be used for a wide variety of
purposes. Descriptions of role plays can be found throughout this book,
including ones to uncover automatic thoughts, develop an adaptive
response, and modify intermediate and core beliefs. Role plays are also
useful in learning and practicing social skills. Some clients have weak
social skills in general. Others have good social skills for one kind of
communication (e.g., at work but not at home---or vice versa) but lack
skills to adapt their style when needed. Abe, for example, is reasonably
good at normal social conversation and situations that call for a
caring, empathic stance. I asked him, "If you were sure that your cousin
would react well, what would you say to her about canceling plans at the
last minute?" Abe wasn't sure. He had a skill deficit. So we did a
couple of role plays. First I played Abe. Next he played himself. Then I
asked him whether anything might get in the way of his having a similar
conversation with his cousin. He replied, "She might think I was being
critical of her." In this instance, Abe had both a skill deficit and an
interfering cognition that we needed to address.

USING THE "PIE" TECHNIQUE It's often helpful to clients to see their
ideas in graphic form. A pie chart can be used in many ways, for
instance, helping clients set goals. A pie chart can indicate how much
time they're currently devoting to fulfilling their aspirations or
values (Figure 19.4). Another use of the pie chart is determining
relative responsibility for a given outcome (Figure 19.5).

FIGURE 19.4. Pie charts in goal setting.

FIGURE 19.5. Pie chart for causality.

JUDITH: Abe, how much do you believe it's your fault that your ex-wife
is so mad at you? ABE: 100%. If I hadn't lost my job, we'd probably
still be married. JUDITH: I wonder if there might be any other
explanations? ABE: (Thinks.) Sometimes I wonder if she's really mad at
herself. She thought she'd be happier if we got divorced, but she
doesn't seem to be. JUDITH: Anything else? ABE: I don't know. JUDITH:
Did she get mad even when the marriage was going well? ABE: Yeah, she
tended to be on my back about every little thing. JUDITH: Did she only
get mad at you? ABE: No, she'd get mad at the kids. She'd get mad at her
friends sometimes. Oh, and at her sisters and her parents.

JUDITH: So getting mad seemed to be part of her personality? ABE: Yeah.
I guess so. JUDITH: Would you say she has a hair trigger for getting
mad? ABE: Yeah. That describes her exactly. JUDITH: And you obviously
didn't lose your job to make her mad. ABE: No, of course not. JUDITH:
Could we draw a pie chart? (Draws circle in Figure 19.5.) I'd like to
see how much it's really your fault that she's still mad at you. Okay?
ABE: Sure. JUDITH: How much of her anger do you think is due to her
personality? ABE: (Thinks.) At least 25%. JUDITH: (Sections off 25% of
the circle and labels it "her personality.") And to her hair trigger?
ABE: Maybe another 25%. JUDITH: (Sections off an additional 25% of the
circle and labels it.) And how much is she really mad at herself because
the divorce hasn't made her happier? ABE: 30%? JUDITH: (Sections off 30%
and labels it.) And how much is due to your losing your job? ABE: Well,
there's not much left, is there? 20%, I guess. JUDITH: (Labels the
remaining 20% of the circle.) And obviously, you didn't lose your job to
deliberately make her mad. So now how much do you believe that it's your
fault that your ex-wife is so mad? ABE: Not as much. I guess I didn't
think of all those other reasons. CLINICAL TIPS When investigating the
contribution of alternative explanations, ask clients to estimate the
dysfunctional attribution (in this case, "It's my fault") last so they
will more fully consider all explanations.

SELF-COMPARISONS Clients often have automatic thoughts in the form of
unhelpful comparisons. They compare themselves at present with how they
were

before the onset of their disorder, or with how they would like to be,
or they compare themselves with others who don't have a psychiatric
disorder. Doing so helps to maintain or increase their dysphoria, as it
does with Maria. I help her see that her comparisons are unhelpful. I
then teach her to make more functional comparisons (with herself at her
worst point). JUDITH: Maria, it sounds as if you were comparing yourself
to other people quite a lot this week. MARIA: Yeah, I guess I was.
JUDITH: And it sounds as if that always made your mood worse. MARIA:
Yeah. I mean, look at me. It was so hard just to do basic stuff, like
organizing the living room, paying bills ... JUDITH: Would you be as
hard on yourself, for example, if you had to push yourself because you
had pneumonia? MARIA: No, but then I'd have a legitimate reason to be
tired. JUDITH: Isn't depression a legitimate reason to be tired? Maybe
it's not fair to compare yourself to people who aren't depressed. Do you
remember at the first session when we talked about some of the symptoms
of depression: tiredness, low energy, trouble concentrating, low
motivation, and so on? MARIA: Uh-huh. JUDITH: So maybe there's a
legitimate reason that you have to push yourself, even though other
people don't, or don't have to as much? MARIA: (Sighs.) I guess so ...
JUDITH: Okay, can we go over what you can do when you compare yourself
with others? MARIA: (Nods.) JUDITH: What would happen if you said to
yourself, "Now wait a minute. That's not a reasonable comparison. Let me
compare myself to me at my worst point, before I started therapy, when
my whole apartment was a mess, and I spent all day in bed or on the
couch." MARIA: Well, I'd realize that I'm doing more now. JUDITH: And
would your mood get worse? MARIA: No, probably better. JUDITH: Would you
like to try this comparison as part of your Action Plan? MARIA: Uh-huh.
JUDITH: What do you want to write down?

MARIA: I guess that it's not helpful to compare myself to other people.
JUDITH: Especially people who aren't depressed. And what can you do
instead? MARIA: I could think of what I'm doing now that I wasn't doing
before we started working together. JUDITH: Great---do you want to write
those two things down? Clients may also have automatic thoughts in which
they compare themselves at present to where they would like to be. For
example, they might say, "I should be able to \[work full time\]." Or
they may compare themselves to where they were before they became
depressed ("This used to be so easy for me"). Again, have them focus on
how far they've progressed. CLINICAL TIPS When clients are at their
lowest point, you'll need to modify the approach: "It sounds as if you
feel pretty down when you compare yourself with other people, or with
how you wish you were. I wonder if it might be helpful at these times to
remind yourself that you have a goal list, and that together we're
working on a plan to help you make changes. If you reminded yourself
that you and I are a team working to get you to where you want to be,
what could happen to your mood?"

SUMMARY In summary, there are a great variety of techniques used in CBT.
Some apply across conditions; some are specific to a particular
disorder. Many are adapted from other modalities. These techniques may
influence clients' thinking, behavior, and/or physiological arousal, in
addition to their mood. Some increase positive affect, some decease
negative affect, and some do both. Some techniques help clients regulate
their emotions; others teach them skills. You will select techniques,
provide a rationale, elicit the client's agreement, and then employ
them. Use your conceptualization of the client as a guide. REFLECTION
QUESTIONS

There are so many techniques you can use in CBT. What advice would you
give to a friend who feels overwhelmed at the prospect of how much there
is to learn? Which techniques in this chapter might help?

PRACTICE EXERCISES What is a decision you need to make or can imagine
needing to make? Write out the advantages and disadvantages of one
option versus another option. Also, make a pie diagram showing your
aspirational use of time versus your actual expenditure of time.

20

IMAGERY

clients experience automatic thoughts not only as unspoken words Many in
their minds but also in the form of mental pictures or images (Beck &
Emery, 1985). As I'm sitting here now, I can recall several images I had
today. As I read an email from a friend, I pictured her in my mind. As I
planned a family dinner, I had a visual memory of the last time we all
had a meal together. When my client reported an automatic thought ("\[My
husband\] will blame me"), I envisioned her husband speaking to her with
a mean look on his face. While most imagery is visual, images can be
sensory (such as a tone of voice) or somatic (physiological sensations).
Imagery affects how we feel (influencing both positive and negative
emotions) more than verbal processes (Hackmann et al., 2011). I've found
that many CBT therapists, even very experienced ones, don't use
techniques to induce positive images in their clients and/or fail to
identify and address their clients' important distressing images. This
chapter answers the following questions: How can you help clients create
positive images? How do you identify and educate clients about
spontaneous negative images? How do you intervene therapeutically with
distressing spontaneous images?

INDUCING POSITIVE IMAGES

In previous chapters, we discussed positive imagery in several ways. For
example, we ask clients to imagine achieving their aspirations and goals
and living in accordance with their values---along with the positive
emotions they would experience if they were able to do so. We may ask
clients to envision doing their Action Plans to strengthen their
motivation, identify and resolve potential obstacles, and increase the
likelihood that they will follow through. Below, you'll find five
additional interventions, each of which induces a positive image:
focusing on positive memories, rehearsing adaptive coping techniques,
distancing, substituting positive images, and focusing on positive
aspects of an upcoming situation.

Focusing on Positive Memories Creating vivid positive imagery can
increase clients' positive emotions, motivation, and self-confidence.
You can have clients recall memories, relevant to a current or upcoming
situation, in which they solved problems, coped well with difficult
situations, or experienced success (Hackmann et al., 2011). JUDITH:
\[summarizing\] It sounds to me as if you've lost a lot of confidence in
yourself. Do you think that's right? ABE: (Thinks.) Yes. (pause) I keep
thinking how hard things are. JUDITH: Things really are harder for you
now because of the depression. But I remember you telling me about a
really hard period in your life, when you worked for a contractor one
summer during high school. ABE: Yeah, I didn't really know what I was
doing at first. JUDITH: What happened? ABE: I watched the other guys,
saw what they were doing, and then I tried to do the same thing. JUDITH:
Was it hard the whole summer? ABE: No, eventually I caught on. I mean
the work was physically hard, but I did a good job. JUDITH: Can you
imagine yourself back at that time? Maybe your last day of work? Can you
see yourself? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH: What are you doing? ABE: Helping
another guy putting in beams.

JUDITH: Was it hot? ABE: It sure was. JUDITH: Can you see it in your
mind's eye? It's hot, you're doing this hard work. (pause) How are you
feeling? ABE: Pretty good. JUDITH: Confident? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: Knowing
you were doing something hard but doing it well? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: Can
you see that you're still the same person? Someone who can do hard
things? You have depression, true, but you haven't given up. You do hard
things every day. And some things, like cleaning up around the house,
doing errands, volunteering at the homeless shelter---all of these
things have gotten easier, haven't they? ABE: Yeah, that's true. JUDITH:
Do you think it could help this week if you try to remember more about
that summer in high school, where you were faced with a challenge, a
hard challenge, and you succeeded? And then remind yourself that you're
still the same person and that some things have already become easier.
ABE: Yeah, I could do that.

Rehearsing Adaptive Coping Techniques You use this technique to help
clients practice using coping strategies in imagination. Doing this
usually boosts their confidence and their mood and motivates them to use
these adaptive behaviors between sessions. Here's how I help Abe at one
of our booster sessions. JUDITH: Okay, you're predicting that you're
going to have a rough time on your first day of work? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH:
When will you first notice your anxiety going up? ABE: When I wake up.
JUDITH: And what will be going through your mind? ABE: I'm going to mess
up. JUDITH: What does that look like?

ABE: I'll be sitting in a cubicle, just staring at the computer screen.
JUDITH: Okay, what could you do to calm yourself before you leave for
work? ABE: Remind myself it's natural to feel nervous on your first day
in a job. JUDITH: Can you see yourself doing that? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH:
Okay, what else can you do? ABE: I could do my mindfulness practice.
JUDITH: Can you see yourself doing that? ABE: Yeah. JUDITH: Then what?
ABE: I feel a little better, but I'm still too nervous for breakfast. I
just shower, get dressed, get ready to go. JUDITH: What's going through
your mind? ABE: What if I keep getting more and more nervous? JUDITH:
How about imagining yourself reading those therapy notes we just
composed before you leave your apartment? Can you imagine pulling them
out and reading them? ABE: Yeah ... I guess it helps some. JUDITH: As
you get near the building, can you imagine jumping ahead in time. It's
lunch time, you've mostly been filling out papers, taking a tour, maybe
setting up your email with the IT people ... How do you feel now? ABE:
Some relief. Still worried, but not as bad. JUDITH: Okay, now you've
just come back from lunch. What happens next, and what do you do? Abe
continues to imagine in detail realistically coping with the situation.
Then he writes down the specific techniques he predicts will help.

Distancing Distancing is another induced imagery technique to reduce
distress and help clients view problems in greater perspective. In the
following example, I help Abe see that his difficulties are likely to be
time limited.

JUDITH: Abe, I know you're feeling kind of hopeless now, and you're
predicting that these problems will go on and on. Do you think it would
help if you could envision getting through this rough period? ABE: I
guess. But it's hard to imagine. JUDITH: Well, let's see. How about if
you try to picture yourself a year from now? When you've gotten through
this, and you're feeling better? ABE: Okay. JUDITH: Any idea what life
is like? ABE: I don't know. It's hard for me to think that far ahead.
JUDITH: Well, let's be concrete. When do you wake up? Where are you?
ABE: Probably I wake up around 7 o'clock or 7:30. I guess I'm in my same
apartment. JUDITH: Okay, can you see yourself waking up? What do you
want to imagine you're doing next? Helping Abe visualize a day in the
future when his mood and functioning have improved creates hope and
motivation.

Substituting Positive Images Substituting a more pleasant image has been
extensively described elsewhere (e.g., Beck & Emery, 1985). It, too,
must be regularly practiced for the client to experience relief from
distressing spontaneous images. It's appropriate to use this technique
only intermittently when clients experience negative images. If negative
images are part of a dysfunctional thought process, then techniques like
mindfulness are more suitable. JUDITH: Abe, another way of dealing with
this kind of upsetting image is to substitute a different one. Some
people like to imagine that the distressing image is a picture on a
television set. Then they imagine changing the channel to a different
scene, like lying on a beach, or walking through the woods, or recalling
a pleasant memory. Would you like to try this technique? ABE: Yeah.
JUDITH: First, you'll picture the pleasant scene in as much detail as
possible, using as many senses as possible; then I'll have you practice
switching

from a distressing image to the pleasant one. Now, what pleasant scene
would you like to imagine?

Focusing on Positive Aspects of a Situation Another type of induced
image is designed to allow clients to view a situation more positively.
One client, who feared undergoing a Cesarean section, envisioned the
excited face of her partner, holding her hand; the kind and caring faces
of the nurses and doctor; and then the wonderful image of holding her
newborn child.

IDENTIFYING NEGATIVE IMAGES Although many clients have automatic
thoughts in the form of negative visual images, few are aware of them
initially. These spontaneous images may last just for milliseconds.
Merely asking about them, even repeatedly, is often insufficient. When
clients do have distressing images, it's useful to teach them imaginal
techniques. Unaddressed images usually result in continued distress.
Here's how I identify one of Abe's negative spontaneous image that
involves his ex-wife. JUDITH: \[summarizing\] Did I get this right? You
were thinking about this upcoming family dinner at your son's house and
you thought, "What if Rita criticizes me in front of the family?" ABE:
Yes. JUDITH: Did you imagine what the scene would look like? ABE: I'm
not sure. JUDITH: \[helping Abe to think very specifically\] Could you
picture it now? Where would this come up? In the living room or kitchen?
Or as you're sitting around the dinner table? ABE: Around the dinner
table. JUDITH: Okay, can you picture it now? It's Saturday night, you're
all sitting around the dinner table ... Can you see it in your mind?
ABE: Yes.

JUDITH: What's happening? ABE: We're talking about the Fourth of July
holiday, and Rita says, "Abe, you know you'll just drag everyone down."
JUDITH: When she says that, what does her face look like? ABE: Kind of
mean. JUDITH: Do you think that image flashed through your mind when you
were thinking about the family dinner? ABE: Yeah, I think so. JUDITH:
Okay. \[providing psychoeducation\] That picture, what you were
imagining, is what we call an image. It's an automatic thought in
another form.

TEACHING CLIENTS ABOUT DISTRESSING IMAGES Clients may not grasp the
concept of images if you only use that one term. Synonyms include mental
picture, daydream, fantasy, imagining, movie in your mind, and memory.
Had Abe failed to report an image, I might have tried using one of these
different words. Or I might have reminded him that we created an image
in our first therapy session when we identified his aspirations and
goals. You must often be diligent in teaching clients to identify images
until they "catch on." Most clients simply are unaware of images
initially, and many therapists, after a few tries, abandon the attempt.
If you get a visual image yourself as the client is describing a
situation, you can use it as a cue to probe further. "Abe, as you were
just describing walking into the homeless shelter and feeling
overwhelmed, I got a picture of it in my head, even though obviously I
don't know what the shelter looks like. (pause) Have you been imagining
what happens as you walk in?" CLINICAL TIPS A few clients can identify
images but don't report them because their images are graphic and
distressing. They may be reluctant to reexperience the distress or fear
you will view them as disturbed. If you suspect either scenario,
normalize the experience.

"Lots of people have visual images either instead of or along with their
other automatic thoughts. But usually we don't realize it. Sometimes
images seem pretty strange, but actually it's common to have all kinds
of images---sad, scary, even violent ones. The only problem is if you
think you're strange for having an image."

MODIFYING SPONTANEOUS NEGATIVE IMAGES There are two kinds of spontaneous
negative images you'll address in treatment. The first kind occurs
repeatedly and is experienced as intrusive. You can view them as an
unhelpful thought process and use mindfulness techniques (Chapter 16).
When images aren't part of a thought process, there are several
strategies you can teach clients: changing the "movie," following the
image to completion, and reality testing the image. Advise clients that
they'll need to practice the techniques in and out of session to use
them effectively when their distressing images spontaneously arise.

Changing the "Movie" Abe reported a spontaneous image he had recently.
He saw himself sitting alone in his apartment during the upcoming
weekend, feeling sad and lonely. I educate him about images and help him
create a new "movie." JUDITH: Abe, you don't have to be at the mercy of
your images. You can change them, if you want. It's as if you're a movie
director. You can decide how you want them to be instead. ABE: I'm not
sure I understand how to do that. JUDITH: Well, okay, you said you saw
yourself sitting on the couch, feeling really sad. What do you wish
would happen next? ABE: Umm, maybe that my daughter calls and invites me
over for dinner. JUDITH: Can you imagine picking up the phone? How do
you feel when she invites you over? ABE: Better. JUDITH: Is there any
other scenario you'd like to imagine?

ABE: Maybe that I call my cousin and she wants to do something with me.
JUDITH: That's a better movie too. ABE: But how do I know they'll come
true? JUDITH: Well, first of all, neither of us really knows if you'll
actually end up sitting on the couch, all weekend. What we do know is
that imagining it makes you feel really sad now. Second, maybe we could
talk about how to make it more likely that there really is a better
ending. What could you do to make it more likely that you'd get together
with your daughter or your cousin?

Following Images to Conclusion Three techniques help you and clients
conceptualize a problem and do cognitive restructuring, to provide
relief. 1. Help clients imagine coping with a difficult situation until
they've gotten through a crisis or resolved a problem. 2. Suggest that
clients imagine the near future when they keep imagining one problem
after another after another. 3. Ask clients to jump to the far future
(and, when relevant, discuss the meaning of a catastrophe).

Coping with Difficult Experiences Clients usually feel better and more
self-confident when they picture themselves getting through a stressful
event. JUDITH: Okay, Abe, can you get that image in mind again about
being interviewed for the job? Tell it to me aloud as you imagine it as
vividly as you can. ABE: I'm sitting in an office. The interviewer is
asking me what happened in my last job. My mind is going blank. I'm
paralyzed. JUDITH: And you're feeling ...? ABE: Really, really anxious.
JUDITH: Anything else happen? ABE: No.

JUDITH: Okay. \[providing psychoeducation\] This is typical. Your mind
automatically stops the image at the very worst point. Now I'd like you
to imagine what happens next. ABE: Hmm. I'm not sure. JUDITH: Well, do
you stay that way for the whole interview? ABE: No, I guess not. JUDITH:
Can you picture what happens next? ... Do you begin to talk? ABE: I
guess so. JUDITH: What do you see happening next? ABE: I kind of
sputter. I tell him that I had done a really good job for over 20 years,
but I got a new boss who changed my job and didn't support me when I
needed help. JUDITH: That's really good! Then what happens? Can you see
it in your mind's eye? ABE: He asks me another question about how the
job changed. JUDITH: Then what? ABE: I answer it okay. JUDITH: Then
what? ABE: I guess we keep talking until he runs out of questions.
JUDITH: Then what? ABE: He thanks me for coming in and shakes my hand
and I leave. JUDITH: And how are you feeling in the image now? ABE: A
little shaky. But okay. JUDITH: Better than at the start when you were
feeling blank and paralyzed? ABE: Yes. Much better.

Jumping to the Near Future Following an image to the end can be
ineffective when clients keep imagining more and more obstacles or
distressing events with no end in sight. At this point, you might
suggest that clients imagine themselves at some point in the near
future, when they're feeling somewhat better. JUDITH: \[summarizing\]
Okay, Abe, when you imagine doing your taxes, you keep seeing how hard
it is and how much effort it's taking and how many problems you're
having with it. Realistically, do you think you'll eventually finish
them?

ABE: Yeah, probably. I might have to work on them for days though.
JUDITH: Could you imagine jumping ahead in time and finishing them? Can
you picture that? What does it look like? ABE: Well, I guess I see
myself looking them over one last time. Then I print them out and mail
them. JUDITH: Could you slow it down a little, really imagine the
details? When is it? Where are you? ABE: Okay. I'm sitting at the table.
It's Sunday, late afternoon. It's hard, and my attention wanders, but I
finally finish looking over the form for mistakes. JUDITH: So, you're
finished. How do you feel? ABE: (Sighs.) Relieved ... like a weight has
been taken off my chest. Lighter. JUDITH: Okay, let's review what we
did. You had an image of yourself starting to work on your taxes, and
the more you imagined, the more problems you saw. Then you jumped ahead
in time and saw yourself finishing them, which made you feel better. Can
we write something down about this technique---jumping ahead in
time---so you'll be able to practice it at home too?

Jumping to the Far Future Sometimes when you guide clients to imagine
what happens next, they visualize the scene worsening catastrophically.
If so, question clients to determine the meaning of the catastrophe and
intervene accordingly. JUDITH: Okay, Maria, so you see your friend in
intensive care. What's happening to her? MARIA: They're trying to help
her, but she's too weak from the cancer. She stops breathing. JUDITH:
(gently) Then what? MARIA: (crying) She's dead. JUDITH: Then what
happens? MARIA: I don't know. I can't see past that. (still crying)
JUDITH: Maria, I think it'll help if we try to go a little further.
What's the worst part about your friend dying? What does it mean to you?
MARIA: I can't survive without her! My life is ruined!

In this example, following the image to completion leads to a
catastrophe. I empathize with Maria. Then I gently ask her if she's
willing to imagine what she is doing and how she is feeling at her
friend's funeral, then a year later, then 5 years later, and finally 10
years later. She is able to see herself with a new best friend in 5
years' time, and she's feeling somewhat better. Jumping ahead in time
allows her to see that while she will always feel sorrow, she will be
able to continue on with her life and experience peace again. She then
feels less desperate about losing this relationship.

Reality Testing the Image Another technique is to teach clients to treat
images as verbal automatic thoughts, using standard Socratic
questioning. I teach Maria to compare a spontaneous image with what is
really happening. MARIA: I was out really late last night. When I got to
the parking lot, I suddenly saw myself feeling really sick and passing
out and having no one there to help me. JUDITH: Was that accurate? Was
the parking lot deserted? MARIA: (Thinks.) No. There were a couple of
other people there. JUDITH: Okay. With this kind of image, when you're
spontaneously imagining something happening right at the moment, you can
do a reality check. You can ask yourself, "Is the parking lot actually
deserted? Am I actually feeling really sick right now?" If you had known
to do that last night, what do you think would have happened to your
mood? MARIA: I guess I might have felt a little less nervous. In
general, it is preferable to use techniques in imagery form or combined
with verbal techniques when dealing with images, rather than verbal
techniques alone. However, clients who have many vivid, distressing
images will benefit from a variety of techniques, and sometimes the
verbal technique of a reality check is helpful.

SUMMARY

Imagery can be used in various ways to heighten positive emotion,
increase confidence, rehearse the use of coping techniques, and change
cognition. When clients experience negative images, you may need to use
persistent (though gentle and nonintrusive) questioning to help clients
recognize their images. Clients who have frequent, distressing images
benefit from either regular practice of several imagery techniques or,
if their images are intrusive, mindfulness techniques. Imagery can be
used to modify negative core beliefs by reframing the meaning of
significant adverse life events (see Appendix D). It can also be used
more extensively to create and reinforce new ways of being (Hackmann et
al., 2011; Padesky & Mooney, 2005). REFLECTION QUESTIONS Why might you
induce a positive image with clients? How would you do that? How might
you use imaginal techniques to help a client who has had a distressing
negative image?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Try to recall a distressing image you've had. For
example, did you feel nervous before you saw your first client? Did you
have a mental picture of him or her? Or maybe you had an upsetting image
when you were thinking about an upcoming interpersonal interaction (a
meeting, a confrontation, a large social gathering, or a presentation)
that you thought might be stressful. Did you picture others' faces? Body
language? What emotion did you imagine they would be feeling? What did
you imagine they would say? Get the image as clearly in mind as you can.
Then use techniques in this chapter to respond to the image.

21

TERMINATION AND RELAPSE PREVENTION

shows that sessions focused on relapse prevention help delay Research
the onset of relapse and recurrence among depressed clients (de Jonge et
al., 2019). The traditional objectives of CBT have been to facilitate a
remission of clients' disorders and to teach them skills they can use
throughout their lifetime to reduce or prevent relapse. While these
objectives are still critical, we now put additional emphases on
enhancing positive mood, increasing valued action, strengthening
resilience, and improving satisfaction and general well-being. In this
chapter, you will find answers to these questions: How do you prepare
clients for termination? What do you do from the beginning of treatment?
What do you do throughout and at the end of treatment? How do you taper
therapy sessions? What does a self-therapy session look like? How do you
prepare clients for potential setbacks or relapse? How do clients react
to ending treatment? How should you conduct booster sessions?

EARLY TREATMENT ACTIVITIES

You begin to prepare clients for termination and relapse even in the
initial session, telling them your goal is to teach them skills so they
can become their own therapist---which also helps speed up treatment. As
soon as clients begin to feel better (often within the first few weeks),
it's important to let them know that their recovery will probably not
follow a straight line. You might draw them a graph (Figure 21.1)
showing them the usual course of progress, with periods of improvement
that are typically interrupted (temporarily) by plateaus, fluctuations,
or setbacks.

FIGURE 21.1. Graph of expected progress. This graph, if skillfully
drawn, can be made to resemble the southern border of the United States,
with setbacks represented by "Texas" and "Florida." While striking some
clients and therapists as humorous, this illustration may help clients
recall that setbacks are normal.

JUDITH: Abe, I'm glad you're feeling a little better. But I should tell
you that you may still have ups and downs. Can I draw a graph to show
you? ABE: Uh-huh.

JUDITH: (drawing) If you're like most people, you'll go along feeling a
little better and a little better; then at some point, you'll reach a
temporary plateau or have a setback. That may last for a little while,
then you'll feel a little better and a little better, and then you may
have another setback, maybe shorter this next time. If you continue to
use your skills though, you'll start making progress again, until you're
over the depression. (Points to the graph.) Can you see that this graph
looks a little like the southern border of the United States? So if you
have a setback, it just means you're visiting Texas. Pretty soon you'll
continue on to Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama. Then you'll go to
Florida, maybe with a detour to Miami. But then you'll recover and get
better and get up to Maine. (pause) But if you didn't know that it's
normal to visit Texas, what might you think? ABE: That I'm back to
square one. That I'm not going to get better. JUDITH: Exactly. You'll
need to remind yourself that it's normal to have ups and downs ... You
can remember this diagram where we predicted some low points. ABE:
(taking the graph) Okay. JUDITH: Now, even after we're finished therapy,
you'll have at least mild ups and downs. Everyone does. Of course, by
then, you'll have the tools you need to help yourself. Or you may want
to come in again for a session or two. We'll talk about this toward the
end of treatment.

ACTIVITIES THROUGHOUT THERAPY Certain techniques, used throughout
treatment, will facilitate relapse prevention.

Attributing Progress to the Client Be alert at every session for
opportunities to reinforce clients for their progress. When they
experience an improvement in mood, find out why they think they are
feeling better. Emphasize the idea, whenever possible, that they
themselves have brought about changes in their mood by making changes in
their thinking and behavior. Point out or ask clients to state what

these positive changes mean about them. Doing these things helps build
their sense of self-efficacy. JUDITH: It sounds as if your depression is
lower this week. Why do you think that is? ABE: I'm not sure. JUDITH:
Did you do anything differently this week? Did you do the activities we
scheduled? Or did you respond to your negative thoughts? ABE: Yeah. I
cleaned up the apartment some, and I got out almost every day. And I
read the therapy notes. JUDITH: Is it possible you're feeling better
this week because you did these things? ABE: Yes, I think so. JUDITH: So
what can you say about how you made progress? ABE: I guess when I do
things to help myself, I do feel better. JUDITH: That's good. And I
think it also shows that even though you're still depressed, you're now
able to take more control. ABE: I guess I am. JUDITH: \[summarizing\] So
you're feeling better, at least in part, because you took control. This
is so important! How about if we write that down? Some clients attribute
all the improvement to a change in circumstance (e.g., "I'm feeling
better because my daughter called me") or to medication. Acknowledge the
external factors, but also ask about changes they made that could have
contributed to (or helped maintain) their improvement. When clients
persist in believing that they don't deserve credit, you might decide to
elicit their underlying belief ("What does it mean to you that I'm
trying to give you credit?").

Teaching Skills When teaching clients techniques and skills, stress that
these are lifelong tools they can use in situations now and in the
future. Research shows that using CBT skills improves outcomes in
clients with recurrent depression, even in the face of stressful life
events (Vittengl et al., 2019). Encourage clients to read and organize
their therapy notes so they can easily refer to them in the future. A
good Action Plan item is to write a synopsis of the

important points and skills they learned in treatment. Common techniques
and skills that can be used during and after therapy include the
following: Setting goals in accordance with their aspirations and
values. Measuring progress toward achieving their goals. Using CBT
techniques to overcome obstacles. Monitoring positive experiences and
drawing conclusions about what these experiences indicate about the
client. Balancing productive, pleasurable, self-care, and social
activities. Giving self-credit. Cultivating positive memories. Reducing
large goals, problems, or tasks to manageable components. Brainstorming
solutions to problems. Identifying advantages and disadvantages (of
specific thoughts, beliefs, or behaviors, or choices when making a
decision). Using worksheets or a list of Socratic questions to evaluate
thoughts and beliefs. Working on hierarchies of avoided tasks or
situations.

Help clients understand how they can use these skills in other
situations during and after therapy, whenever they perceive they're
having a reaction that seems out of proportion to the situation. For
example, they may recognize that they're feeling more anger, anxiety,
sadness, or embarrassment than a situation calls for. Or perhaps they
see a pattern of unhelpful behavior that they want to change.

Building Resilience and Well-Being There are a number of ways to help
clients become more resilient and increase their sense of well-being. A
good guide is provided by the American Psychological Association
(www.apa.org/helpcenter/roadresilience). It stresses many of the
interventions in this book: making connections, modifying catastrophic
thinking, maintaining optimism about the future, accepting situations or
conditions that can't be changed, working toward goals, decreasing
avoidance when challenges occur, identifying ways to grow as a person
when encountering adversity, strengthening positive core beliefs,
seeking a broader perspective in stressful situations, doing good
self-care, and engaging in meditation or a spiritual practice.

Clients often lose confidence in themselves when they become depressed.
It's critical for them to build their resilience and increase their
confidence so they can handle difficult times in the future without
becoming depressed again. Many techniques from positive psychology, as
described by Martin Seligman, PhD, in books for consumers, and from many
other authors writing for professionals (e.g., Bannink, 2012; Chaves et
al., 2019; Jeste & Palmer, 2015), promote a better sense of well-being.

NEAR-TERMINATION ACTIVITIES Tapering Treatment If a client has a limited
number of sessions with you, discuss tapering several weeks before
termination. If there isn't a limit, hold this discussion when clients
are feeling at least somewhat better and are using their skills
consistently and effectively. Your objective is not to solve all your
clients' problems or to help them reach all their goals. In fact, if you
view yourself as responsible to do this, you risk engendering or
reinforcing dependence--- and you deprive clients of the opportunity to
test and strengthen their skills. Make a collaborative decision to space
sessions as an experiment. Initially, consider meeting every other week
instead of every week. If that goes well for at least a couple of
sessions, you might suggest scheduling the following appointment for 3
or 4 weeks in the future. You might have several monthly sessions before
termination and several widely spaced booster sessions after that.

Concerns about Tapering Sessions Although some clients readily agree to
spacing sessions, others may become anxious. If so, ask them to verbally
list (and perhaps record in writing) the advantages and disadvantages of
trying to reduce the frequency of their visits (Figure 21.2). When
clients fail to see advantages, first elicit disadvantages, use guided
discovery to help them identify advantages, and then help them reframe
the disadvantages. Some clients, like Maria, might have a strong
reaction that you need to attend to.

Advantages of Tapering Sessions Save money. Can use the time for
something else. I'll be proud of myself for solving my own problems. It
will boost my confidence. Won't have to travel to \[my therapist's\]
office. Disadvantages with Reframe I might relapse, but if I'm going to,
it's better for it to happen while I'm still in therapy so I can learn
how to handle it. I may not be able to solve problems myself, but
tapering therapy gives me the chance to test my idea that I need \[my
therapist\]. In the long run, it's better for me to learn to solve
problems myself, because I won't be in therapy forever. I can always
schedule an earlier session if I need to. I'll miss \[my therapist\].
This is probably true, but I'll be able to tolerate it and it will
encourage me to build up a support network. FIGURE 21.2. Client's list
of advantages and disadvantages of tapering therapy.

JUDITH: In our last session, we talked about experimenting with spacing
our therapy sessions. Did you think about going to an every-other-week
schedule? MARIA: I did. It made me really anxious. JUDITH: What went
through your mind? MARIA: Oh, what if something happens that I can't
deal with? What if I start getting more depressed---I couldn't stand
that. JUDITH: Did you answer these thoughts back? MARIA: Yeah. I read my
therapy notes. I mean, it doesn't have to be the absolute end of
therapy. And you did say I could call you and come in sooner if I needed
to. JUDITH: That's right. Did you imagine a specific situation that
might come up that would be difficult? MARIA: No, not really. JUDITH:
Maybe it would help if we had you imagine a specific problem now. MARIA:
Okay. Maria imagines getting into another fight with her best friend.
She identifies and responds to her automatic thoughts and makes a
specific plan for what to do next.

JUDITH: Now, let's talk about the second automatic thought you had about
spacing our sessions---that you'd get more depressed and that you
wouldn't be able to stand it. MARIA: I guess that may not be quite true.
I could stand to feel bad again. But I wouldn't like it. JUDITH: Okay.
Now let's say you do get more depressed and it's still a week and a half
before our next session. What can you do? MARIA: Well, I can do what I
did about a month ago when you were on vacation. Reread my therapy
notes, stay active ... Somewhere in my notes I have a list of things to
do. JUDITH: Would it be helpful to find that list this week? MARIA:
Yeah. JUDITH: Okay. How about for your Action Plan if you find the list
and also do a worksheet on these two thoughts: "Something might happen
that I couldn't deal with" and "I couldn't stand it if I got more
depressed." MARIA: Okay. JUDITH: Any other thoughts about spacing our
sessions? MARIA: Just that I'd miss not having you to talk to every
week. JUDITH: (genuinely) I'll miss that too. (pause) Is there anyone
else you could talk to, even a little? MARIA: Well, I could call
Rebecca. And I guess I could call my brother. JUDITH: Those sound like
good ideas. Do you want to write them down to do too? MARIA: Yes.
JUDITH: And finally, do you remember that we said we could experiment
with every-other-week sessions? If it's not working well, I do want you
to call me so we can decide together if you should come in sooner.

SELF-THERAPY SESSIONS Although many clients don't follow through with
formal self-therapy sessions, it's nevertheless useful to discuss a
self-therapy plan (see Figure 21.3) and to encourage its use. When
clients try self-therapy sessions while regular therapy sessions are
still being tapered, they are much more likely to do self-therapy after
termination. And they can discover potential problems:

insufficient time, misunderstandings about what to do, and interfering
thoughts (e.g., "This is too much work"; "I don't really need to do it";
"I can't do it on my own"). In addition to helping clients respond to
these cognitions, you can elicit the advantages of self-therapy
sessions: They are continuing therapy, but at their own convenience and
without charge; they can keep their newly acquired tools fresh and ready
to use. They can resolve difficulties before they become major problems.
They reduce the possibility of relapse. They can use their skills to
enrich their life in a variety of contexts.

Think about the past week(s): What positive things have happened? What
did these experiences mean to me? About me? What do I deserve credit
for? What problems came up? If they're not resolved, what do I need to
do? Did I complete the Action Plan? What could get in the way of
completing it this coming week? Look forward: How do I want to feel by
this time next week? What do I need to do to make that happen? What
goals do I have for this week? What steps should I take? What obstacles
could get in the way? Should I consider Doing worksheets? Scheduling
pleasure, mastery, self-care, or social activities? Reading therapy
notes? Practicing skills such as mindfulness? Keeping a credit list or
positive experience list?

FIGURE 21.3. Guide to self-therapy sessions.

You can review Figure 21.3 with clients and tailor it to meet their
needs. Before your final session with clients, encourage them to
continue having self-therapy sessions at least once a month, then once a
season, and eventually, once a year. Help them devise a system so
they'll remember to do this.

PREPARING FOR SETBACKS AFTER TERMINATION As you near the end of clients'
regularly scheduled appointments, ask them what automatic thoughts they
may have if they experience a setback. Sometimes clients predict they'll
think: "I shouldn't be feeling \[down\] this way" "This means I'm not
getting better" "I'm hopeless" "I'll never be able to get well and stay
well" "My therapist will be disappointed" or "My therapist didn't do a
good job" "CBT really didn't work for me" "I'm doomed to be depressed
forever" "It was only a fluke that I felt better before" Or clients may
report an image of themselves in the future, for example, feeling
frightened, alone, sad, huddled in bed. Socratic questioning and
imaginal techniques can help them respond to these distressing
cognitions.

Recognizing the Signs of a Setback or Relapse Toward the end of
treatment, it's helpful to discuss with clients the early warning signs
they might experience that indicate they're starting to

become depressed again and make sure to record them in their therapy
notes. Therapy notes should also contain important points to remember
and instructions on what to do if their symptoms recur (see Figure
21.4). Early warning signs---Sad mood, anxiety, rumination, spending too
much time on the couch, desire to avoid socializing, letting apartment
get messy, procrastinating (e.g., not paying bills), trouble sleeping,
self-criticism. What to remember---I have a choice. I can catastrophize
about the setback, think things are hopeless, and probably feel worse.
Or I can look back over my therapy notes, remember that setbacks are a
normal part of recovery, and see what I can learn. Doing these things
will probably make me feel better and make the setback less severe. What
to do---If some of these things happen, have a self-therapy session. Set
new goals, evaluate automatic thoughts, schedule activities, do
mindfulness if I'm ruminating, see what problems need solving, and
especially---reach out for help---to kids and to Charlie. If this isn't
enough, call Judith so we can decide together whether I should return to
treatment, probably briefly. FIGURE 21.4. Abe's therapy notes about
setbacks.

Clients' Reactions to Termination As termination approaches, it's
important to elicit clients' automatic thoughts about ending treatment.
Some clients are excited and hopeful. At the other extreme, some clients
are fearful or even angry. Most have some mixed feelings. They are
pleased with their progress but concerned about relapse. Often, they are
sorry to end their relationship with you. Make sure to acknowledge what
clients are feeling and help them respond to distortions or unhelpful
cognitions. It's often desirable for you to express your own genuine
feelings, if you can honestly say that you regret the ending of the
relationship but feel pride in what clients have achieved---and that you
believe they're ready to make it on their own. Some clients say, "I wish
you could be my friend." A good response, but only if you mean it, is
"Wouldn't that be nice? But then I couldn't be your therapist in the
future if you needed me. And it's important to me to be here for you."

BOOSTER SESSIONS Encourage clients to schedule booster sessions after
termination; a good schedule is after 3, 6, and 12 months. You can give
clients the "Guide to Booster Sessions" (Figure 21.5); you can also use
it to structure these sessions. Knowing in advance that you'll ask them
about their progress in doing self-therapy may motivate them to do their
Action Plans and practice their skills. And when clients know they are
scheduled for booster sessions after termination, their anxiety about
maintaining progress may decrease. 1. Schedule ahead---make definite
appointments, if possible, and call to confirm. 2. Consider coming as a
preventive measure, even if you have been maintaining your progress. 3.
Prepare before you come. Decide what would be helpful to discuss,
including the following: a. What has gone well? What do these
experiences imply about you? About how others see you? About the future?
b. How much do you believe your new core beliefs---at both an
intellectual and emotional level? How can you keep strengthening them?
c. To what degree are you living in accordance with your values? What
goals do you have now? What obstacles might arise? How can you handle
them? d. What CBT techniques have you been using? Did you have
self-therapy sessions? Would they be useful to have in the future?

FIGURE 21.5. Guide to Booster Sessions.

SUMMARY In summary, relapse prevention is carried out throughout
treatment. It's important to prepare clients for an upcoming tapering of
sessions and the ending of treatment. Particular interventions are
important at this time, including encouraging clients to do self-therapy
sessions, identifying early warning signs of a potential setback or
relapse, and creating a plan of what clients can do if they become more
symptomatic. Problems in tapering sessions and in termination are
addressed as any other problems, with a combination of problem solving
and responding to dysfunctional thoughts

and beliefs. Clients' concerns or regrets about ending treatment need to
be handled sensitively. REFLECTION QUESTIONS What can you do to decrease
clients' distress about termination? What can you do to increase the
likelihood that they will continue to use their CBT skills after
termination?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Imagine that you're a client who is nearing the end of
treatment. Write a therapy note that will help you with your anxiety.

22

PROBLEMS IN THERAPY

of one kind or another arise with many clients. Even Problems
experienced therapists encounter difficulties at times when establishing
the therapeutic relationship, conceptualizing a client's difficulties,
or consistently working toward joint objectives. You shouldn't be able
to help every client (or help every client enough). I certainly haven't
helped every client over the course of my career. It's not reasonable to
expect yourself to avoid problems. It is reasonable to develop your
skills in uncovering problems, specifying them, conceptualizing how they
arose, and developing a plan to remediate them. It's useful to view
problems or stuck points in therapy as opportunities for you to refine
your conceptualization of the client. In addition, problems in therapy
often provide insight into problems the client experiences outside the
office. Finally, difficulties with one client provide an opportunity for
you to refine your own skills, to promote your flexibility and
creativity, and to gain new understandings and expertise in helping
other clients, as problems can arise related to both clients'
characteristics and therapists' relative weaknesses. This chapter
describes how to identify difficulties in treatment and how to
conceptualize and remediate these problems. You will find the answers to
these questions in this chapter: How do you know if there's a problem in
treatment? How can you conceptualize problems? What kind of problems can
arise? What can you do at stuck points?

How can you remediate problems?

UNCOVERING THE EXISTENCE OF A PROBLEM You can uncover a problem in a
several ways: By listening to clients' unsolicited feedback and by
directly eliciting their feedback, during and at the end of the session.
By periodically asking clients to summarize what you've just discussed
in session and checking on their depth of understanding and agreement.
By tracking improvement according to objective tests and the client's
subjective reports, and measuring progress toward goals. By reviewing
recordings of therapy sessions alone or with a colleague or supervisor
and rating the tape on the Cognitive Therapy Rating Scale
(beckinstitute.org/CBTresources).

Elicit clients' permission to record therapy sessions to review with a
peer or an experienced and competent CBT therapist or supervisor.
Obtaining clients' consent is usually not a problem if you present it in
a positive light: "I have an unusual opportunity for you that I can only
offer a few clients \[or 'that I'm only offering to you'\]. I want you
to feel free to say yes or no. I occasionally record therapy sessions so
\[my supervisor\] and I can listen to them and figure out how I might be
able to be more helpful. If we record our sessions, you'll get the
benefit of \[his or her\] input. I'll keep your name confidential, and
we'll delete the recording immediately after listening to it. (pause) Is
it okay with you if we start taping the session now? If it bothers you
after a few minutes, we can always turn it off or delete the recording
at the end of the session."

CONCEPTUALIZING PROBLEMS

Having recognized that a problem exists, try to understand your clients'
internal reality. How do they view themselves, others, and their world?
How do they process their experiences? What obstacles might inhibit
their ability to take a more functional perspective of their
difficulties? Be alert for automatic thoughts blaming clients (e.g.,
"They're resistant/manipulative/unmotivated"). These labels tend to
alleviate a therapist's sense of responsibility for resolving the
difficulty and to interfere with problem solving. Instead, ask yourself:
"What has the client said (or not said) or done (or not done) in session
(or between sessions) that's a problem?"

You might ask the same question about yourself, to rule out a mistake
you may have made. Next, you would ideally consult with a supervisor who
has reviewed a recording of the entire therapy session. You will
undoubtedly need help in determining whether the problem is related to
the client's dysfunctional cognitions and behaviors, errors you have
made, treatment factors (such as the level of care, format of therapy,
or session frequency), and/or factors external to treatment (e.g., an
organic disease, a psychologically toxic home or work environment,
ineffective medication or deleterious side effects, or an absence of
needed adjunctive treatments; J. S. Beck, 2005). Having identified a
problem that calls for a change in what you're doing, conceptualize the
level at which the problem occurred: Is it merely a technical problem?
For example, did you use an inappropriate technique or use a technique
incorrectly? Is it a more complex problem with the session as a whole?
For example, did you correctly identify a key dysfunctional cognition
but then fail to intervene effectively? Is there an ongoing problem
across several sessions? For example, has there been a breakdown in
collaboration?

TYPES OF PROBLEMS

Typically, problems occur in one or more of the following categories: 1.
Diagnosis, conceptualization, and treatment planning 2. The therapeutic
relationship 3. Motivation 4. Structure and pace of the session 5.
Socialization to treatment 6. Responding to dysfunctional cognitions 7.
Accomplishing therapeutic goals in and across sessions 8. Processing
session content

The following questions can help you and your supervisor specify the
nature of a therapeutic problem. Then you can formulate, prioritize, and
select one or more specific objectives on which to focus.

Diagnosis, Conceptualization, and Treatment Planning Diagnosis "Have I
made a correct diagnosis according to the latest Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) or International
Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems
(ICD)?" "Is a medication or medical consult indicated for this client?"

Conceptualization "Have I identified the client's positive beliefs,
attributes, strengths, and resources?" "Have I continually refined the
CCD to identify his most central dysfunctional cognitions and
behaviors?" "Do I continually share my conceptualization with her at
strategically appropriate times? Does the conceptualization make sense
and 'ring true' to her?"

Treatment Planning

"Have I based treatment on my individual conceptualization of the
client? Do I continually modify his treatment when needed, based on my
conceptualization?" "Have I varied standard CBT, when needed, for her
strong preferences and relevant characteristics: gender, culture, age,
education level, and so forth?" "Have I addressed the need for a major
life change (e.g., a new job, a new living situation) if it's apparent
that improvement via therapy alone is unlikely?" "Have I incorporated
skills training when needed?" "Have I included family members in
treatment as appropriate?"

The Therapeutic Relationship Collaboration "Have the client and I truly
been collaborating? Are we functioning as a team? Are we both working
hard? Do we both feel responsible for progress?" "Have we been working
on what's most important to him?" "Have we agreed on the goals for
treatment?" "Have I elicited agreement with and provided the rationale
for interventions and Action Plans?" "Have I guided her to an
appropriate level of adherence and control in the therapy session?"

Feedback "Have I regularly encouraged the client to provide honest
feedback?" "Have I monitored his affect during the session and elicited
automatic thoughts when I noticed a shift?" "Have I responded
effectively to her negative feedback?"

Client's View of Therapy and Therapist "Does the client have a positive
view of therapy and of me?" "Does he believe, at least to some degree,
that therapy can help?" "Does he see me as competent, collaborative, and
caring?"

Therapist's Reactions "Do I care about this client? Does my caring come
across?" "Do I feel competent to help her? Does my sense of competence
come across?" "Do I have negative cognitions about her or about myself
with respect to this client? Have I evaluated and responded to these
cognitions?" "Do I see problems in the therapeutic alliance as an
opportunity for enhancing progress versus assigning blame?" "Do I
project a realistically upbeat and optimistic view of how therapy can
help?"

Motivation "How motivated does the client seem?" "What have I done to
motivate him? Do we regularly link his goals and actions to his
aspirations and values?" "Does he see advantages for not getting
better?" \[When relevant\] "Have I addressed his sense of helplessness
or hopelessness?"

Structuring and Pacing the Therapy Session Agenda "Do we quickly set a
complete and specific agenda toward the beginning of the session?" "Do
we prioritize agenda topics and decide how to split our time?"

"Do we collaboratively decide which topic to discuss first?" "Do we
collaboratively make sound decisions about deviating from the agenda?"

Pacing "Do we allot and spend an appropriate amount of time for the
standard session elements: mood check, setting the agenda, update and
Action Plan review, discussion of agenda topic(s), setting new Action
Plans, periodic summaries, and feedback?" "Do we collaboratively decide
what to do if more time is needed for a problem than we have allotted?"
"Do I appropriately and gently interrupt the client when needed? Do we
spend too much time on unproductive discourse?" "Do I ensure that she
will remember the most important points of the session and is highly
likely to complete the new Action Plan? Does she feel emotionally stable
before I end the session?"

Socializing the Client to Treatment Goal Setting "Has the client set
reasonable, concrete goals based on his/her values and aspirations? Does
the client keep these goals in mind throughout the week? Is he committed
to working toward thevse goals? Are these goals under his control, or is
he trying to change someone else?" "Do we periodically review progress
toward his goals?" "Do I help him firmly keep in mind why it's worth it
to work in therapy (i.e., to achieve his aspirations and live life
according to his values)?"

Expectations "What are the client's expectations for herself and for
me?"

"Does the client believe all her problems can be solved quickly and
easily? Or that I alone should solve her problems? Does she understand
the importance of taking an active, collaborative role?" "Does she
understand the necessity of learning skills and using them regularly
between sessions?"

Problem Solving/Goal-Focused Orientation "Does the client specify issues
to work on or goals to work toward?" "Does he collaborate with me to
solve problems instead of just airing them?" "Does he fear solving
current problems because then he will have to tackle other problems
(such as a decision about a relationship or work)?"

Cognitive Model "Does the client understand that automatic thoughts
influence emotion and behavior (and sometimes physiology)? some
automatic thoughts are distorted and/or unhelpful? she can feel better
and behave in a more adaptive way when she evaluates and responds to her
thinking?"

Action Plan "Have we designed Action Plans around the client's key
issues, goals, and values?" "Does he understand how the Action Plan
relates to the work of the therapy session and to his overall values and
goals?" "Does he think about our therapy work throughout the week and
complete Action Plans thoroughly?"

Responding to Dysfunctional Cognitions

Identifying and Selecting Key Automatic Thoughts "Do we identify the
actual words and/or images that go through the client's mind when she is
distressed?" "Do we identify the range of her relevant automatic
thoughts?" "Do we select key thoughts to evaluate (i.e., the thoughts
associated with the most distress or dysfunction)?"

Responding to Automatic Thoughts and Beliefs "Do we identify the
client's key cognitions and also evaluate and respond to them?" "Do I
avoid assuming a priori that his cognitions are distorted? Do I use
guided discovery and avoid persuasion and challenge?" "If one line of
questioning is ineffective, do I try other ways?" "Are some of his
automatic thoughts part of a dysfunctional thought process? If so, have
I taught him to disengage from the thought and focus on valued action?"
"Having collaboratively formulated an alternative response, do I check
to see how much he believes it? Does his distress decrease?" "If needed,
do we try other techniques to reduce his distress? Do we mark relevant
cognitions for future work?"

Maximizing Cognitive Change "Do we record the client's new, more
functional understandings for her to read as part of her Action Plans?"

Accomplishing Therapeutic Goals in and across Sessions Identifying
Overall and Session-by-Session Objectives

"Have I appropriately expressed to the client that the objective of
treatment is not only to get better but also to learn skills to stay
better?" "Do I help him identify one or more important issues or goals
to discuss in each session?" "Do we devote time to both problem solving
and cognitive restructuring?" "Do Action Plans incorporate both
behavioral and cognitive change?"

Maintaining a Consistent Focus "Do I use guided discovery to help the
client identify relevant positive and negative beliefs?" "Can I state
which of her beliefs are most central and which are narrower or more
peripheral?" \[Toward the middle of treatment\] "Do I consistently
explore the relationship of new obstacles to her central beliefs? Are we
doing consistent, sustained work on her central beliefs \[both positive
and negative\] at each session instead of only crisis intervention?" "If
we have discussed childhood events, was there a clear rationale for why
we needed to do so? Have I helped her see how her early beliefs relate
to current difficulties and how such insight can help in the coming
week? Or how early experiences support her positive beliefs?"

Interventions "Do I choose interventions based on both my goals for the
session and the client's agenda?" "Do I check how distressed he felt
and/or how strongly he endorsed an automatic thought or belief both
before and after an intervention so I could judge how successful the
intervention was?" "If an intervention is relatively unsuccessful, do I
switch gears and try another approach?"

Processing Session Content

Monitoring Clients' Understanding "Have I summarized \[or asked the
client to summarize\] frequently during the session?" "Have I asked her
to state her conclusions in her own words?" "Have I been alert for
nonverbal signs of confusion or disagreement?"

Conceptualizing Problems in Understanding "Have I checked out my
hypotheses with the client?" "If he has difficulty understanding what I
am trying to express, is it due to a mistake I have made? To my lack of
concreteness? To my vocabulary or level of abstraction? To the amount of
material I'm presenting in one chunk or in one session?" "Is a
difficulty in understanding due to his level of emotional distress in
the therapy session? To distraction? To automatic thoughts he is having
at the moment?"

Maximizing Consolidation of Learning "What have I done to ensure that
the client will remember key parts of the therapy session during the
week and even after therapy has ended?" "Have I motivated her to read
therapy notes daily?"

STUCK POINTS At times, clients may feel better during individual
sessions but fail to make progress over the course of several sessions.
If you're an experienced CBT therapist, you may not need to ask yourself
the preceding questions. Instead, first make sure that you have a
correct diagnosis, conceptualization, and treatment plan tailored for
the client's disorder (and have correctly

employed techniques). Then you can assess the following, alone or with a
supervisor: "Do the client and I have a solid therapeutic alliance?" "Do
we both have a clear idea of his values and goals for therapy? Is he
committed to working to achieve these goals?" "Does the client truly
believe the cognitive model \[that her thinking influences her mood and
behavior, that her thoughts may be inaccurate or unhelpful, and that
responding to her dysfunctional cognitions positively affects her
emotions and behavior\]?" "Is the client socialized to CBT---does he
contribute to the agenda, collaboratively work toward resolving problems
and obstacles, do Action Plans, and provide feedback?" "Is the client's
biology \[e.g., illness, medical condition, medication side effects, or
inadequate level of medication\] or her external environment \[e.g., an
abusive partner, an extremely demanding job, or an intolerable level of
poverty or crime in her environment\] interfering with our work
together?"

REMEDIATING PROBLEMS IN THERAPY Depending on the identified problem, you
might consider the advisability of one or more of the following: 1.
Doing a more in-depth diagnostic evaluation 2. Referring the client for
a medical or neuropsychological examination 3. Refining your
conceptualization and checking it out with the client 4. Reading more
about the treatment of the client's disorder(s) 5. Seeking specific
feedback from the client about his experience of therapy and of you 6.
Reestablishing the client's aspirations, values, and goals for therapy
(and possibly examining the advantages and disadvantages of working
toward them) 7. Reviewing the cognitive model with the client (and
eliciting doubts or misunderstandings) 8. Reviewing the treatment plan
with the client (and eliciting concerns or doubts) 9. Assessing the
client's expectations for how she's going to get better (What does she
think you need to do? What does she think she needs to do?) 10.
Emphasizing setting and reviewing Action Plans in session and
accomplishing Action Plans throughout the week 11. Working consistently
on key automatic thoughts, beliefs, and behaviors across sessions 12.
Checking on the client's understanding of session content and recording
the most important points 13. Based on the client's needs and
preferences, changing (in one direction or the other) the pace or
structure of the session, the amount or difficulty of material covered,
the degree of empathy you've been expressing, the degree to which you
have been didactic or persuasive, and/or the relative focus on resolving
obstacles

In addition, you should monitor your own thoughts and mood when seeking
to conceptualize and remediate difficulties in therapy because your
cognitions may at times interfere with problem solving. It's likely that
all therapists, at least occasionally, have negative thoughts about
clients, the therapy, and/or themselves as therapists. Typical therapist
assumptions that interfere with making changes include: "If I interrupt
the client, he'll think I'm controlling him." "If I structure the
session with an agenda, I'll miss something important." "If I record a
session, I'll be too self-conscious." "If my client gets annoyed with
me, she'll drop out of therapy."

You may benefit from a model of personal practice in which you
reflectively focus on your development, both personal and professional,
on an ongoing basis. A workbook can facilitate this work (Bennett-Levy
et al., 2015). Finally, when you encounter a problem in treatment, you
have a choice. You can catastrophize about the problem and/or blame
yourself or the client. Alternatively, you can turn the problem into an
opportunity to refine your skills of conceptualization, treatment
planning, and establishing a sound therapeutic relationship.
Difficulties often provide opportunities to improve your technical
expertise and your ability to vary therapy for the specific needs of
each client.

SUMMARY You are bound to face challenges in treatment. It's important
not to blame yourself or the client. Some difficulties arise because
you're human and, therefore, fallible. Other difficulties arise because
your client is human and, therefore, fallible. You may very well learn
the most from clients who have been challenging to treat. At every
session, it's important to monitor clients' emotional experience,
cognitions about therapy and about you, their depth of understanding,
and their progress so you can uncover problems. When you do identify a
problem, conceptualize it. Is there something the client is doing or not

doing or saying or not saying in session or between sessions that's a
problem? Is there a problem with something you're doing or not doing or
saying or not saying that's a problem? Is it a limited problem or a more
general one? Use the questions in this chapter to diagnose what's going
on and create a plan to improve treatment. REFLECTION QUESTIONS Which
kinds of problems do you think you'll have most difficulty handling?
Why? What can you do?

PRACTICE EXERCISE Imagine that you have a client who has failed to make
progress for the past four sessions. Write a plan for how you can
improve the situation.

APPENDIX A CBT Resources

For principles of CBT, worksheets, videos, conceptualization diagrams,
the case summary outline, and the Cognitive Therapy Rating Scale and
manual, visit beckinstitute.org/CBTresources.

TRAINING PROGRAMS The Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy in
suburban Philadelphia offers a variety of on-site, off-site, and online
training programs for individuals and organizations worldwide, along
with supervision and consultation programs (beckinstitute.org).

ADDITIONAL RESOURCES Worksheet packet Client booklets Books, CDs, and
DVDs by Aaron T. Beck, MD, and Judith S. Beck, PhD

Videos with Aaron T. Beck, Judith S. Beck, and Beck Institute clinicians

BECK CBT CERTIFICATION Information about the Beck CBT Certification
program and certified clinician's directory (in press).

CONNECT WITH THE BECK INSTITUTE Monthly newsletter with CBT tips, news,
and announcements Blog with articles from Beck Institute leadership and
faculty Links to the Beck Institute's social accounts

ASSESSMENT MATERIALS The following scales and manuals may be ordered
from Pearson (www.pearsonassessments.com): Beck Youth Inventories of
Emotional and Social Impairment® (BYI®) ---Second Edition (for children
and adolescents ages 7--18) Beck Anxiety Inventory® (BAI®) Beck
Depression Inventory® (BDI®) Beck Scale for Suicide Ideation® (BSS®)
Beck Hopelessness Scale® (BHS®) Clark--Beck Obsessive--Compulsive
Inventory® (CBOCI®) BDI®---Fast Screen for Medical Patients The
following scales and manuals can be found at www.beckinstitute.org:

Personality Belief Questionnaire Personality Belief
Questionnaire---Short Form Dysfunctional Attitude Scale

APPENDIX B Beck Institute Case Write-Up SUMMARY AND CONCEPTUALIZATION

PART ONE: INTAKE INFORMATION Identifying Information at Intake Age: 56
Gender Identity and Sexual Orientation: Male, heterosexual Cultural
Heritage: American with European heritage Religious/Spiritual
Orientation: Belongs to the Unitarian Church; was not attending church
at intake Living Environment: Small apartment in large city; lives alone
Employment Status: Unemployed Socioeconomic Status: Middle class

Chief Complaint, Major Symptoms, Mental Status, and Diagnosis Chief
Complaint: Abe sought treatment for severe depressive symptoms and
moderate anxiety. Major Symptoms Emotional: Feelings of depression,
anxiety, pessimism, and some guilt; lack of pleasure and interest
Cognitive: Trouble making decisions, trouble concentrating Behavioral:
Avoidance (not cleaning up at home, looking for a job, or doing
errands), social isolation (stopped going to church, spent less time
with family, stopped seeing friends) Physiological: Heaviness in body,
significant fatigue, low libido, difficulty relaxing, decreased appetite
Mental Status: Abe appeared to be quite depressed. His clothes were
somewhat wrinkled; he didn't stand or sit up straight, made little eye
contact, and didn't smile throughout the evaluation. His movements were
a little slow. His speech was normal. He showed little affect other than
depression. His thought process was intact. His sensorium,

cognition, insight, and judgment were within normal limits. He was able
to fully participate in treatment. Diagnosis (from the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders or the International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems): Major
depressive disorder, single episode, severe, with anxious distress. No
personality disorder but mild obsessive--compulsive personality disorder
features.

Current Psychiatric Medications, Adherence, and Side Effects; Concurrent
Treatment Abe was not taking psychiatric medication and was not
receiving any treatment for his depression.

Current Significant Relationships Although Abe had withdrawn somewhat
from his family, his relationship with his two grown children and four
school-age grandchildren were good. He sometimes visited them or
attended his grandchildren's sporting events. He had a great deal of
conflict with his ex-wife and had completely withdrawn from his two male
friends. He was relatively close to one cousin and less so to one
brother. He saw and spoke to his other brother and his mother
infrequently and didn't feel close to them.

PART TWO: HISTORICAL INFORMATION Best Lifetime Functioning (Including
Strengths, Assets, and Resources) Abe was at his best when he finished
high school, got a job, and moved into an apartment with a friend. This
period lasted for about 6 years. He did well on the job, got along well
with his supervisor and coworkers, socialized often with good friends,
exercised and kept himself in good shape, and started saving money for
the future. He was a good problem solver, resourceful and resilient. He
was respectful to others and pleasant to be around, often helping family
and friends without being asked. He was hardworking, both at work and
around the house. He saw himself as competent, in control, reliable, and
responsible. He viewed others and his world as basically benign. His
future seemed bright to him. He also functioned highly after this time,
though he had more stress in his life after he married and had children.

History of Present Illness Abe developed depressive and anxious symptoms
2½ years ago. His symptoms gradually worsened and turned into a major
depressive episode about 2 years ago. Since that time, symptoms of
depression and anxiety have remained consistently elevated without any
periods of remission.

History of Psychiatric, Psychological, or Substance Use Problems and
Impact on Functioning Abe became quite anxious about 2½ years ago when
his supervisor changed his job responsibilities and provided him with
inadequate training. He began to perceive himself as failing on the job
and became depressed. His depression increased significantly when he
lost his job 6 months later. He withdrew into himself and stopped many
activities: helping around the house, doing yard work and errands, and
seeing his friends. His wife then became highly critical, and his
depression became severe. He had not had any problems with alcohol or
other substances.

History of Psychiatric, Psychological, or Substance Abuse Treatment,
Type, Level of Care, and Response Abe and his wife had had three joint
outpatient marital counseling sessions with a social worker about 2
years ago; Abe reported it did not help. He reported no other previous
treatment.

Developmental History (Relevant Learning, Emotional, and Physical
Development) Abe had no relevant difficulties in his physical or
emotional development or in his school performance.

Personal, Social, Educational, and Vocational History Abe was the oldest
of three sons. His father abandoned the family when Abe was 11 years
old, and he never saw his father again. His mother then developed
unrealistically high expectations for him, criticizing him severely for
not consistently getting his younger brothers to do homework and for not
cleaning up their apartment while she was at work. He had some conflict
with his younger brothers who didn't like him "bossing" them around. Abe
always had a few good friends at school or in the neighborhood. After
his father left, he developed a closer relationship with his maternal
uncle and later with several of his coaches. Abe was an average student
and a very good athlete. His highest level of education was a high
school diploma. Abe started working in the construction industry in high
school and had just a few jobs in the industry between graduation and
when he became depressed. He worked his way up in customer service until
he became a supervisor. He got along well with his bosses, supervisors,
and coworkers and had always received excellent evaluations until his
most recent supervisor.

Medical History and Limitations Abe had a few sports-related injuries in
high school but nothing major. His health was relatively good, except
for moderately high blood pressure,

which he developed in his late forties. He didn't have any physical
limitations.

Current Nonpsychiatric Medications, Treatment, Adherence, and Side
Effects Abe was taking Vasotec, 10 mg, 2 × per day, with full adherence
to treat high blood pressure. He had no significant side effects. He was
not receiving any other treatment.

PART THREE: THE COGNITIVE CONCEPTUALIZATION DIAGRAM (CCD) See pages
44--54.

PART FOUR: THE CASE CONCEPTUALIZATION SUMMARY History of Current
Illness, Precipitants, and Life Stressors The first occurrence of Abe's
psychiatric symptoms began 2½ years ago when Abe began to display mild
depressive and anxious symptoms. The precipitant was difficulty at work;
his new supervisor had significantly changed his job responsibilities,
and Abe experienced great difficulty in performing his job competently.
He began to withdraw from other people, including his wife, and started
spending much of the time when he was home sitting on the couch. His
symptoms steadily worsened and increased significantly when he lost his
job and his wife divorced him, about 2 years ago. His functioning
steadily declined after that. At intake, he was spending most of his
time sitting on the couch, watching television, and surfing the web.

Maintaining Factors Highly negative interpretations of his experience,
attentional bias (noticing everything he wasn't doing or wasn't doing
well), lack of structure in his day, continuing unemployment, avoidance
and inactivity, social withdrawal, tendency to stay in his apartment and
not go out, increased self-criticism, deterioration of problem-solving
skills, negative memories, rumination over perceived current and past
failures, and worry about the future.

Values and Aspirations Family, autonomy, and productivity were very
important to Abe. He aspired to rebuild his life, to recapture his sense
of competence and ability to get things done, to get back to work, to
become financially stable, to reengage in activities he had abandoned,
and to give back to others.

Narrative Summary, Incorporating Historical Information, Precipitants,
Maintaining Factors, and Cognitive

Conceptualization Diagram Information For most of his life, Abe
demonstrated many strengths, positive qualities, and internal resources.
For many years he had had a successful work history, marriage, and
family. He had always aspired to be a good person, someone who was
competent and reliable and helpful to others. He valued hard work and
commitment. His strongly held values led to adaptive behavioral patterns
of holding high expectations for himself, working hard, solving his
problems independently, and being responsible. His corresponding
intermediate beliefs were "If I have high expectations and work hard,
I'll be okay. I should solve problems myself. I should be responsible."
His core beliefs about the self were that he was reasonably effective
and competent, likeable, and worthwhile. He saw other people and his
world as basically neutral or benign. His automatic thoughts, for the
most part, were realistic and adaptive. But the meaning Abe put to
certain adverse childhood experiences made him vulnerable to having his
negative beliefs activated later in life. His father left the family
permanently when Abe was 11 years old, which led him to believe that his
world was at least somewhat unpredictable. His mother criticized him for
failing to reach her unreasonably high expectations. Not realizing her
standards were unreasonable, Abe began to see himself as not fully
competent. But these two beliefs weren't rock solid. Abe believed that
much of his world was still relatively predictable and that he was
competent in other ways, especially in sports. As an adult, when Abe
began to struggle on the job, he became anxious, fearing that he
wouldn't be able to live up to his deeply held values of being
responsible, competent, and productive. The anxiety led to worry, which
caused difficulties in concentration and problem solving, and his work
suffered. He started to view himself and his experiences in a highly
negative way and developed symptoms of depression. His core belief of
incompetence/failure became activated, and he began to see himself as
somewhat helpless and out of control. His negative assumptions surfaced:
"If I try to do hard things, I'll fail"; "If I ask for help, people will
see how incompetent I am." So, he began to engage in dysfunctional
coping strategies, primarily avoidance. These coping strategies helped
maintain his depression.

Failing to be as productive as he thought he should be and avoiding
asking for help and support from others, along with harsh criticism from
his wife for not helping around the house, also contributed to the onset
of his depression. He interpreted his symptoms of depression (e.g.,
avoidance, difficulty concentrating and making decisions, and fatigue)
as additional signs of incompetence. Once he became depressed, he
interpreted many of his experiences through the lens of his core belief
of incompetence or failure. Three of these situations are noted at the
bottom of the Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram. Once Abe became
depressed, he started to view other people differently. He feared that
they would be critical of him, and he withdrew socially. Historically,
he had seen his world as potentially unpredictable. After losing his job
and his wife blindsiding him, he began to view his world as less safe
(especially financially), less stable, and less predictable.

PART FIVE: TREATMENT PLAN Overall Treatment Plan The plan was to reduce
Abe's depression and anxiety, improve his functioning and social
interactions, and increase positive affect.

Problem List/Client's Goals and Evidence-Based Interventions
Unemployment/get a job. Examined advantages and disadvantages of looking
for similar job as before versus initially getting a different job (one
that would be easier to obtain and perform), evaluated and responded to
hopeless automatic thoughts ("I'll never get a job and even if I do,
I'll probably get fired again"), problem-solved how to update résumé and
look for a job, and role-played job interview. Avoidance/reengage in
avoided activities. Scheduled specific tasks around the house to do at
specific times and did behavioral experiments to test his automatic
thoughts ("I won't have enough energy to do this"; "I won't do a good
enough job on this"). Evaluated and responded to automatic thoughts
(such as "Doing this will just be a drop in the bucket"). Scheduled
social activities and other activities that could bring a sense of
pleasure. Taught Abe to give himself credit for anything he did that was
even a little difficult and keep a credit list. Social
isolation/reconnect with others. Scheduled times to get together with
friends and family; assessed which friend would be easiest to contact,
evaluated automatic thoughts ("He won't want to hear from me"; "He'll be
critical of me for not having a job"), discussed what to say to friend
about having been out of touch, and did behavioral experiments to test
interfering thoughts. Ongoing conflict with ex-wife/investigate whether
improved communication skills can help/decrease sense of responsibility
for divorce. Taught communication skills such as assertion and did
behavioral experiments to test thoughts ("It won't make any difference;
she'll never stop punishing me/being mad at me"). Did a pie chart of
responsibility.

Depressive rumination and self-criticism/reduce depressive rumination.
Provided psychoeducation about symptoms and impact of depression,
evaluated beliefs about deserved criticism, evaluated positive and
negative beliefs about rumination and worry, did a behavioral experiment
to see impact of mindfulness of the breath, and prescribed mindfulness
exercise each morning and during the day as needed.

PART SIX: COURSE OF TREATMENT AND OUTCOME Therapeutic Relationship At
the beginning of treatment, Abe was concerned that I might be critical
of him, and he thought he should be able to overcome his problems on his
own. I provided him with my view: that he had a real illness for which
most people require treatment, that his difficulties stemmed from his
depression and didn't indicate anything negative about him as a person,
and that it was a sign of strength that he was willing to see if
treatment could help. He seemed to be reassured. He demonstrated a level
of trust in me from the beginning; he was open about his difficulties
and collaborated easily. Initially, when he reported what he had
accomplished on his Action Plans, he was skeptical when I suggested that
these experiences showed his positive attributes. But he was able to
recognize that he, too, would see these activities in a positive light
if someone else in his situation had engaged in them. Abe mostly
provided positive feedback at the end of sessions. He was able to
appropriately let me know when I misunderstood something he said. In
summary, he was able to establish and maintain a good therapeutic
relationship with me.

Number and Frequency of Treatment Sessions, Length of Treatment Abe and
I met weekly for 12 weeks, then every other week for 4 weeks, and then
once a month for 4 months, for a total of 18 sessions over 8 months. We
had standard 50-minute CBT sessions.

Course of Treatment Summary I suggested, and Abe agreed, that we work
first on (1) getting Abe to get out of his apartment almost every day,
(2) spending more time with his family, and (3) cleaning up his
apartment. Doing these things increased his sense of connectedness and
his sense of control and competence (and decreased his belief that he
was incompetent and somewhat out of control). (Later we

worked on spending more time with friends and volunteering.) Increasing
his social activities improved his social support and fulfilled his
important values of close relationships and being helpful and
responsible to other people. We also worked on decreasing his depressive
rumination. Once he was functioning somewhat better, we worked on
finding employment; he started off by doing construction for his
friend's business. Our final goal was to see if he could improve his
relationship with his wife---but he could not.

Measures of Progress Abe scored 18 on the PHQ-9 and 8 on the GAD-7 at
intake, and his sense of well-being on a 0--10 scale was 1. I continued
to monitor progress by using these three assessments at every session.
At the end of treatment, his PHQ-9 score was 3, his GAD-7 score was 2,
and his sense of well-being score was 7. Although he still had some days
that were difficult, on more days than not, he felt much better.

Outcome of Treatment Abe's depression was almost in remission at the end
of weekly treatment. He subsequently got a full-time job that he liked
and did well in, was more engaged with friends and family, and felt much
better. When he returned for his last monthly booster session, his
depression was in full remission, and his sense of well-being had
increased to an 8. See beckinstitute.org/CBTresources.

APPENDIX C Steps in the AWARE Technique

1.  Accept anxiety. Anxiety is natural, normal, and necessary for
    survival. The sensations you experience are a normal part of
    anxiety, even when they become intense. Anxiety increases when you
    get anxious about feeling anxious. But just because you feel anxious
    doesn't necessarily mean there's anything wrong. Your brain reacts
    in the same way whether it perceives actual danger or imagined
    danger. You can view anxiety as energy, given to help you deal with
    dangerous or difficult situations. Don't try to avoid, suppress, or
    control anxiety. If you do, it will become more intense and
    prolonged.
2.  Watch it from a distance. Look at it without judgment---not good,
    not bad. Rate it on a 0--10 scale, and watch it go up and down. Be
    detached. Remember, you are not your anxiety. The more you can
    separate yourself from the experience, the more you can just watch
    it. Look at your thoughts, feelings, and actions as if you're a
    friendly, but not overly concerned, bystander.
3.  Act constructively with it. Act as if you aren't anxious. Whatever
    you can do without anxiety, you can do it with it. You can hold a
    conversation, do chores, walk, drive, exercise, dance, sing, pray,
    and write with anxiety. Breathe slowly and normally. Don't run away
    from

anxiety or avoid anxiety-provoking situations. If you do, you give
yourself the message that anxiety is bad or dangerous. 4. Repeat the
above. Continue to Accept, Watch, and Act constructively with the
anxiety. 5. Expect the best. Most of the time, what you most fear
doesn't happen. Give yourself lots of opportunities to use the steps
above so you can gain confidence that anxiety always decreases. And your
difficulties with anxiety will decrease once you stop fighting it or
trying to avoid or control it. Adapted with permission from Beck and
Emery (1985).

APPENDIX D Restructuring the Meaning of Early Memories through
Experiential Techniques

I have put techniques to restructure the meaning of early experience in
an appendix because they are more advanced and may not apply to many of
your clients. These Gestalt-type techniques have been adapted to the
cognitive model, specifically to change dysfunctional beliefs, and are
more often used with clients with personality disorders than with
clients who have acute disorders, though not exclusively so. You use
these techniques toward the middle or end of treatment, when clients
have already begun to modify their dysfunctional beliefs. Note that it
may be important for some clients to focus more heavily on recalling
positive memories and deriving positive meanings to fortify their
adaptive beliefs about themselves, their worlds, and/or other people. I
present two ways to restructure the meaning of memories below. Technique
1: Restructuring the Meaning of Early Experience through Reenactment and
Therapist--Client Role Play. Below, I first ask Abe about a distressing
situation, suggesting he focus on the somatic sensations

attached to his negative emotion to activate his core beliefs and
distress more intensely. I do this so he can gain greater access to an
earlier memory with the same theme. JUDITH: Abe, you look pretty down
today. ABE: Yeah. My ex-wife called. I was supposed to babysit for my
grandchildren this morning, but I had to cancel at the last minute
because I had forgotten I had a doctor's appointment. JUDITH: What did
she say to you? ABE: That I'm a terrible grandfather. JUDITH: What went
through your mind when she said that? ABE: She's right. I am a terrible
grandfather. JUDITH: And how are you feeling? ABE: \[expressing her
emotion\] Sad. Real sad. \[expressing his core belief\] I'm such a
failure. JUDITH: Just as a grandfather or overall? ABE: It feels like
overall. JUDITH: \[heightening his affect to facilitate memory
retrieval\] Do you feel this sadness and failure somewhere in your body?
ABE: (Points to chest.) Here, in my chest. There's this heaviness. Next,
we collaboratively decide not to focus on this current situation at the
moment. Instead, I take advantage of Abe's negative mood state to
identify an important early experience, in which the same core belief
had been activated. I ask him to imagine the scene. Then we discuss the
memory on the intellectual level, and I help Abe see an alternative
explanation for his mother's outburst in which she blamed and criticized
him. JUDITH: When is the first time you remember feeling this way, as a
kid? ABE: (pause) Probably when I was about 11 or 12. I remember my
mother coming home really late from work because she had missed her bus.
She got really upset with me because my brothers were playing with
colored clay in the kitchen and it was all over the table and on the
floor. JUDITH: Can you picture the scene in your mind? Were you and your
brothers and mom in the kitchen? ABE: Yes.

JUDITH: What did her face look like? What did she say? ABE: Well, she
looked pretty mad. She really yelled. She said something like "Abe, what
am I going to do with you? Just look at this place!" JUDITH: What did
you say? ABE: I don't think I said anything. My mom kept yelling at me.
She said something like "Don't you know how hard I work? I don't ask you
to do much. But why did you let your brothers get clay all over the
place. You should have been watching them. Is that really so hard to
do?" JUDITH: \[empathizing\] You must have felt pretty bad. ABE: I did.
JUDITH: Do you think this was a reasonable way for her to act? ABE:
(Thinks.) I don't know ... She was pretty tired and stressed out.
JUDITH: Is this something you found yourself saying a lot to your own
kids? ABE: No. I never said anything like that. I didn't expect them to
look after each other. JUDITH: Can you remember when your son was 11
years old---and your daughter was, what, 8? ABE: Yes. JUDITH: If you had
come home one day after work, you were really late and really tired and
stressed out, and the table and floor were covered with clay, what would
you have said to them? ABE: Umm ... I guess I'd have said something
like---"Uh-oh. Okay, there's clay all over the table and on the floor.
Stop what you're doing and clean it up. And next time, don't let it get
so messy." JUDITH: That's really good. Do you have any idea why your
mother didn't just ask you to clean up the clay? ABE: I'm not sure.
JUDITH: I wonder, from what you've told me before, if it could be
because she was overwhelmed with being a single parent. I wonder whether
seeing the kitchen messy made her feel out of control. ABE: That's
probably right. It was hard for her. Next, I change the focus so Abe can
engage in experiential learning through role play. Initially he plays
his mother; then we switch roles and he plays himself.

JUDITH: Okay, how about if we do a role play? I'll play you at age 11;
you play your mom. Try to see things from her point of view as much as
you can. You start. You've just come home from work, you see clay all
over the table and the floor, and you say ... ABE: \[as Mom\] Abe, look
at this mess. You should have stopped your brothers. JUDITH: \[as Abe\]
Mom, I'm sorry. It is a mess. I'll start cleaning it up. ABE: Don't you
know how hard I work? Is it really too much to expect you to watch your
brothers? JUDITH: I was watching them, and I did tell them to clean up,
but they wouldn't listen to me. ABE: You have to make them. JUDITH: I
don't know how to do that. I'm only 11. You're expecting too much from
me. I'll clean it up now. I don't know why you're making such a big deal
out of this. You're making me feel like such a failure. Is that what you
think I am? ABE: No, I don't want you to think that. It's not true. I
just want you to do better. Next, I help Abe draw a different conclusion
about the experience: JUDITH: Okay, out of role. What do you think? ABE:
I wasn't really a failure. I did most things okay. Mom was probably just
really stressed. JUDITH: How much do you believe that? ABE: I think I do
believe it. JUDITH: How about if we do the role-play again, but this
time we'll switch parts. You be your 11-year-old self, and let's see how
well you can talk back to your mom. Following this second role play, I
ask Abe to summarize what he learned. Then we discuss how his
conclusions apply to the current situation in which his ex-wife called
him a failure. Technique 2: Restructuring the Meaning of Early
Experience through Reenactment and Older Client--Younger Client Role
Play. This technique starts out in the same way. Here are the steps:

1. Identify a specific situation that is currently quite distressing to
a client and is associated with an important dysfunctional belief.
Heighten the clients' affect by focusing on her automatic thoughts,
emotions, and somatic sensations. 2. Help the client identify a relevant
early experience by asking, "When do you remember feeling like this when
you were growing up?" or "When is the earliest time you remember
believing this about yourself? \[or 'When did your belief get much
stronger?'\]" Elicit a description of a specific situation and the
meaning the client put to it. Use Socratic questioning to help her
reframe the dysfunctional belief that had been activated. 3. Ask the
client to reexperience the situation as if she is the child (the
"younger self") and as if it is happening to her right then. Until
you're finished with the technique, speak to the younger self using
vocabulary and concepts appropriate for her developmental level. As she
tells you about the experience, elicit automatic thoughts, emotions, and
beliefs of the younger self. Ask her to rate how much she believes her
beliefs. (You often need to give the younger self a multiple choice: "Do
you believe it a little? A medium amount? A lot?" If you ask the younger
self for a percentage, she will mentally shift to her older \[current\]
self.) Ask the client to continue to imagine the scene, always speaking
as the younger self, using the present tense, until the trauma is over
and she's in a safer place. 4. Ask the younger self if she wants to have
her older self come into the scene (the safer place) and help her
understand what happened. Facilitate a dialogue between the younger self
(the emotional mind) and the older self (the intellectual mind) to
reframe the dysfunctional belief. If the younger self is confused or
doesn't believe her older self, make suggestions to the older self about
what she can say (using developmentally appropriate language and
concepts). 5. Ask the younger self to re-rate how much she now believes
the dysfunctional belief. If her degree of belief has reduced, ask the
younger self if she has anything else she wants to ask or say to her
older self; then facilitate their saying good-bye. 6. Ask the client,
"What do you conclude from what we've just done?" A typical conclusion
is that the dysfunctional belief was not true, or

certainly, not completely true, and that the younger self was vulnerable
and deserved protection and good treatment. The client may also agree to
begin talking to herself in a more compassionate manner (in the way her
older self talked to her younger self) as part of her Action Plan.

REFERENCES

Abbott, R. A., Whear, R., Rodgers, L. R., Bethel, A., Coon, J. T.,
Kuyken, W., ... Dickens, C. (2014). Effectiveness of mindfulness-based
stress reduction and mindfulness based cognitive therapy in vascular
disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled
trials. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 76(5), 341--351. Alford, B.
A., & Beck, A. T. (1997). The integrative power of cognitive therapy.
New York: Guilford Press. American Psychiatric Association. (2013).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.).
Arlington, VA: Author. Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D. H. (Eds.). (2010).
Handbook of assessment and treatment planning for psychological
disorders (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press. Arnkoff, D. B., & Glass,
C. R. (1992). Cognitive therapy and psychotherapy integration. In D. K.
Freedheim (Ed.), History of psychotherapy: A century of change
(pp. 657--694). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Bannink, F. (2012). Practicing positive CBT: From reducing distress to
building success. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and
its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd ed.).
New York: Guilford Press. Beck, A. (2016). Transcultural cognitive
behavior therapy for anxiety and depression. New York: Routledge. Beck,
A. T. (1964). Thinking and depression: II. Theory and therapy. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 10, 561--571. Beck, A. T. (1967). Depression:
Causes and treatment. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. New
York: International Universities Press. Beck, A. T. (1987). Cognitive
approaches to panic disorder: Theory and therapy. In S. Rachman & J.
Maser (Eds.), Panic: Psychological perspectives (pp. 91--109).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Beck, A. T. (1999). Cognitive aspects of
personality disorders and their relation to syndromal disorders: A
psychoevolutionary approach. In C. R. Cloninger (Ed.), Personality and

psychopathology (pp. 411--429). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Press. Beck, A. T. (2005). The current state of cognitive therapy: A
40-year retrospective. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 953--959.
Beck, A. T. (2019). A 60-year evolution of cognitive theory and therapy.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 14(1), 16--20. Beck, A. T., &
Beck, J. S. (1991). The personality belief questionnaire. Philadelphia:
Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy. Beck, A. T., Davis, D.
D., & Freeman, A. (Eds.). (2015). Cognitive therapy of personality
disorders (3rd ed.). New York: Guilford Press. Beck, A. T., & Emery, G.
(with Greenberg, R. L.). (1985). Anxiety disorders and phobias: A
cognitive perspective. New York: Basic Books. Beck, A. T., Finkel, M.
R., & Beck, J. S. (2020). The theory of modes: Applications to
schizophrenia and other psychological conditions. Cognitive Therapy and
Research. Beck, A. T., Perivoliotis, D., Brinen, A. P., Inverso, E., &
Grant, P. M. (in press). Recovery-oriented cognitive therapy for
schizophrenia and serious mental health conditions. New York: Guilford
Press. Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979).
Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford Press. Beck, A. T.,
& Steer, R. A. (1993a). Beck Anxiety Inventory. San Antonio, TX:
Psychological Corporation. Beck, A. T., & Steer, R. A. (1993b). Beck
Hopelessness Scale. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation. Beck, A.
T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Beck Depression Inventory--II.
San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation. Beck, A. T., Wright, F. D.,
Newman, C. F., & Liese, B. S. (1993). Cognitive therapy of substance
abuse. New York: Guilford Press. Beck, J. S. (2001). A cognitive therapy
approach to medication compliance. In J. Kay (Ed.), Integrated treatment
of psychiatric disorders (pp. 113--141). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Publishing. Beck, J. S. (2005). Cognitive therapy for
challenging problems: What to do when the basics don't work. New York:
Guilford Press. Beck, J. S. (2007). The Beck diet solution: Train your
brain to think like a thin person. Birmingham, AL: Oxmoor House. Beck,
J. S. (2018). CBT worksheet packet. Philadelphia: Beck Institute for
Cognitive Behavior Therapy. Beck, J. S. (2020). Coping with depression.
Philadelphia: Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy.
Bennett-Levy, J., Butler, G., Fennell, M., Hackman, A., Mueller, M., &
Westbrook, D. (Eds.). (2004). Oxford guide to behavioral experiments in
cognitive therapy. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Bennett-Levy,
J., & Thwaites, R. (2007). Self and self-reflection in the therapeutic
relationship. In P. Gilbert & R. L. Leahy (Eds.), The therapeutic
relationship in the cognitive behavioral psychotherapies (pp. 255--281).
New York: Routledge/Taylor & Francis. Bennett-Levy, J., Thwaites, R.,
Haarhoff, B., & Perry, H. (2015). Experiencing CBT from the inside out:
A self-practice/self-reflection workbook for therapists. New York:
Guilford Press. Benson, H. (1975). The relaxation response. New York:
Avon.

Bishop, S. R., Lau, M., Shapiro, S., Carlson, L., Anderson, N. D.,
Carmody, J., ... Devins, G. (2004). Mindfulness: A proposed operational
definition. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11(3), 230--241.
Boisvert, C. M., & Ahmed, M. (2018). Using diagrams in psychotherapy: A
guide to visually enhanced therapy. New York: Routledge. Boswell, J. F.,
Kraus, D. R., Miller, S. D., & Lambert, M. J. (2015). Implementing
routine outcome monitoring in clinical practice: Benefits, challenges,
and solutions. Psychotherapy Research: Building Collaboration and
Communication between Researchers and Clinicians, 25(1), 6--19. Braun,
J. D., Strunk, D. R., Sasso, K. E., & Cooper, A. A. (2015). Therapist
use of Socratic questioning predicts session-to-session symptom change
in cognitive therapy for depression. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 70,
32--37. Burns, D. D. (1980). Feeling good: The new mood therapy. New
York: Signet. Butler, A. C., Chapman, J. E., Forman, E. M., & Beck, A.
T. (2006). The empirical status of cognitive-behavioral therapy: A
review of meta-analyses. Clinical Psychology Review, 26, 17-- 31.
Callan, J. A., Kazantzis, N., Park, S. Y., Moore, C., Thase, M. E.,
Emeremni, C. A., ... Siegle, G. J. (2019). Effects of cognitive behavior
therapy homework adherence on outcomes: Propensity score analysis.
Behavior Therapy, 50(2), 285--299. Carpenter, J. K., Andrews, L. A.,
Witcraft, S. M., Powers, M. B., Smits, J. A., & Hofmann, S. G. (2018).
Cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety and related disorders: A
meta-analysis of randomized placebo-controlled trials. Depression and
Anxiety, 35(6), 502--514. Chambless, D., & Ollendick, T. H. (2001).
Empirically supported psychological interventions. Annual Review of
Psychology, 52, 685--716. Chaves, C., Lopez-Gomez, I., Hervas, G., &
Vazquez, C. (2019). The integrative positive psychological intervention
for depression (IPPI-D). Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 49(3),
177--185. Chiesa, A., & Serretti, A. (2011). Mindfulness based cognitive
therapy for psychiatric disorders: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Psychiatry Research, 187(3), 441--453. Clark, D. A.,
Beck, A. T., & Alford, B. A. (1999). Scientific foundations of cognitive
theory and therapy of depression. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Clark, D. M.
(1989). Anxiety states: Panic and generalized anxiety. In K. Hawton, P.
M. Salkovskis, J. Kirk, & D. M. Clark (Eds.), Cognitive-behavior therapy
for psychiatric problems: A practical guide (pp. 52--96). New York:
Oxford University Press. Constantino, M. J., Ametrano, R. M., &
Greenberg, R. P. (2012). Clinician interventions and participant
characteristics that foster adaptive patient expectations for
psychotherapy and psychotherapeutic change. Psychotherapy, 49(4),
557--569. Craske, M. G., Treanor, M., Conway, C. C., Zbozinek, T., &
Vervliet, B. (2014). Maximizing exposure therapy: An inhibitory learning
approach. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 58, 10--23. Cuijpers, P., van
Straten, A., & Warmerdam, L. (2007). Behavioral activation treatments of
depression: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 27, 318--326.
D'Zurilla, T. J., & Nezu, A. M. (2006). Problem-solving therapy: A
positive approach to clinical intervention (3rd ed.). New York:
Springer. David, D., Cristea, I., & Hofmann, S. G. (2018). Why cognitive
behavioral therapy is the current gold standard of psychotherapy.
Frontiers in Psychiatry, 9, 4. Davis, M., Eshelman, E. R., & McKay, M.
(2008). The relaxation and stress reduction workbook (6th ed.). Oakland,
CA: New Harbinger.

de Jonge, M., Bockting, C. L., Kikkert, M. J., van Dijk, M. K., van
Schaik, D. J., Peen, J., ... Dekker, J. J. (2019). Preventive cognitive
therapy versus care as usual in cognitive behavioral therapy responders:
A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 87(6), 521. De Oliveira, I. R. (2018). Trial-based cognitive
therapy. In S. Borgo, I. Marks, & L. Sibilia (Eds.), Common language for
psychotherapy procedures: The first 101 (pp. 202--204). Rome: Centro per
la Ricerca in Psicoterapia. De Shazer, S. (1988). Clues: Investigating
solutions in brief therapy. New York: Norton. DeRubeis, R. J., & Feeley,
M. (1990). Determinants of change in cognitive therapy for depression.
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 14, 469--482. Dobson, D., & Dobson, K.
S. (2018). Evidence-based practice of cognitive-behavioral therapy. New
York: Guilford Press. Dobson, K. S., & Dozois, D. J. A. (2009).
Historical and philosophical bases of the cognitivebehavioral therapies.
In K. S. Dobson (Ed.), Handbook of cognitive-behavioral therapies (3rd
ed., pp. 3--37). New York: Guilford Press. Dobson, K. S., Hollon, S. D.,
Dimidjian, S., Schmaling, K. B., Kohlenberg, R. J., Gallop, R. J., ...
Jacobson, N. S. (2008). Randomized trial of behavioral activation,
cognitive therapy, and antidepressant medication in the prevention of
relapse and recurrence in major depression. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 76(3), 468--477. Dunn, B. D. (2012). Helping
depressed clients reconnect to positive emotion experience: Current
insights and future directions. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy,
19(4), 326--340. Dutra, L., Stathopoulou, G., Basden, S. L., Leyro, T.
M., Powers, M. B., & Otto, M. W. (2008). A meta-analytic review of
psychosocial interventions for substance use disorders. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 165(2), 179--187. Elliott, R., Bohart, A. C., Watson, J.
C., & Greenberg, L. S. (2011). Empathy. Psychotherapy, 48(1), 43--49.
Ellis, A. (1962). Reason and emotion in psychotherapy. New York: Lyle
Stuart. Ezzamel, S., Spada, M. M., & Nikčević, A. V. (2015).
Cognitive-behavioural case formulation in the treatment of a complex
case of social anxiety disorder and substance misuse. In M. Bruch (Ed.),
Beyond diagnosis: Case formulation in cognitive-behavioural
psychotherapy (pp. 194--219). London: Wiley. Fairburn, C. G.,
Bailey-Straebler, S., Basden, S., Doll, H. A., Jones, R., Murphy, R.,
... Cooper, Z. (2015). A transdiagnostic comparison of enhanced
cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT-E) and interpersonal psychotherapy in
the treatment of eating disorders. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 70,
64--71. Foa, E. B., & Rothbaum, B. O. (1998). Treating the trauma of
rape: Cognitive-behavioral therapy for PTSD. New York: Guilford Press.
Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The role of positive emotions in positive
psychology: The broaden-andbuild theory of positive emotions. American
Psychologist, 56, 218--226. Frisch, M. B. (2005). Quality of life
therapy. New York: Wiley. Goldstein, A. (1962). Therapist-patient
expectancies in psychotherapy. New York: Pergamon Press. Goldstein, A.,
& Stainback, B. (1987). Overcoming agoraphobia: Conquering fear of the
outside world. New York: Viking Penguin. Gottman, J., & Gottman, J. S.
(2014). Level 2 clinical training: Gottman method couples therapy
\[DVD\]. Seattle, WA: Gottman Institute. Gould, R. L., Coulson, M. C., &
Howard, R. J. (2012). Efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy for
anxiety disorders in older people: A meta-analysis and meta-regression
of randomized controlled

trials. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 60(2), 218--229.
Grant, P. M., Bredemeier, K., & Beck, A. T. (2017). Six-month follow-up
of recovery-oriented cognitive therapy for low-functioning individuals
with schizophrenia. Psychiatric Services, 68(10), 997--1002. Grant, P.
M., Huh, G. A., Perivoliotis, D., Stolar, N. M., & Beck, A. T. (2012).
Randomized trial to evaluate the efficacy of cognitive therapy for
low-functioning patients with schizophrenia. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 69(2), 121--127. Greenberg L. S. (2002). Emotion focused
therapy: Coaching clients to work through their feelings. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association. Hackmann, A., Bennett-Levy, J.,
& Holmes, E. A. (2011). Oxford guide to imagery in cognitive therapy.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Hall, J., Kellett, S., Berrios, R.,
Bains, M. K., & Scott, S. (2016). Efficacy of cognitive behavioral
therapy for generalized anxiety disorder in older adults: Systematic
review, meta-analysis, and meta-regression. American Journal of
Geriatric Psychiatry, 24(11), 1063--1073. Hanrahan, F., Field, A. P.,
Jones, F. W., & Davey, G. C. L. (2013). A meta-analysis of cognitive
therapy for worry in generalized anxiety disorder. Clinical Psychology
Review, 33, 120--132. Hayes, S. C., Follette, V. M., & Linehan, M. M.
(Eds.). (2004). Mindfulness and acceptance: Expanding the
cognitive-behavioral tradition. New York: Guilford Press. Hayes, S. C.,
Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance and commitment
therapy: An experiential approach to behavior change. New York: Guilford
Press. Hays, P. A. (2009). Integrating evidence-based practice,
cognitive-behavior therapy, and multicultural therapy: Ten steps for
culturally competent practice. Professional Psychology: Research and
Practice, 40(4), 354--360. Heiniger, L. E., Clark, G. I., & Egan, S. J.
(2018). Perceptions of Socratic and non-Socratic presentation of
information in cognitive behavior therapy. Journal of Behavior Therapy
and Experimental Psychiatry, 58, 106--113. Hofmann, S. G. (2016).
Emotion in therapy: From science to practice. New York: Guilford Press.
Hofmann, S. G., Asnaani, A., Vonk, I. J., Sawyer, A. T., & Fang, A.
(2012). The efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy: A review of
meta-analyses. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 36(5), 427-- 440.
Hofmann, S. G., Sawyer, A. T., Witt, A. A., & Oh, D. (2010). The effect
of mindfulness-based therapy on anxiety and depression: A meta-analytic
review. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78(2), 169--183.
Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., Fawcett, J., Amsterdam, J. D., Shelton,
R. C., Zajecka, J., ... Gallop, R. (2014). Effect of cognitive therapy
with antidepressant medications vs antidepressants alone on the rate of
recovery in major depressive disorder: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA
Psychiatry, 71(10), 1157--1164. Ingram, R. E., & Hollon, S. D. (1986).
Cognitive therapy for depression from an information processing
perspective. In R. E. Ingram (Ed.), Personality, psychopathology, and
psychotherapy series: Information processing approaches to clinical
psychology (pp. 259--281). New York: Academic Press. Iwamasa, G. Y., &
Hays, P. A. (Eds.). (2019). Culturally responsive cognitive behavior
therapy: Practice and supervision (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Jacobson, E. (1974). Progressive relaxation.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, Midway Reprint. Jeste, D. V., &
Palmer, B. W. (2015). Positive psychiatry: A clinical handbook.
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.

Johnstone, L., Whomsley, S., Cole, S., & Oliver, N. (2011). Good
practice guidelines on the use of psychological formulation. Leicester,
UK: British Psychological Society. Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full
catastrophe living. New York: Delta. Kallapiran, K., Koo, S.,
Kirubakaran, R., & Hancock, K. (2015). Effectiveness of mindfulness in
improving mental health symptoms of children and adolescents: A
meta-analysis. Child and Adolescent Mental Health, 20(4), 182--194.
Kazantzis, N., Luong, H. K., Usatoff, A. S., Impala, T., Yew, R. Y., &
Hofmann, S. G. (2018). The processes of cognitive behavioral therapy: A
review of meta-analyses. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 42(4),
349--357. Kazantzis, N., Whittington, C., Zelencich, L., Kyrios, M.,
Norton, P. J., & Hofmann, S. G. (2016). Quantity and quality of homework
compliance: A meta-analysis of relations with outcome in cognitive
behavior therapy. Behavior Therapy, 47(5), 755--772. King, B. R., &
Boswell, J. F. (2019). Therapeutic strategies and techniques in early
cognitivebehavioral therapy. Psychotherapy, 56(1), 35--40. Knapp, P.,
Kieling, C., & Beck, A. T. (2015). What do psychotherapists do?: A
systematic review and meta-regression of surveys. Psychotherapy and
Psychosomatics, 84(6), 377--378. Kuyken, W., Padesky, C. A., & Dudley,
R. (2009). Collaborative case conceptualization: Working effectively
with clients in cognitive behavioral therapy. New York: Guilford Press.
Lambert, M. J., Whipple, J. L., Smart, D. W., Vermeersch, D. A.,
Nielsen, S. L., & Hawkins, E. J. (2001). The effects of providing
therapists with feedback on patient progress during psychotherapy: Are
outcomes enhanced? Psychotherapy Research, 11(1), 49--68. Lambert, M.
J., Whipple, J. L., Vermeersch, D. A., Smart, D. W., Hawkins, E. J.,
Nielsen, S. L., & Goates, M. (2002). Enhancing psychotherapy outcomes
via providing feedback on client progress: A replication. Clinical
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 9(2), 91--103. Lazarus, A. A., & Lazarus,
C. N. (1991). Multimodal life history inventory. Champaign, IL: Research
Press. Leahy, R. L. (2002). A model of emotional schemas. Cognitive and
Behavioral Practice, 9(3), 177-- 190. Leahy, R. L. (Ed.). (2018).
Science and practice in cognitive therapy: Foundations, mechanisms, and
applications. New York: Guilford Press. Ledley, D. R., Marx, B. P., &
Heimberg R. G. (2005). Making cognitive-behavioral therapy work:
Clinical process for new practitioners. New York: Guilford Press. Lee,
J. Y., Dong, L., Gumport, N. B., & Harvey, A. G. (2020). Establishing
the dose of memory support to improve patient memory for treatment and
treatment outcome. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental
Psychiatry, 68, 101526. Lewinsohn, P. M., Sullivan, J. M., & Grosscup,
S. J. (1980). Changing reinforcing events: An approach to the treatment
of depression. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, and Training,
17(3), 322--334. Linardon, J., Wade, T. D., de la Piedad Garcia, X., &
Brennan, L. (2017). The efficacy of cognitivebehavioral therapy for
eating disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 85(11), 1080--1094. Linehan, M. M.
(1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality
disorder. New York: Guilford Press. Linehan, M. M. (2015). DBT skills
training manual (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press. Magill, M., & Ray,
L. A. (2009). Cognitive-behavioral treatment with adult alcohol and
illicit drug users: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 70(4), 516--527.

Martell, C., Addis, M., & Jacobson, N. (2001). Depression in context:
Strategies for guided action. New York: Norton. Matusiewicz, A. K.,
Banducci, A. N., & Lejuez, C. W. (2010). The effectiveness of cognitive
behavioral therapy for personality disorders. Psychiatric Clinics of
North America, 33(3), 657-- 685. Mayo-Wilson, E., Dias, S.,
Mavranezouli, I., Kew, K., Clark, D. M., Ades, A. E., & Pilling, S.
(2014). Psychological and pharmacological interventions for social
anxiety disorder in adults: A systematic review and network
meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry, 1(5), 368--376. McCown, D., Reibel,
D., & Micozzi, M. S. (2010). Teaching mindfulness: A practical guide for
clinicians and educators. New York: Springer. McCullough, J. P.,
Jr. (1999). Treatment for chronic depression: Cognitive behavioral
analysis system of psychotherapy. New York: Guilford Press. McEvoy, P.
M., Saulsman, L. M., & Rapee, R. M. (2018). Imagery-enhanced CBT for
social anxiety disorder. New York: Guilford Press. Meichenbaum, D.
(1977). Cognitive-behavior modification: An integrative approach. New
York: Plenum Press. Miller, S. D., Hubble, M. A., Chow, D., & Seidel, J.
(2015). Beyond measures and monitoring: Realizing the potential of
feedback-informed treatment. Psychotherapy, 52(4), 449--457. Needleman,
L. D. (1999). Cognitive case conceptualization: A guidebook for
practitioners. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Norcross, J. C., & Lambert, M. J.
(2018). Psychotherapy relationships that work: III. Psychotherapy,
55(4), 303--315. Norcross, J. C., & Wampold, B. E. (2011).
Evidence-based therapy relationships: Research conclusions and clinical
practices. Psychotherapy, 48(1), 98--102. Öst, L. G., Havnen, A.,
Hansen, B., & Kvale, G. (2015). Cognitive behavioral treatments of
obsessive--compulsive disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis of
studies published 1993--2014. Clinical Psychology Review, 40, 156--169.
Overholser, J. C. (2018). The Socratic method of psychotherapy. New
York: Columbia University Press. Padesky, C. A. (1994). Schema change
processes in cognitive therapy. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy,
1(5), 267--278. Padesky, C. A., & Mooney, K. A. (2005). Cognitive
therapy for personality disorders: Constructing a new personality. Paper
presented at the 5th International Congress of Cognitive Psychotherapy,
Gotenburg, Sweden. Persons, J. B. (2008). The case formulation approach
to cognitive-behavior therapy. New York: Guilford Press. Pugh, M.
(2019). Cognitive behavioural chairwork: Distinctive features. Oxon, UK:
Routledge. Raue, P. J., & Goldfried, M. R. (1994). The therapeutic
alliance in cognitive-behavioral therapy. In A. O. Horvath & L. S.
Greenberg (Eds.), The working alliance: Theory, research, and practice
(pp. 131--152). New York: Wiley. Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K.
(1993). Cognitive processing therapy for rape victims: A treatment
manual. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE. Ritschel, L. A., & Sheppard, C. S.
(2018). Hope and depression. In M. W. Gallagher & S. J. Lopez (Eds.),
The Oxford handbook of hope (pp. 209--219). New York: Oxford University
Press. Rosen, H. (1988). The constructivist--development paradigm. In R.
A. Dorfman (Ed.), Paradigms of clinical social work (pp. 317--355). New
York: Brunner/Mazel.

Rush, A. J., Beck, A. T., Kovacs, M., & Hollon, S. D. (1977).
Comparative efficacy of cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy in the
treatment of depressed outclients. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 1(1),
17--37. Safran, J., & Segal, Z. V. (1996). Interpersonal process in
cognitive therapy. Lanham, MD: Jason Aronson. Salkovskis, P. M. (1996).
The cognitive approach to anxiety: Threat beliefs, safety-seeking
behavior, and the special case of health anxiety obsessions. In P. M.
Salkovskis (Ed.), Frontiers of cognitive therapy: The state of the art
and beyond (pp. 48--74). New York: Guilford Press. Segal, Z., Williams,
M., & Teasdale, J. (2018). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for
depression (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press. Smith, T. B., Rodriguez,
M. D., & Bernal, G. (2011). Culture. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.),
Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford
University Press. Snyder, C. R., Michael, S. T., & Cheavens, J. (1999).
Hope as a psychotherapeutic foundation of common factors, placebos, and
expectancies. In M. A. Hubble, B. Duncan, & S. Miller (Eds.), The heart
and soul of change (pp. 179--200). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Stott, R., Mansell, W., Salkovskis, P.,
Lavender, A., & Cartwright-Hatton, S. (2010). Oxford guide to metaphors
in CBT: Building cognitive bridges. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Sudak, D. M. (2011). Combining CBT and medication: An evidence-based
approach. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Sue, S., Zane, N., Nagayama Hall, G. D., &
Berger, L. K. (2009). The case for cultural competency in
psychotherapeutic interventions. Annual Review of Psychology, 60,
525--548. Swift, J. K., Greenberg, R. P., Whipple, J. L., & Kominiak, N.
(2012). Practice recommendations for reducing premature termination in
therapy. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 43, 379--387.
Tarrier, N. (Ed.). (2006). Case formulation in cognitive behavior
therapy: The treatment of challenging and complex cases. New York:
Routledge. Thoma, N., Pilecki, B., & McKay, D. (2015). Contemporary
cognitive behavior therapy: A review of theory, history, and evidence.
Psychodynamic Psychiatry, 43(3), 423--461. Tolin, D. F. (2016). Doing
CBT: A comprehensive guide to working with behaviors, thoughts, and
emotions. New York: Guilford Press. Tompkins, M. A. (2004). Using
homework in psychotherapy: Strategies, guidelines, and forms. New York:
Guilford Press. Tugade, M. M., Frederickson, B. L., & Barrett, L. F.
(2004). Psychological resilience and positive emotional granularity:
Examining the benefits of positive emotions on coping and health.
Journal of Personality, 72(6), 1161--1190. Vittengl, J. R., Stutzman,
S., Atluru, A., & Jarrett, R. B. (in press). Do cognitive therapy skills
neutralize lifetime stress to improve treatment outcomes in recurrent
depression? Behavior Therapy. von Brachel, R., Hirschfeld, G., Berner,
A., Willutzki, U., Teismann, T., Cwik, J. C., ... Margraf, J. (2019).
Long-term effectiveness of cognitive behavioral therapy in routine
outpatient care: A 5to 20-year follow-up study. Psychotherapy and
Psychosomatics, 88(4), 225--235. Weck, F., Kaufmann, Y. M., & Höfling,
V. (2017). Competence feedback improves CBT competence in trainee
therapists: A randomized controlled pilot study. Psychotherapy Research,
27(4), 501-- 509. Weissman, A. N., & Beck, A. T. (1978). Development and
validation of the Dysfunctional Attitude Scale: A preliminary
investigation. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American

Educational Research Association, Toronto, Canada. Wenzel, A., Brown, G.
K., & Beck, A. T. (2009). Cognitive therapy for suicidal patients:
Scientific and clinical applications. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Wuthrich, V. M., & Rapee, R. M. (2013).
Randomised controlled trial of group cognitive behavioural therapy for
comorbid anxiety and depression in older adults. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 51(12), 779--786. Young, J. E. (1999). Cognitive therapy for
personality disorders: A schema-focused approach (3rd ed.). Sarasota,
FL: Professional Resource. Young, J. E., Klosko, J. S., & Weishaar, M.
E. (2003). Schema therapy: A practitioner's guide. New York: Guilford
Press. Zilcha-Mano, S., Errázuriz, P., Yaffe-Herbst, L., German, R. E.,
& DeRubeis, R. J. (2019). Are there any robust predictors of "sudden
gainers," and how is sustained improvement in treatment outcome achieved
following a gain? Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 87(6),
491-- 500.

Index

The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition
from which it was created. To locate a specific passage, please use the
search feature of your e-book reader or select a page number link below.
Note. All page numbers in italics indicate a figure or a table. Abe
(case example) Action Plan dealing with negative predictions, 153--154
dealing with procrastination, 157 final check on, 189, 190--191 first
therapy session, 93--96, 114 preparing for a possible negative outcome,
148--149 provision of explicit instructions, 141 setting in the
evaluation session, 82--84 update and review in the first part of a
session, 183--185 activity scheduling, 121, 124--126 agenda difficulties
in discussing agenda items, 205 prioritizing, 186 setting in the
evaluation session, 74--75 setting in the first part of session,
181--182 setting in the first therapy session, 91--92 attributing
progress to, 355--356 automatic thoughts asking for a helpful response
to address, 256--257 behavioral experiment to address, 255 changing the
form of telegraphic or question thoughts, 220--221 characteristics of,
211, 212, 213 core beliefs expressed as, 292 differentiating from
emotions, 233--234 difficulties in eliciting, 222, 223--224, 225

downward arrow technique, 292 identifying cognitive distortions,
254--255 looking for central themes in, 291 matching content to
emotions, 235 problem solving with true thoughts, 257--258 questioning
to evaluate, 243--244, 245--247, 248--249 summary of automatic thoughts,
261 Testing Your Thoughts Worksheet, 269--270 using alternative
questions to evaluate, 251--252 Beck Institute case write-up case
conceptualization summary, 382--383 cognitive conceptualization diagram,
45, 382 course of treatment and outcome, 384--385 historical
information, 380--382 intake information, 379--380 treatment plan, 384
CBT principles of treatment, 16--24 cognitive conceptualization
behavioral strategies, 41 core beliefs, 39--40 intermediate beliefs and
values, 40 overview, 38--39 sequences leading to depression, 41--43
strengths, resources, and personal assets, 43--44 core beliefs
identifying adaptive beliefs, 289--290 identifying dysfunctional
beliefs, 291, 292 modifying dysfunctional beliefs, 309--316, 317,
318--320 overview, 39--40, 287--288 psychoeducation about, 297--300
strengthening adaptive beliefs, 304, 305, 306, 307 decision making,
327--329 depressive rumination, 274--275 difficulties in discussing
agenda items, 205 emotions differentiating from automatic thoughts,
233--234 intensity of, 227 matching content of automatic thoughts to,
235 regulation of, 324 evaluation session description of a typical day,
76--77 diagnostic impression, 80 establishing expectations for
treatment, 84 responding to hopelessness and skepticism, 77--78 setting
goals and relating a general treatment plan, 80--82 setting the Action
Plan, 82--84 setting the agenda, 74--75 summarizing and eliciting
feedback, 85 excerpt from a typical CBT intervention, 8--9 final
summary, check on Action Plan, and feedback, 189, 190--191

first part of a session mood check, 179--180 prioritizing the agenda,
186 setting an initial agenda, 181--182 update and Action Plan review,
183--185 first therapy session Action Plan, 114 diagnosis and
psychoeducation, 96--101, 102--104 eliciting values and aspirations,
105, 106, 107--108 feedback, 113 initial agenda setting, 91--92 mood
check, 89--90 reinforcing the cognitive model, 94 setting goals,
108--111 update and review of the Action Plan, 93--96 graph of expected
progress, 354--355 identifying negative images, 345--346 inducing
positive images, 341--344 introducing mindfulness, 278--279 introduction
to, 1--2 middle part of a session, 187--188 modifying spontaneous
negative images, 347, 348--350 pie chart technique, 334, 336--337
problem solving, 326--327 restructuring the meaning of early memories,
387--390 setbacks, 363 social skills and role play, 334 therapeutic
relationship, 58, 63--64, 65--66 therapy notes, 262--263, 363 treatment
plan Beck Institute case write-up, 384 deciding to focus on an issue or
goal, 170--171 evaluation session, 80--82 initial plan, 164 therapeutic
objectives, 161 Acceptance, 258--259 Acceptance and commitment therapy,
3, 323 Accountability, 152 Acting "as if," 307 Action Plan review
difficulties in, 205 discussion of, 149--150 at the end of session, 190
first part of a session, 182--185 first therapy session, 94--96 Action
Plans activities and, 131 activity scheduling and, 129 anticipating and
preventing problems attention to clients' negative reactions, 145--147

changing the plan, 148 check on the likelihood of completion, 143
examine advantages and disadvantages, 147--148 identify obstacles and do
covert rehearsal, 143--145 making the plan a no-lose proposition, 148
overview, 142--143 check on at the end of session, 190 clinical tips,
147--148, 152, 156--157 components of, 23 conceptualization of
inactivity, 120 conceptualizing difficulties interfering cognitions,
153--158 interfering cognitions masked as practical problems, 158
overview, 150 practical problems, 150--153 problems related to the
therapist's cognition, 158--159 creating in the evaluation session,
82--84 encouraging clients to set, 138--139 first therapy session Abe
case example, 114 end-of-session summary and, 113 review of, 94--96
setting an item to identify automatic thoughts, 102--104 identifying
problems in, 371 importance of and benefits to clients, 23--24, 135--136
increasing adherence, 139--142 mindfulness, 277 preparing for a possible
negative outcome, 148--149 question lists for evaluating automatic
thoughts, 244 reinforcing adaptive beliefs, 311--312 reviewing. See
Action Plan review session format and, 22 setting, 136 summary of, 159
treatment planning and, 167--168 types of items in, 137--138 writing
down, 23--24 Active participation, 19--20 Activities rating, 129--130
types of, 131 See also Activity scheduling Activity Chart assessing
predictions about mastery and pleasure, 131--133 difficulties with mood
check and, 200 partially completed example chart, 122--123 rating
activities and, 129--130 using, 121, 129 Activity scheduling assessing
predictions of mastery and pleasure, 131--133

clinical tips, 126, 131, 133 conceptualization of inactivity, 118--120
conceptualization of lack of mastery or pleasure, 120 discussion of and
case example, 121, 124--126 first therapy session, 112 importance of,
117--118 rating activities, 129--130 summary, 134 types of activities,
130 when clients resist scheduling activities, 126--129 See also
Activity Chart Adaptive behaviors. See Behavioral strategies Adaptive
coping techniques, rehearsing, 342--343 Adaptive (positive) core beliefs
characteristics of, 31--32, 283 clinical tips, 290 identifying, 289--290
impact on schemas, 283, 284 strengthening, 303--307 Strengths-Based
Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram, 44, 45, 46 Adaptive mode, 284--286
Advantages--disadvantages analysis in decision making, 327--329 of
tapering therapy, 358, 359 Affect, engaging in activities to lift, 137
Agendas deviating from, 207--208 difficulties in discussing items,
205--207 first part of a session prioritizing the agenda, 185--186
setting an initial agenda, 180--182 identifying problems in, 370
treatment planning and, 167, 168--169 Agenda setting difficulties in
failing to contribute, 200--202 feeling hopeless and overwhelmed, 203
rambling, 200 evaluation session, 74--75 first therapy session, 91--92
setting an initial agenda in the first part of a session, 180--182
Alcohol use, 167 All-or-nothing thinking, 253 "Alternative explanation"
questions, 246 American Psychological Association, 357 Analogy, 10
Anxiety, AWARE technique, 280, 386 Arousal effect, from relaxation, 324
Aspirations Action Plans and, 140

creating an image of having achieved, 107--108 drawing conclusions
about, 106--107 eliciting, 106 pie chart technique, 334, 335 Assessment,
in the evaluation session, 75--80 Assumptions cognitive model, 37
concept of intermediate beliefs and, 35--36 defined, 5 See also
Intermediate beliefs Attitudes cognitive model, 37 concept of
intermediate beliefs and, 35--36 See also Intermediate beliefs
Audio-recorded therapy notes, 264 Automatic thoughts addressing thoughts
that interfere with goal setting, 108--110 alternate methods to address
alternative questions, 251--252 asking clients for a helpful response,
256--257 behavioral experiments, 255--256 identifying cognitive
distortions, 252--255 overview, 251 self-disclosure, 256 characteristics
of, 211--213 clinical tips for identifying, 101--102 cognitive
conceptualization diagrams simplified diagram, 54 strengths-based
diagram, 44, 45, 46 traditional diagram, 47, 48, 49--51, 53 cognitive
models of CBT and, 4--5, 28--29, 37--38, 216, 217--218 conceptualization
of inactivity, 118--119 conceptualization of lack of mastery or
pleasure, 120 conceptualizing when cognitive restructuring is
ineffective, 249--251 core beliefs expressed as, 292 defined, 5, 29
development of Beck's CBT and, 6--7 differentiating from emotions,
232--234 disengaging from, 137 downward arrow technique, 291--292
eliciting, 215--216, 222--225 evaluating and responding to, 137
evaluating the validity of, 30 explaining to clients, 214--215 forms and
types of, 216, 219--221, 239--240 identifying, 29--30, 225--226
Identifying Automatic Thoughts Worksheet, 103--104 identifying problems
in identifying and selecting key thoughts, 371 identifying problems in
responding to, 372 intermediate beliefs and, 35--36, 293--294

looking for central themes in, 291 matching thought content to emotions,
234--235 monitoring, 137 overview, 210 psychoeducation about, 100--102
questioning to evaluate assessing the outcome of the process, 248--249
behavioral methods, 243 clinical tips, 245, 247 question lists, 242, 243
reasons to avoid direct challenges, 241--242 recommendations and
guidelines, 243--245 Socratic questioning, 242--243 Question to Identify
Automatic Thoughts handout, 225, 226 responding to importance of, 260
between sessions, 260 summary, 272 therapy notes, 261--264 using
worksheets, 264--270 when a worksheet isn't helpful enough, 270--271
selecting key thoughts to focus on, 240--241 setting an Action Plan item
to reinforce the cognitive model, 102--104 summaries of evaluated
thoughts, 261 summary of, 226, 259 Testing Your Thoughts Worksheet, 260
Thought Record, 260 working with true thoughts, 257--259 Avoidance
description of, 331 exposure and, 331--334 regarding Action Plans,
157--158 AWARE technique, 280, 386 Beck, Aaron, 3, 6--7, 14, 56 Beck
Anxiety Inventory, 89 Beck Depression Inventory--II, 89 Beck
Hopelessness Scale, 89 Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy, 7
Behavioral activation, 3 Behavioral experiments in Action Plans, 137 to
address automatic thoughts, 255--256 to evaluate automatic thoughts, 243
mindfulness and testing dysfunctional beliefs, 277 modifying
dysfunctional beliefs, 312--313 testing beliefs about negative emotions,
237 Behavioral skills, practicing, 138 Behavioral strategies Abe case
example, 41

psychoeducation about, 100 simplified cognitive conceptualization
diagram, 54 Strengths-Based Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram, 44, 45,
46 traditional cognitive conceptualization diagrams, 48, 49, 50, 52, 53
Belief Change Worksheet, 312 Belief questionnaires, 295 Beliefs
adaptive, 31--32. See also Adaptive core beliefs categories of, 282 core
beliefs, 30--31. See also Core beliefs dysfunctional, 32--35. See also
Dysfunctional core beliefs identifying problems in responding to, 372
important concepts about, 297 intermediate, 35--36. See also
Intermediate beliefs introduction to, 282--283 modifying adaptive
beliefs, 303--307 importance of, 303 maladaptive beliefs, 308--321
Bibliotherapy, 138 Booster sessions, 363, 364 Breathing exercises, 324
Case conceptualization identifying problems in, 368 the therapeutic
relationship and, 58 Catastrophizing, 253 CBT. See Cognitive behavior
therapy CBT sessions booster sessions, 363, 364 content and format of,
174--175, 176--177 deciding to focus on an issue or goal, 169--171
helping clients identify a problematic situation, 171--173 identifying
problems in processing session content, 373 identifying problems in
structure and pacing, 370 importance of structured sessions, 22. See
also CBT session structuring phases of treatment planning, 162--163
planning individual sessions, 166--169 self-therapy sessions, 360--361
stuck points, 374 termination. See Termination See also Evaluation
session; First therapy session CBT session structuring common problems
in structural parts of sessions discussing agenda items, 205--207
eliciting an update, 203--204 mood check, 197--200 overview, 197
reviewing the Action Plan, 205 setting agenda, 200--203

content and format of sessions, 174--175, 176--177 deviating from the
agenda, 207--208 end of sessions, 177, 188--191 first part of sessions
medications/other treatments check, 180 mood check, 178--180 overview,
177 prioritizing the agenda, 185--186 setting an initial agenda,
180--182 specific objectives, 175, 178 update and Action Plan review,
182--185 general difficulties in, 192--197 identifying problems in, 370
importance of structured sessions, 22 middle part of sessions, 177,
186--189 when clients are distressed toward the end of a session,
208--209 CBT theoretical model, 4--5 CBT therapists Action Plans and
problems related to the therapist's cognitions, 158--159 becoming an
effective therapist, 9--12 client distress toward the end of a session,
208--209 common problems in structural parts of sessions discussing
agenda items, 205--207 eliciting an update, 203--204 mood check,
197--200 overview, 197 reviewing the Action Plan, 205 setting an agenda,
200--203 general difficulties in structuring sessions addressing
dysfunctional cognitions, 195--197 clinical tips, 196 engaging the
client, 195 interrupting the client, 194 overview, 192--193 socializing
the client, 194--195 therapist cognitions, 193 identifying problems in
the client's views of, 369 identifying problems in the reactions of, 369
stages of development, 11--12 CCDs. See Cognitive conceptualization
diagrams Clients asking for a helpful response to address automatic
thoughts, 256--257 difficulties addressing dysfunctional cognitions,
195--197 difficulties around interrupting, 194 difficulties engaging,
196 distress toward the end of a session, 208--209 introducing
mindfulness, 278--279 motivating to modify dysfunctional beliefs,
300--302 socializing, 194--195, 196, 370--371 teaching to identify
automatic thoughts, 225--226

Clinical tips Action Plans client's adherence to a plan, 152 clients'
ambivalence about, 147--148 clients trying to do plans perfectly,
156--157 activity scheduling, 126 activity when clients aren't in the
moment, 133 activity when clients have maladaptive behaviors, 131
arousal effect from relaxation, 324 automatic thoughts identifying
automatic thoughts, 101--102 questions to evaluate automatic thoughts,
245, 247 worksheets and automatic thoughts, 269, 270--271 core beliefs,
288--289 difficulties in goal setting, 112 eliciting values, 104--105
exposures, 333 first therapy session, 88, 90, 91, 101--102, 104--105,
112 general difficulties in structuring sessions, 196 identifying
adaptive core beliefs, 290 identifying positive data, 307
intellectual-emotional role plays, 320 medication/other treatments
check, 91 mood check, 90, 180, 200 pie chart technique, 337
psychoeducation about the cognitive model, 101--102 responding to
hopelessness and skepticism, 77, 78--79 self-comparisons, 339 skills
training, 325 summaries, 189 switching goals in treatment, 172--173
teaching clients about distressing images, 346 therapy notes, 261, 263,
264 Cognitions identifying cognitive distortions, 252--255 identifying
problems in maximizing cognitive change, 372 interfering cognitions
about Action Plans, 153--158 levels of, 5 positive, 19, 183--184 See
also Dysfunctional cognitions Cognitive behavioral analysis system of
psychotherapy, 3 Cognitive behavioral modification, 3 Cognitive behavior
therapy (CBT) additional techniques decision making, 327--329 emotion
regulation, 323--324 exposure, 331--334 graded task assignments and the
staircase analogy, 329--331 overview, 322--323 "pie" technique, 334--337

problem solving, 325--327 role playing, 334 self-comparisons, 337--339
skills training, 325 summary, 339 becoming an effective therapist, 9--12
cognitive model of. See Cognitive model development of Beck's CBT, 6--7
difference between CBT and CT-R, 8 example cases, 1--2. See also Abe;
Maria forms of, 3 graph of expected progress, 354--355 negative emotions
and the goal of, 323 origin and overview, 3--4, 14 principles of
treatment, 16--25 problems in therapy. See Problems in therapy research
and CBT efficacy, 5--6 resources, 377--378 sessions. See CBT sessions;
CBT session structuring theoretical model, 4--5 typical cognitive
intervention, 8--9 Cognitive change, identifying problems in maximizing,
372 Cognitive conceptualization Abe case example behavioral strategies,
41 core beliefs, 39--40, 287--288 intermediate beliefs and values, 40
overview, 38--39 sequences leading to depression, 41--43 strengths,
resources, and personal assets, 43--44 automatic thoughts, 28--30
beliefs, 30--35 CBT treatment plans and, 17 cognitive model and, 36--38
initiating the process, 28 intermediate beliefs, 35--36 introduction to
and importance of, 26--28 Cognitive conceptualization diagrams (CCDs)
importance of, 44 Strengths-Based Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram,
44--47 summary, 52--54 traditional CCD, 47--52, 53 Cognitive continuum
technique, 314--316 Cognitive distortions, identifying, 252--255
Cognitive interventions, typical intervention in CBT, 8--9 Cognitive
model automatic thoughts and, 4--5, 28--30, 37--38, 216, 217--218
extended models, 36--38, 216, 217--218 identifying problems in the
client's understanding of, 371 overview, 4--5

psychoeducation about, 99--102 reinforcing in the first therapy session,
94 setting an Action Plan item to reinforce, 102--104 Cognitive
processing therapy, 3 Cognitive restructuring, 326--327 Cognitive
therapy, 3 Cognitive Therapy of Depression (Beck et al.), 56 Cognitive
Therapy Rating Scale, 169, 366 Collaboration identifying problems in,
369 importance in CBT, 19--20 setting Action Plans collaboratively,
140--141 the therapeutic relationship and, 61--62 Collaborative
empiricism, 22--23 Competence Evidence of Competence Chart, 306 Reframes
of Competence Belief Chart, 310--311 Coping cards, 10--11 Coping
strategies coping with difficult experiences, 348--349 rehearsing
adaptive strategies, 342--343 Coping with Depression (Beck), 88 Core
beliefs Abe case example, 39--40, 287--288 about others, the world, and
the future, 287 adaptive, 31--32. See also Adaptive core beliefs
clinical tips, 288--289 cognitive model, 37 concept of, 30--31 defined,
5, 282 dysfunctional, 32--35. See also Dysfunctional core beliefs
expressed as automatic thoughts, 292 intermediate beliefs and, 35--36
modes, 284--287 modifying adaptive beliefs, 303--307 importance of, 303
maladaptive beliefs, 308--321 origin of, 36 schemas and, 283--284, 285
simplified cognitive conceptualization diagram, 54 Strengths-Based
Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram, 44, 45, 46 summary, 302 traditional
cognitive conceptualization diagrams, 47, 48, 49, 50--51, 53 Counseling
skills, the therapeutic relationship and, 58--60 Covert rehearsal,
144--145, 150, 154 Credit lists, 138 CT-R. See Recovery-oriented
cognitive therapy Cultural competency, 18--19

Daily Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts. See Thought Record
"Decatastrophizing" questions, 246--247 Decision making, 327--329
Depression Abe case example, 41--43 analogizing to pneumonia, 97
development of Beck's CBT and, 6--7 importance of modifying maladaptive
beliefs, 303 presenting a diagnosis in the first therapy session, 96--97
psychoeducation about, 97--99 Depressive mode, 284, 286--287 Depressive
rumination, 274--275 Diagnosis identifying problems in, 368 presenting
in the first therapy session, 96--97 Diagnostic impressions, 80
Diagrams, using to explain beliefs, 300 Dialectical behavior therapy, 3
Difficult experiences, coping with, 348--349 Discounting the positive,
253 Disqualifying the positive, 253 Distancing, 343--344 "Distancing"
questions, 248 Downward arrow technique, 204, 291--292 Drug use,
treatment planning and, 167 Dysfunctional Attitude Scale, 295
Dysfunctional cognitions CBT theoretical model and, 4--5 difficulties in
addressing, 195--197 guided discovery in CBT, 22--23 identifying
problems in responding to, 371--372 Dysfunctional (negative) core
beliefs case example, 32--35 characteristics and categories of, 32, 33,
283 clinical tips, 288--289, 292--293 depressive mode and categories of,
286--287 determining the origin and maintenance of, 299--300 educating
clients about, 296--300 identifying, 291--293 impact on schemas, 283,
285 modifying behavioral experiments, 312--313 cognitive continuum,
314--316 deciding when to modify, 296 deciding whether to modify, 295
historical tests, 320 importance of, 303 intellectual--emotional role
plays, 318--320 overview and importance of, 308--309 reframing, 310--312

restructuring the meaning of early memories, 321 Socratic questioning,
309, 310 summary, 321 using other people as a reference point, 316--317
using self-disclosure, 318 using stories, movies, and metaphors, 314
motivating clients to modify, 300--302 Early memories, restructuring,
321, 387--390 Embedded automatic thoughts, 220 Emotional reasoning, 253
Emotion charts, 230, 231 Emotions cognitive model, 28--29, 37, 217--218
differentiating from automatic thoughts, 232--234 emotion regulation
techniques, 323--324 heightening emotional responses to elicit automatic
thoughts, 222 matching the content of automatic thoughts to, 234--235
overview and importance of, 227--228 rating the intensity of, 231--232
summary of, 237--238 techniques to regulate, 237 See also Negative
emotions; Positive emotions Empathy, the therapeutic relationship and,
58--60 Empty-chair work, 308 Engaging clients, difficulties with, 196
Evaluation session clinical tips, 77, 78--79 conducting the assessment,
75--80 diagnostic impression, 80 establishing expectations for
treatment, 84 objectives for, 72--73 overview and importance of, 71--72
setting goals and relating a general treatment plan, 80--82 setting the
Action Plan, 82--84 starting the session, 74--75 structure of, 73
summarizing for the client and eliciting feedback, 85 summary of, 86
therapist activities following, 85 Evidence of Competence Chart, 306
"Evidence" questions, 245--246 Expectations, identifying problems in,
371 Experiential techniques, restructuring the meaning of early
memories, 321, 387--390 Exposure monitor, 333, 334 Exposures clinical
tips, 333 description of, 332--333 overview and rationale for, 331--332
Exposure therapy, 3

Feedback attention to clients' negative reactions about Action Plans,
145--147 eliciting from clients, 60--61 eliciting in the evaluation
session, 85 eliciting in the first therapy session, 113 at the end of a
session, 190--191 identifying problems in, 369 Feedback Form, 115 Final
summary, 189 First therapy session activity scheduling, 112 client
feedback, 113 clinical tips, 88, 90, 91, 101--102, 104--105, 112
diagnosis and psychoeducation about depression, 96--104 end-of-session
summary, 112--113 identifying values and aspirations, 104--108 initial
agenda setting, 91--92 medication/other treatments check, 90--91 mood
check, 89--90 overview and importance of, 87--88 setting goals, 108--112
structure of, 88 therapist activities prior to, 88 update and review of
the Action Plan, 92--96 Formal mindfulness meditation, 275, 276, 277,
279 Forms, negative reaction to, 197--199 Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Scale (GAD-7), 89 Genuineness, therapeutic relationship and, 58--60
Gestalt-type techniques. See Experiential techniques Goals Action Plans
and, 140 deciding to focus sessions on, 169--171 graded task assignment
and the staircase analogy, 329--331 identifying problems in
accomplishing in and across sessions, 372--373 identifying problems in
goal-focused orientation of sessions, 371 implementing steps toward, 137
importance in CBT, 20 setting. See Goal setting switching goals in
treatment, 172--173 treatment planning to accomplish a specific goal,
163, 165 Goal setting addressing automatic thoughts that interfere with,
108--110 addressing difficulties in, 111--112 evaluation session, 80--82
first therapy session, 108--112 identifying problems in, 370 pie chart
technique, 334, 335 Graded task assignment, 329--331 Graph of expected
progress, 354--355

Guided discovery, 22--23, 200 Guide to Booster Sessions, 363, 364 Guide
to self-therapy sessions, 361 Helpless core beliefs, 32, 33, 286--287
Historical tests, 320 Hopelessness check on client's level of, 89
difficulty in agenda setting and, 203 responding to in the evaluation
session, 77--79 Identifying Automatic Thoughts Worksheet, 103--104
Imagery and images identifying negative images, 345--346 inducing
positive images, 341--345 inquiring about to elicit automatic thoughts,
224 introduction to and importance of, 340 modifying spontaneous
negative images, 346--351 relaxation and, 324 strengthening core
beliefs, 307 summary of, 351 synonyms for images, 346 teaching clients
about distressing images, 346 Imaginal exposure, 333 Imaginal recall,
235 Imipramine, 7 "Impact of the automatic thought" questions, 247
Inactivity, conceptualization of, 118--120 Informal mindfulness
practice, 275--276, 279 Information processing dysfunctional negative
beliefs and, 34--35, 288 using a metaphor to explain, 298--299
Intellectual--emotional role plays, 318--320 Intermediate beliefs Abe
case example, 40 cognitive model, 37 concept of, 35--36 defined, 5, 282
maladaptive deciding whether to modify, 295 educating clients about,
296--300 identifying, 293--295 origin of, 36 simplified cognitive
conceptualization diagram, 54 strengthening adaptive beliefs, 303--307
Strengths-Based Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram, 44, 45, 46
traditional cognitive conceptualization diagrams, 48, 49, 50, 51--52, 53
Interpretations, differentiating from automatic thoughts, 219
Interrupting clients, difficulties around, 194 Invalid conclusions,
investigating, 258 Issues, deciding to focus sessions on, 169--171

Jumping to the future technique, 349--350 Labeling, 253 Life events
Strengths-Based Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram, 44, 45, 46
traditional cognitive conceptualization diagrams, 48, 49, 51, 53
Magnification/minimization, 253 Maladaptive intermediate beliefs. See
Intermediate beliefs, maladaptive Maria (case example) Action Plan
addressing practical problems, 151 anticipating and preventing problems,
143--146 daily checklist, 152 overestimation of the demands of, 155--156
tailoring to the individual, 140 addressing dysfunctional cognitions,
195--196 automatic thoughts differentiating from interpretations, 219
eliciting, 215--216 looking for central themes in, 291 psychoeducation
about, 214--215 responding to when a worksheet isn't helpful, 270--271
specifying embedded thoughts, 220 teaching to identify, 225 concerns
about tapering sessions, 358--360 core beliefs identifying dysfunctional
beliefs, 293 modifying dysfunctional beliefs, 314, 320 difficulties in
agenda setting, 201--202, 203 difficulty solving problems, 326 distress
toward the end of a session, 208--209 emotions labeling negative
emotions, 230--231 rating the intensity of, 231, 232 testing beliefs
about, 236 graded task assignment and the staircase analogy, 329--331
interrupting the client, 194 introduction to, 2 modifying spontaneous
negative images, 350--351 resistance to activity scheduling, 126--129
self-comparisons, 337--339 tension and, 212 therapeutic relationship,
66--68 treatment planning deciding to focus on an issue or goal, 170
identifying a problematic situation, 171--173 using the Activity Chart
to assess predictions of mastery and pleasure, 132--133 Mastery
conceptualization of lack of, 120 using the Activity Chart to assess
predictions regarding, 131--133

Medication/other treatments check, 90--91, 180 Medication use, treatment
planning and, 167 Memories focusing on positive memories, 341--342
restructuring, 321, 387--390 Mental filter, 253 Metaphors extended trial
metaphor, 308 using in CBT, 10 using to explain information processing,
298--299 using to modify dysfunctional beliefs, 314 Mindfulness AWARE
technique, 280, 386 concepts and kinds of, 273--274 depressive
rumination and, 274--275 exposure to internal stimuli, 333 formal and
informal practices, 275--276 introducing to clients, 278--279
self-practice and reasons to practice, 276 summary of, 280 techniques
before introducing into CBT treatment, 276--277 techniques following a
mindfulness exercise, 279 testing beliefs about negative emotions, 237
Mind reading, 253 Minimization/magnification, 253 Modes adaptive mode,
284--286 defined, 284 depressive mode, 284, 286--287 Monitoring of
automatic thoughts, 137 exposure monitor, 333, 334 identifying problems
in monitoring clients' understanding, 373 importance in CBT, 18 the
therapeutic relationship and, 60--61 treatment planning and, 168 Mood
check Abe case example, 179--180 clinical tips, 180 common problems
attribution of mood change to external factors, 199 clinical tips, 200
difficulty expressing mood, 199 negative reaction to forms, 197--199
worsening of mood, 199--200 first therapy session, 89--90 opportunities
created by, 178--179 treatment planing and, 167 Motivation identifying
problems in, 369--370

to modify dysfunctional beliefs, 300--302 Movies changing the "movie"
technique, 347 using to modify dysfunctional beliefs, 314 "Must"
statements, 254 Near-termination activities, 358--360 Negative core
beliefs. See Dysfunctional core beliefs Negative emotions
differentiating from automatic thoughts, 232--234 dysfunctional, 227
emotion regulation techniques, 323--324 goal of CBT and, 323 heightening
negative affect, 236 labeling, 229--231 list of, 230 positive functions
of, 227 summary of, 237--238 testing beliefs about, 236--237 Negative
images changing the "movie," 347 following images to conclusion,
347--350 identifying, 345--346 overview, 346--347 reality testing,
350--351 substituting positive images for, 344 teaching clients about
distressing images, 346 Negative predictions, about Action Plans,
153--154 Older client--younger client role play, 390 Opposite thoughts,
224 Other people referencing to modify dysfunctional beliefs, 316--317
referencing to strengthen adaptive beliefs, 305--306 Overestimations, of
the demands of an Action Plan, 154--157 Overgeneralization, 253 Pacing,
205--206, 370 Past-orientation, CBT and, 20--21 Patient Health
Questionnaire (PHQ-9), 89 Periodic summaries, 188--189 Personality
Belief Questionnaire, 295 Personalization, 254 Personal strengths Abe
case example, 43--44 Strengths-Based Cognitive Conceptualization
Diagram, 45, 46 PHQ-9. See Patient Health Questionnaire Physiological
responses, heightening to elicit automatic thoughts, 222 Pie chart
technique, 334--337 Pleasure conceptualization of lack of, 120

using the Activity Chart to assess predictions regarding, 131--133 PMR.
See Progressive muscle relaxation Pneumonia analogy, 97
Point--counterpoint technique, 318--320 Positive cognitions emphasizing
in the session, 183--184 importance in CBT, 19 Positive core beliefs.
See Adaptive core beliefs Positive data clinical tips, 307 strengthening
adaptive beliefs, 304, 305 Positive emotions eliciting and
strengthening, 228--229 emphasizing in the session, 183--184 importance
in CBT, 19 list of, 229 Positive images, inducing, 341--345 Positive
qualities list, 47 Positive regard, therapeutic relationship and, 58--60
Practice exercises, advice about using, 13 Preparing for Therapy
Worksheet, 138, 178, 195 Present-orientation, in CBT, 20--21 Problematic
situations eliciting the meaning of, 25 focusing on positive aspects of,
345 helping clients identify, 171--173 using role play to elicit
automatic thoughts, 223--224 See also Trigger situations Problem-based
cognitive conceptualization diagrams, 47--52, 53 Problems in therapy
conceptualizing, 366--367 overview, 365 remediating, 374--376 stuck
points, 374 summary, 376 types of problems accomplishing therapeutic
goals, 372--373 diagnosis, conceptualization, and treatment planning,
368 motivation, 369--370 overview, 367--368 processing session content,
373 responding to dysfunctional cognitions, 371--372 socializing the
client to treatment, 370--371 structuring and pacing sessions, 370
therapeutic relationship, 369 uncovering the existence of, 366 Problem
solving difficulty with, 206--207, 326 identifying problems in, 371
overview, 325

with true automatic thoughts, 257--258 when problems can't be solved,
326--327 when problems have a low probability of occurrence, 327
"Problem-solving" questions, 248 Problem-solving therapy, 3
Procrastination, 157--158 Progress attributing to the client, 355--356
graph of expected progress, 354--355 Progressive muscle relaxation
(PMR), 324 Psychoeducation about automatic thoughts, 214--215 about
depression, negative thinking, and the treatment plan, 97--99 about
dysfunctional beliefs, 297--300 about the cognitive model, 99--102
importance in CBT, 21 Questions automatic thoughts framed as, 221
eliciting an intermediate belief, 294--295 to evaluate automatic
thoughts "alternative explanation" questions, 246 behavioral methods,
243 clinical tips, 245, 247 "decatastrophizing" questions, 246--247
"distancing" questions, 248 "evidence" questions, 245--246 "impact of
the automatic thought" questions, 247 "problem-solving" questions, 248
question lists, 242, 243 reasons to avoid direct challenges, 241--242
recommendations and guidelines, 243--245 Socratic questioning, 242--243
using alternative questions, 251--252 to specify problems in therapy,
368--373 Questions to Identify Automatic Thoughts handout, 225, 226
Rational emotional behavior therapy, 3 Reality testing, 350--351
Recorded therapy sessions, 366 Recovery-oriented cognitive therapy
(CT-R) automatic thoughts and, 213 difference between CBT and CT-R, 8
example cases, 1--2 middle part of the session, 186--187 origin and
overview, 7--8 theoretical model, 4--5 update in the first therapy
session, 92--94 Re-creations, using to elicit automatic thoughts,
223--224 Reenactment, 387--390 Refocusing, 323--324

Reframes of Competence Belief Chart, 310--311 Reframing, to modify
dysfunctional beliefs, 310--312 Relapse. See Setbacks and relapse
Relapse prevention activities throughout therapy, 355--358 early
treatment activities, 353--355 graph of expected progress, 354--355
introduction to, 353 preparing for setbacks after termination, 362--363
summary, 363--364 Relaxation techniques, 324 Reminder systems, for
Action Plans, 141--142 Resilience building, 357--358 Rogerian counseling
skills, 58--60 Role plays to elicit automatic thoughts, 223--224
intellectual--emotional role plays, 318--320 overview and description
of, 334 restructuring the meaning of early memories, 387--390 Rules
cognitive model, 37 concept of intermediate beliefs and, 35--36 See also
Intermediate beliefs Rumination, 274--275 Rush, A. John, 6--7 Safety
behaviors, 331 SB-CCD. See Strengths-Based Cognitive Conceptualization
Diagram Schemas core beliefs and, 283--284, 285 dysfunctional negative
beliefs and, 34--35 modes and, 284--287 Self, negative core beliefs
about, 286--287 Self-comparisons, 337--339 Self-disclosure using in the
therapeutic relationship, 63--64 using to address automatic thoughts,
256 using to modify dysfunctional beliefs, 318 Self-soothing, 324
Self-therapy sessions, 360--361 Seligman, Martin, 357 Session Notes,
175, 176--177 Setbacks and relapse preparing for after termination,
362--363 recognizing the signs of, 362 See also Relapse prevention
"Should" statements, 254 Situations. See Problematic situations; Trigger
situations Skepticism, responding to in the evaluation session, 77--79
Skills training

in emotion regulation, 325 for relapse prevention, 356--357 Socializing
the client clinical tips, 196 difficulties in, 194--195 identifying
problems in, 370--371 Social skills, role play and, 334 Socratic
questioning evaluating automatic thoughts, 242--243, 261 with guided
discovery, 22--23 modifying dysfunctional beliefs, 309--310 testing the
validity of negative predictions, 137, 255 Solution-focused brief
therapy, 111 Staircase analogy, 329--331 Stories, using to modify
dysfunctional beliefs, 314 Strengths-Based Cognitive Conceptualization
Diagram (SB-CCD), 44--47 Suicidality check, 89 Summaries clinical tips,
189 of evaluated automatic thoughts, 261 final summary, 189 periodic,
188--189 Tapering treatment, 358--360 Telegraphic automatic thoughts,
220--221 Termination clients' reactions to, 362--363 early treatment
activities, 353--355 near-termination activities, 358--360 preparing for
setbacks after, 362--363 Testing Your Thoughts Worksheet, 260, 264,
265--266, 269--270 Therapeutic interventions failing to make, 206
identifying problems in, 373 typical cognitive intervention in CBT, 8--9
Therapeutic objectives, treatment plans and, 161 Therapeutic
relationship collaboration, 61--62 counseling skills, 58--60 essential
guidelines, 57--58 helping clients generalize to other relationships,
67--68 identifying problems in, 369 importance in CBT, 18 introduction
to, 56--57 managing negative reactions toward clients, 68--70 monitoring
clients' affect and eliciting feedback, 60--61 repairing ruptures,
64--67 summary of, 70 tailoring to the individual, 62 using
self-disclosure, 63--64

Therapists. See CBT therapists Therapy notes about setbacks, 363 in
Action Plans, 137 audio-recorded, 264 clinical tips, 261, 263, 264
composing, 261--263 making in the first therapy session, 98--99 writing
down, 23--24 Thought Record, 233, 260, 264, 267--268 Time sensitivity,
CBT and, 21--22 Traditional (problem-based) cognitive conceptualization
diagrams, 47--52, 53 Treatment plans to accomplish a specific goal, 163,
165 clinical tips, 172--173 cognitive conceptualization and, 17
creating, 163, 164 deciding to focus on an issue or goal, 169--171
helping clients identify a problematic situation, 171--173 identifying
problems in, 368 importance of, 160 making therapy notes in the first
therapy session, 98--99 phases of planning, 162--163 planning individual
sessions, 166--169 relating in the evaluation session, 80--82 summary
of, 173 therapeutic objectives and, 161 Treatment time, 21--22 Trial
metaphor, 308 Trigger situations cognitive model, 37 psychoeducation
about, 100 simplified cognitive conceptualization diagram, 54
Strengths-Based Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram, 44, 45, 46
traditional cognitive conceptualization diagrams, 48, 49, 50, 53 See
also Problematic situations Tunnel vision, 254 Two-column technique, for
responses to automatic thoughts, 271 Underlying assumptions. See
Assumptions University of Pennsylvania, 6--7 Unlovable core beliefs, 32,
33, 286--287 Updates difficulties in eliciting, 203--204 first part of a
session, 182--185 first therapy session, 92--94 Valued action/behavior,
258--259, 323--324 Values Abe case example, 40 Action Plans and, 140

eliciting, 104--105 importance in CBT, 20 pie chart technique, 334, 335
Visualization of positive outcomes for Action Plans, 142 using to elicit
automatic thoughts, 223 Well-being building, 357--358 Worksheets advice
about using, 13 alternatives to for responding to automatic thoughts,
270--271 clinical tips with automatic thoughts, 269, 270--271 using to
respond to automatic thoughts, 264--270 Worry, AWARE technique, 280, 386
Worthlessness core beliefs, 32, 33, 286--287

About Guilford Press www.guilford.com Founded in 1973, Guilford
Publications, Inc., has built an international reputation as a publisher
of books, periodicals, and DVDs in mental health, education, geography,
and research methods. We pride ourselves on teaming up with authors who
are recognized experts, and who translate their knowledge into vital,
needed resources for practitioners, academics, and general readers. Our
dedicated editorial professionals work closely on each title to produce
high-quality content that readers can rely on. The firm is owned by its
founding partners, President Bob Matloff and Editor-in-Chief Seymour
Weingarten, and many staff members have been at Guilford for more than
20 years.

Discover Related Guilford Books Sign up to receive e-Alerts with new
book news and special offers in your fields of interest:
http://www.guilford.com/e-alerts.

Guilford Periodicals---Online and GP Mobile Taking periodicals to the
next level, our website offers exciting features and new ways to access
up-to-the-minute information and perspectives. Visit
www.guilfordjournals.com from any device to access your subscription or
to view sample issues, order individual articles, or purchase a 24-hour
Day Pass to download any articles (from current or back issues as well
as digital archives) on our site. You can also search for authors or
keywords across one---or all---Guilford periodicals, subscribe to TOC
alerts or RSS feeds, see our Most Viewed and Most Cited Articles, and
use a variety of social media options to share free content with your
friends.

Description of image for Figure 3.3 The diagram shows a circle, labeled
"I'm incompetent." Two negative data: "Difficulty reading text" and
"Thinking of applying for a bank loan" directly enter the circle. Two
positive data: "Sessions with a client went well" and "Finished reading
text" are converted into negative data as "But it's because she's so
eager to please me" and "But it took me so long." These converted data
then enter into the circle, "I'm incompetent" Two other positive data:
"Finished paperwork" and "Figured out ambiguous diagnosis" are rejected
back on its entry to "I'm incompetent." Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Figure 3.4 The flow starts with Relevant Life
History and Strengths, Assets. From here it flows down to Adaptive core
beliefs (prior to onset of current difficulties) and then to the
Adaptive intermediate beliefs: Rules, Attitudes, Assumptions (prior to
onset of current difficulties) and flows to Adaptive patterns of
behavior (prior to onset of current difficulties). The Relevant Life
History reads (including accomplishments, strengths, personal qualities,
and resources prior to current difficulties): People described Abe as "a
good kid." Some positive interactions with family, maternal uncle, and
coaches growing up. Took father's abandonment in stride. Tried hard when
given age-inappropriate responsibilities at home at age 11. Good
friends, average grades, above-average athlete, high school diploma.
Likeable, a "good family man"; good relationships with
children/grandchildren, a cousin, two male friends; made a reasonable
living; always budgeted and saved money. The Strengths, Assets reads
Strongly motivated, good sense of humor, liked by most people. Sees two
grown children and four grandchildren often, helps them out, close
relationships with them, a cousin, and several male friends. Had made a
reasonable living; always budgeted and saved money. Highly motivated.
Excellent work history; many interpersonal, organizational, and
supervisory skills; reliable and responsible. Good problem-solver and
good common sense. Adaptive core beliefs (prior to onset of current
difficulties) reads "I'm responsible, considerate, competent,
self-reliant, helpful, a good person, likeable, resourceful. Most people
are neutral or benign. The world is potentially unpredictable but
relatively safe and stable. I can cope (if bad things happen)." Adaptive
intermediate beliefs: Rules, Attitudes, Assumptions (prior to onset of
current difficulties) reads "Family, work, and community are important.
It's important to work hard, be productive, self-reliant, responsible,
and

reliable, honor commitments, consider others' feelings, do the right
thing; do what I say I'm going to do. I should figure things out for
myself. If I persist on a difficult task, I'll probably succeed. If I
perform highly, it means I'm competent; I'm okay." Adaptive patterns of
behavior (prior to onset of current difficulties) reads Sets high
standards for himself, works hard, tries to increase his competence,
perseveres and solves problems himself; is kind and considerate to
others, honors his commitments, does what he sees as "the right thing,"
helps others. From Adaptive patterns of behavior (prior to onset of
current difficulties) three Situations are branched out and from each
Situation the flow covers Automatic though(s), Emotions, and Behavior.
The first branch shows the flow as follows. SITUATION 1: Thinking about
meeting buddies for breakfast. AUTOMATIC THOUGHT(S): "I'm really tired,
but I don't want to disappoint them." EMOTIONS: Neutral. BEHAVIOR: Goes
to breakfast. The second branch shows the flow as follows. SITUATION 2:
Fixing neighbor's car AUTOMATIC THOUGHT(S): "I don't know if I can get
it to run." EMOTIONS: Neutral. BEHAVIOR: Keeps trying. The third branch
shows the flow as follows. SITUATION 3: Surfing the Web

AUTOMATIC THOUGHT(S): "I'd like a better TV, but I have to cover my
bills." EMOTIONS: Mild disappointment. BEHAVIOR: Doesn't order TV.
Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Figure 3.5 The flow starts with Relevant Life
History. From here it flows down to Adaptive core beliefs (prior to
onset of current difficulties) and then to the Adaptive intermediate
beliefs: Rules, Attitudes, Assumptions (prior to onset of current
difficulties) and flows to Adaptive patterns of behavior (prior to onset
of current difficulties). The Relevant Life History reads (including
accomplishments, strengths, personal qualities, and resources prior to
current difficulties): What experiences contributed to the development
and maintenance of the adaptive core belief(s)? What have the client's
strengths, skills, personal and material assets, and positive
relationships been like? What are the client's skills, strengths, and
positive qualities? What internal and external resources does the client
have? Adaptive core beliefs (prior to onset of current difficulties)
reads What are the client's most central adaptive beliefs about
him/herself? Others? The world? Adaptive intermediate beliefs: Rules,
Attitudes, Assumptions (prior to onset of current difficulties) reads
What general assumptions, rules, attitudes, and values does the client
have? Adaptive patterns of behavior (prior to onset of current
difficulties) reads What adaptive coping strategies and behaviors does
the client display? From Adaptive patterns of behavior (prior to onset
of current difficulties), three Situations are branched out and from
each Situation the flow covers Automatic though(s), Emotions, and
Behavior. The first branch shows the flow as follows. SITUATION 1: What
was the problematic situation?

AUTOMATIC THOUGHT(S): What went through the client's mind? EMOTIONS:
What emotions were associated with the automatic thought? BEHAVIOR: What
did the client do that was helpful? The second and third branch shows
blank for all its components. Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Figure 3.7 The flow starts with Relevant Life
History and Precipitants. From here it flows down to Core Belief(s)
(during current episode) and then to the Intermediate Beliefs:
Conditional Assumptions/Attitudes/Rules (during current episode) and
flows to Coping Strategies (during current episode). The Relevant Life
History and Precipitants reads Father leaves family when Abe is 11 years
old. He never sees him again. Mom is overburdened, very critical when he
can't meet her unrealistic expectations. Precipitants to current
disorder: Abe struggles and then loses his job and undergoes divorce.
The Core Belief(s) (during current episode) reads "I'm incompetent/a
failure." The Intermediate Beliefs: Conditional
Assumptions/Attitudes/Rules (during current episode) reads "It's
important to be responsible, competent, reliable, and helpful." "It's
important to work hard and be productive." During depression: (1) "If I
avoid challenges, I'll be okay, but if I try to do hard things, I'll
fail." (2) "If I avoid asking for help, my incompetence won't show, but
if I do ask for help, people will see how incompetent I am." The Coping
Strategies (during current episode) reads Avoids asking for help and
avoids challenges. From Coping Strategies (during current episode),
three Situations are branched out and from each Situation the flow
covers Automatic though(s), MEANING OF A.T., Emotions, and Behavior.

The first branch shows the flow as follows. SITUATION 1: Thinking about
bills. AUTOMATIC THOUGHT(S): "What if I run out of money?" MEANING OF
A.T: "I'm a failure." EMOTIONS: Anxious BEHAVIOR: Continues to sit on
couch; ruminates about his failures The second branch shows the flow as
follows. SITUATION 2: Thinking of asking son for help in revising
resume. AUTOMATIC THOUGHT(S): "I should be able to do this on my own."
MEANING OF A.T: "I'm incompetent." EMOTIONS: Sad BEHAVIOR: Avoids asking
son for help. The third branch shows the flow as follows. SITUATION 3:
Memory of being criticized by boss AUTOMATIC THOUGHT(S): "I should have
tried harder." MEANING OF A.T: "I'm a failure." EMOTIONS: Sad BEHAVIOR:
Ruminates about what a failure he was. An arrow from the CORE BELIEF(S)
(during current episode): "I'm incompetent/a failure." Flows directly to
the first branch of AUTOMATIC THOUGHT(S): "What if I run out of money?"

Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Figure 3.8 The flow starts with Relevant Life
History and Precipitants. From here it flows down to Core Belief(s)
(during current episode) and then to the Intermediate Beliefs:
Conditional Assumptions/Attitudes/Rules (during current episode) and
flows to Coping Strategies (during current episode). The Relevant Life
History and Precipitants reads Which experiences contributed to the
development and maintenance of the core belief(s)? The Core Belief(s)
(during current episode) reads What are the client's most central
dysfunctional beliefs about him/herself? Other people? The world? The
Intermediate Beliefs: Conditional Assumptions/Attitudes/Rules (during
current episode) reads Which assumptions, rules, and beliefs help
him/her cope with the core belief(s\]? The Coping Strategies (during
current episode) reads Which dysfunctional behaviors help him/her cope
with the belief(s)? From Coping Strategies (during current episode)
three Situations are branched out and from each Situation the flow
covers Automatic though(s), MEANING OF A.T., Emotions, and Behavior. The
first branch shows the flow as follows. SITUATION 1: What was the
problematic situation? AUTOMATIC THOUGHT(S): What went through his/her
mind? MEANING OF A.T: What did the automatic thought mean to him/her?
EMOTIONS: Which emotion(s) were associated with the automatic
thought(s)? BEHAVIOR: What did the client do then?

The second and third branch shows blank for all its components. An arrow
from the CORE BELIEF(S) (during current episode): "I'm incompetent/a
failure." Flows directly to the first branch of AUTOMATIC THOUGHT(S):
"What if I run out of money?" Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Figure 3.9 The Situation is branched out into
two Automatic Thoughts and this is further branched into Emotion and
Behavior, respectively. • The Situation reads, Charlie cancels Sunday
breakfast. • The first automatic thought reads "What if there's
something wrong?" • The second automatic thought reads "He probably
doesn't want to get together." • The first emotion is Anxiety. • The
first behavior is nothing. • The second emotion is Sadness. • The second
behavior is Sits on couch and ruminates. Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Figure 3.10 The flow is as follows. • CORE
BELIEF(S) "I'm incompetent." • INTERMEDIATE BELIEFS: CONDITIONAL
ASSUMPTIONS/ATTITUDES/RULES "It's terrible to fail." "I should give up
if a challenge seems too great." "If I set low goals for myself, I'll be
okay, but if I set high goals, I'll fail." "If I rely on others, I'll be
okay, but if I rely on myself, I'll fail." "If I avoid difficult tasks,
I'll be okay, but if I don't, I'll fail." The flow continues. • COPING
STRATEGIES: Developing low standards, relying on others, avoiding hard
work • SITUATION: Reads CBT textbook • AUTOMATIC THOUGHT(S): "This is
just too hard. I'm so dumb. I'll never master this. I'll never make it
as a therapist." • MEANING OF A T: "I'm incompetent." • EMOTIONS: Sad •
BEHAVIOR: Turns on the television.

Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Page 100 These four components are relatively
compared with the conversation between Abe and Judith. Situation: Think
about doing something, like taking grandchildren out. Automatic
thoughts: "Everything is too hard." Emotion: Depressed. Behavior: Stays
sitting on couch. The automatic thoughts, Emotion, and Behavior are
interlinked to each other. Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Figure 6.2 The action plan dated, May
thirteenth reads as follows. Read this Action Plan and the one from last
week twice a day. Continue to give myself credit. How my thoughts affect
my reaction • Situation: Thinking about doing something, like taking
grandchildren out • Automatic thoughts: "Everything is too hard." •
Emotion: Depressed. • Behavior: Stay sitting on couch. The automatic
thoughts, emotion, and behavior are interlinked to each other. When I
criticize myself, remember I'm only looking at part of the scene, and
it's through black glasses. Judy says it's not my fault that I'm doing
this. It's happening because I have depression. When I notice my mood is
getting worse or I'm doing something unproductive, ask myself, "What's
going through my mind right now?" and write down my thoughts on the
Identifying Thoughts Worksheet. Wear a rubber band to remind me to do
this. Remember, black glasses. A drawing shows black glasses. If I'm
feeling really tired and feel like staying on the couch instead of going
out---or doing something else---remind myself that I have to get back
into the world. It's important to go. Not going will probably keep me
depressed. I want to get back into the world so I can be productive, be
better to my

family. I'll feel more useful and competent and in control. Going out
may or may not affect my mood right away. I may need to crank up the
jack-in-thebox. To do: 1. Take Ethan out for ice cream. 2. Go out four
times this week. For example, take a 5-minute walk, go to the grocery
store, or go to the hardware store. Demonstrate to myself that I can
take control and do things. 3. Look at the goal list. Do I want to add
or cross off or change any? Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Page 118 The Situation includes Thinking about
initiating an activity. The common Automatic Thought includes "I'm too
tired." "I won't enjoy it." "My friends won't want to spend time with
me." "I won't be able to do it." "Nothing can help me feel better." The
common Emotional reactions include Sadness, anxiety, and hopelessness.
The common Behavior includes Remain inactive. Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Page 119 The three components are
Behavior/Situation, Negative Thoughts, and Depressed Mood. The
Behavior/Situation includes Inactivity/Recognizing Inactivity. Navigate
back to the page.

Description of image for Page 119 The three components are
Behavior/Situation, Positive Thoughts, and Increased Hopefulness. The
Behavior/Situation includes Increased Activity/Recognition of Increased
Activity. Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Page 120 The situation includes Engaging in an
activity. The common automatic thought includes "There's no point in
doing this." "I'm doing a terrible job." "I should have done this long
ago." "There's still so much left to do." "I can't do this as well as I
used to." "This used to be more fun." "I don't deserve to be doing
this." The common emotional reactions include Sadness, anxiety, guilt,
anger at self. The common behavior includes Stop the activity. Fail to
repeat this activity in the future. Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Figure 12.1, Image 1 The flow is as follows. •
Situation: Friend calls Annie to cancel lunch and shopping. • Automatic
thought: "She doesn't want to see me." • Emotion: Sadness. • Additional
automatic thoughts: "This is the second time she's done that. She's
being inconsiderate." • Emotion: Irritability. • Situation: Realizes she
has no backup plan. • Automatic thought: "Now what am I going to do this
afternoon?" • Emotion: Anxiety. • Situation: Thinks about what to do. •
Automatic thoughts: "I really should go pay the bills. But what if I
don't have enough money in the checking account?" • Emotion: Anxiety. •
Behavior: Sits on couch and obsesses over lack of money. • Physiological
response: Tension in body. • Situation: Notices how she's feeling. The
flow continues.

Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Figure 12.1, Image 2 The flow continues as
follows. • Automatic thought: "I don't like feeling this way." •
Emotion: Increased anxiety. • Physiological response: Increased tension
• Automatic thought: "I want a glass of wine. But it's too early to
start drinking." • Emotion: Increased anxiety. • Physiological response:
Increased tension. • Automatic thought: \[permission giving thought\]
"There's nothing else I can do to get rid of this feeling. I might as
well go get some \[wine\]." • Emotion: Partial relief. • Physiological
response: Slight reduction in tension. • Behavior: Gets a glass of wine
and drinks it quickly. • Automatic thought: "That feels better." •
Emotion: Relief. • Physiological response: Reduction of tension. The
flow goes on. Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Page 231 The following are the rating for
different level of emotions. 1 and 2: A little, 3 through 5: A medium
amount, 7: A lot, 9 and 10: Completely. The rating 6 lies between the
emotion levels: A medium amount and A lot, while rating 8 lies between A
lot and Completely. Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Figure 17.1 The flow starts from the Lifetime
experiences and ends at Reaction. • Lifetime experiences: Abe did well
enough at school, excelled at sports, was very helpful to others, got
excellent job reviews, was a good problemsolver, and worked hard. • Core
belief: "I'm competent." • Historical situation: Thinking about new
responsibilities as a supervisor. The flow enters into a section
labeled, "Schema" and the flow continues. • Interpretation of experience
through screen of core belief. • Automatic thought, "I'll do a good
job." • Reaction. An arrow from Core belief directly flows to the
Automatic thought. Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Figure 17.2 The flow starts from the Lifetime
experiences and ends at Reaction. • Lifetime experiences: Mother yelled
when the house was messy or brothers were out of control. • Core belief:
"I'm competent." • Historical situation: Thinking about unpaid bills.
The flow enters into a section labeled, "Schema" and the flow continues.
• Interpretation of experience through screen of core belief. •
Automatic thought, "I can't believe I haven't paid them yet." •
Reaction. An arrow from Core belief directly flows to the Automatic
thought. Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Page 316 The values on the number line relate
as follows: zero percent: Never works, harms others; 20 percent: Lives
off family money; 40 percent: Jeremy; 60 percent: Abe; 90 percent: Abe
with job. Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Figure 19.2 The staircase consists of six steps
that read the following metaphor from down to up. • Talk to my neighbor
about moving. • Figure out how much rent I can afford. • Look online for
apartments. • Call to make appointment to visit. • Visit one potential
apartment. • Visit another potential apartment. Navigate back to the
page.

Description of image for Figure 19.4 The first pie chart is titled,
"Ideal Expenditure of time." The chart is divided into seven segments.
The data from the chart are as follows: • Work or School or Intellectual
Side: 50 percent. • Friend: 25 percent. • Fun: 12.5 percent. • Other
Interests: 3.125 • Spiritual: 3.125 • Household,: 3.125. • Physical:
3.125. Note: All values are estimated. The second pie chart is titled,
"Actual Expenditure of time." The chart is divided into seven segments.
The data from the chart are as follows: • Work/School/Intellectual Side:
80 percent. • Friends: 5 percent. • Fun: 5 percent. • Other Interests:
2.5 percent. • Spiritual: 2.5 percent. • Household,: 2.5 percent.

• Physical: 2.5 percent. Note: All values are estimated. Navigate back
to the page.

Description of image for Figure 19.5 The chart is divided into four
segments and infers the following data. • Personality: 25 percent. •
Hair Trigger: 25 percent. • Divorce Hasn't Made Her Happier: 30 percent.
• Losing My Job: 20 percent. Navigate back to the page.

Description of image for Figure 20.1 The vertical and horizontal axes of
the graph represent Improvement and Time, respectively. The graph shows
a progressive trend with a lot of rises and falls, along with a few
stable trends. Navigate back to the page.


