Learning Supportive Psychotherapy An Illustrated Guide Second Edition

Learning Supportive Psychotherapy An Illustrated Guide Second Edition
Arnold Winston, M.D. Chairman Emeritus, Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, Mount Sinai Beth Israel, New York, New York;
Professor Emeritus, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York; Professor
and Associate Chairman, Department of Psychiatry, St. George's
University School of Medicine, St. George's, Grenada

Richard N. Rosenthal, M.D., M.A. Director of Addiction Psychiatry,
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Health, Stony Brook Medicine,
Stony Brook, New York; Professor of Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry
and Behavioral Health, Renaissance School of Medicine at Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, New York; Adjunct Professor of Psychiatry,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York

Laura Weiss Roberts, M.D., M.A. Chairman and Katharine Dexter McCormick
and Stanley McCormick Memorial Professor, Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences,

Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California

Note: The authors have worked to ensure that all information in this
book is accurate at the time of publication and consistent with general
psychiatric and medical standards, and that information concerning drug
dosages, schedules, and routes of administration is accurate at the time
of publication and consistent with standards set by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration and the general medical community. As medical
research and practice continue to advance, however, therapeutic
standards may change. Moreover, specific situations may require a
specific therapeutic response not included in this book. For these
reasons and because human and mechanical errors sometimes occur, we
recommend that readers follow the advice of physicians directly involved
in their care or the care of a member of their family. Books published
by American Psychiatric Association Publishing represent the findings,
conclusions, and views of the individual authors and do not necessarily
represent the policies and opinions of American Psychiatric Association
Publishing or the American Psychiatric Association. Disclosures of
interests: The authors have no competing interests or conflicts to
declare. If you wish to buy 50 or more copies of the same title, please
go to www.appi.org/special discounts for more information. Copyright ©
2020 American Psychiatric Association Publishing ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Second Edition Manufactured in the United States of America on acid-free
paper 23 22 21 20 19 5 4 3 2 1 American Psychiatric Association
Publishing 800 Maine Avenue SW Suite 900 Washington, DC 20024-2812
www.appi.org Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names:
Winston, Arnold, 1935-- author. \| Rosenthal, Richard N., author. \|
Roberts, Laura Weiss, 1960-- author. \| American Psychiatric Association
Publishing, issuing body. Title: Learning supportive psychotherapy : an
illustrated guide / by Arnold Winston, Richard N. Rosenthal, Laura Weiss
Roberts. Other titles: Core competencies in psychotherapy. Description:
Second edition. \| Washington, D.C. : American Psychiatric Association
Publishing, \[2020\] \| Series: Core competencies in psychotherapy \|
Includes bibliographical references and index. \| Identifiers: LCCN
2019037391 (print) \| LCCN 2019037392 (ebook) \| ISBN 9781615372348
(paperback ; alk. paper) \| ISBN 9781615372874 (ebook) Subjects: MESH:
Psychotherapy---methods \| Professional-Patient Relations \|
Psychotherapeutic Processes Classification: LCC RC480.5 (print) \| LCC
RC480.5 (ebook) \| NLM WM 420 \| DDC 616.89/14--- dc23 LC record
available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019037391 LC ebook record available
at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019037392

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data A CIP record is
available from the British Library.

To my wife, Dr. Beverly Winston, for her steadfast love, help, and
support. ---Arnold Winston, M.D.

To my late father, Harold M. Rosenthal, whose conversations with me
about psychoanalysis inspired my lifelong interest in the life of the
mind. ---Richard N. Rosenthal, M.D., M.A.

For Gabrielle. ---Laura Weiss Roberts, M.D., M.A.

Contents Introduction Acknowledgments Video Guide

1 Evolution of the Concept of Supportive Psychotherapy 2 Principles and
Mode of Action 3 Assessment, Case Formulation, and Goal Setting 4
Techniques 5 General Framework of Supportive Psychotherapy 6 The
Therapeutic Relationship 7 Crisis Intervention 8 Applicability to
Special Populations 9 Evaluating Competence and Outcome Research 10
Questions for Self-Study References Index

Introduction

We are pleased to present a revised edition of our book, Learning
Supportive Psychotherapy, first published in 2004 as Introduction to
Supportive Psychotherapy and revised in 2012. One of our authors, Dr.
Henry Pinsker, has retired, but we have been fortunate to find an
outstanding new coauthor, Dr. Laura Roberts, who brings a wealth of
experience and expertise to this new edition. This book is written for
beginning therapists who need to learn the fundamentals of psychotherapy
and in particular need to learn how to talk with psychotherapy patients.
All practitioners search for effective ways to treat patients. We
believe that the beginning resident attempting to practice supportive
psychotherapy needs clear guidelines for the conduct and progression of
psychotherapy from beginning to end. Accordingly, we have attempted to
present straightforward guidelines to help the beginner in four major
areas: Forming and maintaining a positive therapeutic alliance
Understanding and formulating patients' problems Setting realistic
treatment goals Knowing what to say to patients (technique) After
introducing the concept of supportive psychotherapy, we present the
basic principles of this treatment approach and the position of
supportive psychotherapy on a continuum from supportive to expressive
psychotherapy on the basis of the extent and level of a patient's
psychopathology. We describe supportive psychotherapy interventions
available to the therapist, the process of performing a thorough patient

evaluation and case formulation, and the process of setting realistic
goals with the patient. The general framework of supportive
psychotherapy--- including indications, phases of treatment, initiation
and termination of sessions, and professional boundaries---is outlined.
We include therapeutic relationship issues (transference,
countertransference, therapeutic alliance) and self-disclosure
guidelines. We then discuss crisis intervention, which uses many
supportive psychotherapy approaches, and the applicability of supportive
psychotherapy to special populations, including patients with chronic
mental illness, substance use disorders, and co-occurring conditions. We
conclude the book with a discussion of how to determine whether a
psychiatry resident has achieved competence in supportive psychotherapy
and with a presentation of the evidence for the efficacy of supportive
psychotherapy, including a number of outcome trials. The final chapter
includes a number of questions for self-study. Arnold Winston, M.D.
Richard N. Rosenthal, M.D., M.A. Laura Weiss Roberts, M.D., M.A.

Acknowledgments

Residents at Beth Israel Medical Center and St. Luke's-Roosevelt
Hospital Center were recruited as patients and therapists for the
psychotherapy videos. We are grateful for their efforts in production of
these videos. The following residents participated from Beth Israel
Medical Center: Caroline Blackman, M.D., Nivea Calico, M.D., David
Edgcomb, M.D., and Glenn Occhiogrosso, M.D. The following residents
participated from St. Luke'sRoosevelt Hospital Center: Justin Capote,
M.D., Nonso Ekene Enekwechi, M.D., Adrienne Mishkin, M.D., and Vinod
Pachagiri Suresh, M.D. We wish to acknowledge the importance of the Beth
Israel Brief Psychotherapy Research Program in providing the milieu for
the writing of this book and our appreciation of our colleagues from
this program, especially John Christopher Muran, Jeremy Safran, and Lisa
Wallner Samstag. Finally, we are grateful to the Supportive
Psychotherapy Study Group, including Victor Goldin, Esther Goldman,
David Hellerstein, David Janeway, Steve Klee, Lee Shomstein, Fran
Silverman, Jeffrey Solgan, Adam Wilensky, and Philip Yanowitch, for help
in developing many of the ideas contained in this book. We also wish to
express our appreciation to Gabrielle Termuehlen, Tenzin Tsungmey, and
Ann Tennier for their excellent work in editing, engaging with the
authors, and performing literature reviews in the development of this
most recent edition.

Video Guide

The videos in this book provide detailed examples of supportive
psychotherapy. Each video includes text boxes at the bottom of the
screen highlighting the therapist's interventions. The videos can be
viewed online by navigating to www.appi.org/Winston and using the
embedded video player. The videos are optimized for most current
operating systems, including mobile operating systems.

Video cues provided in the text identify the vignette by title and
approximate run time.

Case Vignettes Chapter 3. Assessment, Case Formulation, and Goal Setting
Vignette 1: Assessment (9:54) This vignette illustrates how to perform a
thorough assessment of a new patient while developing and maintaining a
therapeutic alliance.

Chapter 4. Techniques Vignette 2: Severe, Persistent Mental Illness in
an Uncooperative Patient (13:42)

This vignette illustrates a highly supportive approach with an
uncooperative patient who has a great deal of psychopathology. Vignette
3: Supportive-Expressive Treatment (30:49) This vignette is of a
reasonably well integrated young woman who is treated with
supportive-expressive psychotherapy.

Chapter 5. General Framework of Supportive Psychotherapy Vignette 4:
Addressing a Misalliance (6:22) In this vignette, the therapist
addresses a misalliance within the patienttherapist relationship and
"owns up" to making a mistake, which helps to alleviate the misalliance.

Chapter 7. Crisis Intervention Vignette 5: Crisis Intervention (18:00)
This vignette illustrates a number of different techniques that can be
used for a patient with posttraumatic stress disorder. Session 1
(0:00--7:13) Session 2 (7:14--12:47) Session 4 (12:48--15:03) Session 5
(15:04--18:00)

Chapter 8. Applicability to Special Populations Vignette 6: Substance
Use Disorder (7:00) This vignette illustrates the use of psychoeducation
in a patient with substance use disorder in order to address the
patient's use of denial and the moral model of addiction.

Evolution of the Concept of Supportive Psychotherapy

1

Origins Supportive psychotherapy is a treatment approach focused on
patients' overall health and well-being and their abilities to adapt
constructively to their life circumstances. The domain of supportive
psychotherapy has become larger in recent years, reflecting changes in
the definition, and even more so in the practice, of psychotherapy.
Today, supportive psychotherapy has a robust evidence base and plays an
important role in the care of individuals living with diverse mental and
physical disorders and in the care of individuals facing difficult life
events or experiences, such as the transition to college, the birth of a
child, changes in employment, divorce, and bereavement. Supportive
psychotherapy was developed in the early twentieth century as a
treatment approach with more limited objectives than psychoanalysis,
which had previously been the only psychological treatment in medicine.
Psychoanalysis and psychotherapy were originally developed as treatments
for neurosis, which was the principal concern of office-based (i.e.,
nonhospital) psychiatrists. Neurosis was conceptualized as an
unconscious attempt to solve a psychological conflict. As psychotherapy
became more widely accepted, therapists applied psychotherapeutic
techniques to a broad range of problems that were outside the scope of
the earliest psychotherapy and not adequately explained by the theories
associated with it. Because of practical considerations, including
affordability, a course of treatment often consisted of a small number
of visits, and the objective was limited to relief of the presenting
problem. Therapists found it necessary to be more interactive and
responsive with patients. Flexible response to clinical reality called
for more general use of supportive approaches. Although some therapists
feared that they were diluting "real" psychotherapy by not

adhering to its rules, therapists were, in fact, applying a different
psychotherapy. Psychoanalytic thinkers who formulated theories about the
causes of symptoms and personality problems created a general theory of
mental organization and behavior referred to as psychodynamic theory.
Many concepts of psychodynamic theory have become so widely disseminated
that they are now accepted as established truths about mental life by
much of the educated public in the Western world. Therapy that was not
psychoanalysis but that instead was based on theories developed by
psychoanalysts became known as psychodynamic psychotherapy. This therapy
has been called psychoanalytically oriented psychotherapy, intensive
psychotherapy, uncovering psychotherapy, change-oriented psychotherapy,
insight-directed psychotherapy, or---the term we employ--- expressive
psychotherapy (not to be confused with dance therapy, art therapy, and
so forth, which have also been designated as "expressive"). Between 1950
and 1970, psychodynamic psychotherapy became the most widely practiced
psychological treatment approach in the United States. It was taught as
the embodiment of theories of personality development, with the
objectives of reversing the primary disease process or restructuring the
personality (Ursano and Silberman 1999). Although personality change is
invariably assumed to be the objective in the psychotherapy literature,
for many patients, the objective is stability and adaptation, not
fundamental change. The objectives of supportive treatment, as initially
defined, were not to change a patient's personality but rather to help a
patient cope with symptoms, to prevent relapse of a serious mental
illness, or to help a relatively healthy person deal with a transient
problem. Supportive psychotherapy differed from traditional
psychoanalytic treatment in that the therapist played an active and
direct role in the therapeutic relationship. Authors continue to propose
different definitions of supportive psychotherapy (Douglas 2008; Winston
et al. 1986) and continue to hold different opinions about whether or
not supportive psychotherapy is a psychodynamic therapy or a distinctive
form of therapy. The problem of definition is compounded by the
coexistence of two incompatible definitions of psychodynamic therapy.
Some writers use the term psychodynamic psychotherapy broadly to
describe any therapy in which the

therapist's understanding of mental life is based on theories developed
by psychoanalytic writers; other authors use the term narrowly to
describe only therapies that employ the essential techniques of
expressive therapy. Definitions of supportive psychotherapy have been
organized around four themes: 1. What the therapist hopes to achieve
(objectives)---for example, to maintain or improve the patient's
self-esteem, to minimize or prevent recurrence of symptoms, and to
maximize the patient's adaptive capacities (Pinsker et al. 1991) 2. What
the patient wants to achieve (goals)---for example, to maintain or
reestablish the patient's best possible level of functioning given the
limitations of his or her personality, inherent ability, and life
circumstances (Ursano and Silberman 1999) 3. What the therapist does
(technique)---for example, encouragement, reassurance, education, and
advice 4. What it is not---that is, an exposition of elements that have
been subtracted from expressive therapy (Dewald 1964, 1971) In
addressing the question of where supportive psychotherapy fits among the
many models of psychotherapy, Rockland (1989) proposed the acronym POST
to signify psychodynamically oriented supportive therapy, explaining
that all psychotherapies involve both supportive and exploratory
interventions and that therapy should be "based on as complete an
understanding as possible of the patient's core conflicts,
characteristic defensive maneuvers, ego functions, superego
organization, and object relations" (p. 7). Although Rockland's acronym
has not caught on, his thinking reflects the views of most people who
have written about supportive psychotherapy in the past 25 years. A
therapist who accepts the following tenets of modern psychodynamic
therapy is a psychodynamically oriented therapist (Fonagy and Target
2009): Assumption of psychological causation Assumption of limitations
of consciousness and the influence of unconscious mental states

Assumption of internal representations of interpersonal relationships
Assumption of ubiquity of psychological conflict Assumption of psychic
defenses Assumption of complex meaning Assumption of emphasis on the
therapeutic relationship Assumption of the validity of a developmental
perspective According to Gabbard (2017, pp. 4--18), three elements of
psychodynamic psychotherapy pertain to the therapist's understanding of
the patient: Much of mental life is unconscious. Childhood experiences
in concert with genetic factors shape the adult. Symptoms and behaviors
serve multiple functions and are determined by complex and often
unconscious forces. Three elements of psychodynamic psychotherapy
pertain to the therapist's actions, or to the conduct of the treatment:
The patient's transference to the therapist is a primary source of
understanding. The therapist's countertransference provides valuable
understanding about what the patient induces in others. The patient's
resistance to the therapeutic process is a major focus of the therapy. A
final element of psychodynamic psychotherapy describes the objective, or
what the therapist hopes to accomplish: The goal is to assist the
patient in achieving a sense of authenticity and uniqueness. The
psychodynamically oriented therapist practicing supportive psychotherapy
understands the patient in terms of the first three of Gabbard's (2017)
points but does not conduct treatment in the manner described in the
next three points. Transference is used only to the extent

necessary. Resistance might be used without implications about
unconscious process to describe the patient's clinging to familiar
patterns. Although the therapist would be pleased to achieve the outcome
described in the last point, the formal objectives of supportive
psychotherapy are limited to symptom relief and better adaptation in
promoting overall health and personal well-being. The early
characterization of supportive psychotherapy as a limited approach was
based on its deviation from classical theory. Although the rationale and
techniques of today's supportive psychotherapy can be explained in terms
of theory, the techniques were developed from practical work with
patients. Novalis et al. (1993, p. 5) observed, "Virtually all of the
several hundred psychotherapies are based upon a concept or theory of
mind. Supportive psychotherapy . . . is not dependent upon any specific
overriding concept or theory, but utilizes the rich work done by many
theorists in understanding how people change as this work is confirmed
empirically."

Psychodynamic Therapy and the SupportiveExpressive Continuum In his
textbook Psychotherapy: A Dynamic Approach, Dewald (1971) explained the
contrast between supportive psychotherapy and insightdirected therapy
(i.e., expressive therapy, in our terminology), observing that a
patient's treatment usually falls somewhere in between the two (Figure
1--1). As Dewald (1964) noted, "The ends of the continuum can be clearly
distinguished from each other in regards to the theory of psychotherapy,
and to the technique which evolves logically from this theory. In the
center of the continuum these differences are less discrete and less
clearly demarcated. The treatment of most patients involves both
supportive and expressive elements, which must be used in a coherent,
integrated fashion" (p. 97).

Figure 1--1. Supportive-expressive continuum. Dewald described
supportive psychotherapy as generally aimed at symptom relief and overt
behavior change, without emphasis on modifying personality or resolving
unconscious conflict. He wrote, "The majority of people with psychiatric
illness . . ., character problems, acute or chronic psychosis, etc., are
not suitable candidates for a formal attempt at insightdirected
psychotherapy. Instead they are more suitably and expeditiously treated
by a dynamically oriented supportive approach" (Dewald 1971, p. 114).
Expressive therapy is a collective term for a variety of approaches that
seek personality change through analysis of the relationship between the
therapist and patient and through the acquisition of insight about
previously unrecognized feelings, thoughts, needs, and conflicts, which
the patient must attempt to consciously resolve and better integrate. We
prefer using the term expressive therapy in order to avoid using the
word psychodynamic with two different meanings. To emphasize that the
treatment of each patient involves both supportive and expressive
elements, a linear representation of this continuum has been presented
by a number of authors (see Figure 1--1). At one end, the frequency of
supportive interventions is high and the frequency of exploratory
intervention is low. At the other end, the frequency of supportive
interventions is low. The supportive and expressive stances, or points
of view, are very different. The most supportive stance involves
guidance, whereas the most expressive stance involves discovery.
Luborsky and Mark (1991, p. 110) described expressive therapies as
"techniques aimed at facilitating the patient's expressions about
problems and conflicts and their understanding." The supportive position
may encourage use of a defense; the expressive position may seek to
discover the roots of the defense with the hope that its use will end.
Even though treatment invariably entails both supportive and expressive
elements, the therapist's basic stance, at a single point in treatment
of a patient, must be primarily

one or the other. When the stance is expressive, the therapist follows
the dictum "be as expressive as you can be, and as supportive as you
have to be" (Wallerstein 1986, p. 688). When the stance is supportive,
the therapist follows Wachtel's (1993) advice: "Be as supportive as you
can be so that you can be as expressive as you will need to be"
(p. 155). This distinction is critical. If asked what they are doing,
most practitioners will respond "psychotherapy" or "supportive
psychotherapy" or "psychoanalytically oriented psychotherapy" or
"psychodynamic psychotherapy." It is important to note that the world of
psychotherapy has changed greatly, and psychotherapy is no longer
limited to approaches based on psychodynamic formulations. Supportive
interventions may be used productively in the conduct of
cognitive-behavioral therapy, for example, without raising significant
theoretical or practical problems. The graphic representation in Figure
1--1 is not an indication that the patient population is distributed on
a bell-shaped curve. Essentially, when we describe the conceptual basis
of therapy, supportive-expressive psychotherapy and
expressive-supportive psychotherapy meet at the center of the visual
representation. When we describe practical work with patients, we
believe that supportive-expressive psychotherapy is what most
practitioners are doing most of the time with most of their patients. If
the treatment of each patient involves both supportive and expressive
elements, why are the elements taught separately? As Rockland (1989)
pointed out, "supportive and exploratory psychotherapies . . . \[are\]
sufficiently discrepant in major ways to deserve clear differentiation
and separation" (p. 20). Supportive psychotherapy, expressive therapy,
cognitive-behavioral therapy, family therapy, and group therapy, among
others, are all taught by different specialists because there is a lot
to know about each of them. As in all areas of education, it is the task
of the student to integrate all that he or she has learned. We
appreciate that many, many approaches to therapy have been named that
emphasize an element of treatment, personality development, or symptom
formation that is thought to be novel or especially significant.
Although, as Winston and Winston (2002) said, theories "are described
separately to maintain clarity, these various models come together to
inform the psychotherapy approach for a given patient" (p. 13).

"Therapists . . . should be able to transition from one approach to
another. Such transitioning involves combining various interventions
from different psychotherapy traditions into a cohesive therapy"
(p. 264).

Definition of Supportive Psychotherapy The term supportive therapy is
frequently used in nonpsychiatric studies to denote an approach that
involves expression of interest, attention to concrete services,
encouragement, and optimism. This is a supportive relationship or
supportive contact but not supportive psychotherapy. Supportive
relationships with family, friends, coworkers, clergy, and others may
indeed be useful and sustaining, but in our opinion they should not be
called "therapy." We note, too, that the boundary between counseling and
psychotherapy is not clear. Supportive psychotherapy is based on
diagnostic evaluation; the therapist's actions are deliberate and
designed to achieve specified objectives. The professional relationship
is unique and exists solely to meet the needs of the patient. The
therapist's gratification must come from doing the job well, rather than
from the patient's expressions of gratitude or from using the patient as
an audience. In everyday life, there are many motivations for being
supportive. In the professional supportive relationship, the motivation
must be to meet the patient's needs---to help the patient adapt and cope
in order to live his or her best life. In psychiatric literature, the
terms supportive therapy and supportive psychotherapy have been used
interchangeably. This is unfortunate because the nonspecific support
provided to patients who have medical or surgical problems is also
characterized as supportive therapy, in this case referring to efforts
that make the patient more comfortable. We will always use the long
form---supportive psychotherapy---to emphasize that we are writing about
a professional service that is provided in a mental health context by a
person trained in mental health theory and practices. We define
supportive psychotherapy as a dyadic treatment that uses direct
techniques to 1) ameliorate symptoms and 2) maintain, restore, or
improve self-esteem, ego function, and adaptive skills (see below) with
a focus on the patient's overall health and well-being. Treatment may
examine real or transferential relationships and past and current
patterns of emotional response or behavior in order to accomplish these
objectives.

Self-esteem involves the patient's sense of efficacy, confidence, hope,
and self-regard. Ego functions include relation to reality, thinking,
defense formation, regulation of affect, synthetic function, and others,
as enumerated by Beres (1956, pp. 164--235), Bellak (1958, pp. 1--40),
and other authors. Ego functions could alternatively be called
psychological functions because they are addressed by behavior
therapists and cognitive therapists whose formulations do not include
the ego as a component of a mental apparatus. Ego functions are often
categorized as psychic structure. As cognitive functions are
increasingly understood in physical and physiological terms,
psychological terminology may be eclipsed, but it still appears to be
useful in the clinical setting at present. Adaptive skills are actions
associated with effective functioning. Social skills are one example of
an adaptive skill for individuals living with a chronic psychotic
disorder or personality disorder. The boundary between ego functions and
adaptive skills is not sharply defined. The patient's assessment of
events is an ego function; the action taken in response to the
assessment is an adaptive skill. We have explained that supportive and
expressive therapies are different and that the treatment of an
individual patient is likely to involve elements of both. In practice,
supportive psychotherapy, as we have defined it, describes what is
identified as supportive-expressive psychotherapy on the continuum. When
we teach or prescribe psychodynamic therapy, we are usually referring to
what is identified on the continuum as expressivesupportive
psychotherapy. Most psychotherapists in the United States are guided by
psychodynamic principles, but it is possible to address selfesteem
issues, ego-function problems, and adaptive skills without accepting
psychodynamic principles. In the following three examples, the
therapists' approaches represent different points along the
supportive-expressive continuum.

Case Illustration 1 Juan is a 55-year-old man who attended school for 6
years in his native country in Latin America. In the United States, he
has held various unskilled jobs. He was married for several

years, but his wife divorced him when he became involved with illicit
substances. He has been drug-free since serving a 2-year prison sentence
20 years ago, but he has had increased difficulty obtaining work. He now
has several medical problems, and he keeps his clinic appointments and
follows prescribed treatment. A resident has monitored his
antidepressant medication in the psychiatric clinic once a month for
more than a year. Juan attends a day program for medical patients, but
he has been threatened with expulsion because he is quick to show anger
and lash out if he feels that someone is pushing him aside at lunchtime
or taking the seat he wished to occupy. The day program and his clinic
visits are his only structured activity. The treating resident discusses
the recommendations of the other physicians with Juan and talks about
the effects of his medications, encouraging Juan to tell the other
physicians if he has any problems. The resident responds empathically to
Juan's descriptions of loneliness and praises Juan for his success at
maintaining sobriety. The resident is satisfied that Juan's angry
responses are not associated with delusional thinking, but she has been
unable to involve Juan in scrutinizing the reason for his angry
responses or offering anything but the most superficial justifications
for his actions. Juan does accept the suggestion that he should always
seek help from a staff member if he is angered by other participants in
the day program. (This is an entirely supportive approach, involving
encouragement, praise, and advice about adaptive skills. Success will be
measured by the patient's continued acceptance of medical treatment and
antidepressant medication and ability to control his temper.)

Case Illustration 2 Richard has the same problems as Juan, but he has a
greater ability to think about his internal life. He says that if
someone gets ahead of him, he feels that the person is putting him down
and mocking him. Richard says he was brought up this way. When he did
not stand up for himself, his father would become very angry and punish
him, and no one in his family or neighborhood would have considered his
father to be wrong. The therapist explains that people with such
experiences in the past may be quick to defend themselves from what
appears to be an affront, and Richard agrees that this makes sense. (The
therapy in this case is supportive-expressive because it involves
assumptions about mental life. The therapist seeks to help the patient
begin to understand problem-causing behavior in terms of attitudes about
which he had been unaware.)

Case Illustration 3

George is aware of having an "anger problem" and becomes very irritable
when his therapist asks, as he had done in previous sessions, whether
George has been involved in any conflicts since the last visit. George
responds sullenly and tells the therapist that the medication he had
been taking for several months was causing too many side effects and
wasn't helping at all. The therapist suggests that perhaps being asked
about possible failures of self-control reminds George of his childhood
experience of being scolded by his father. George says he hadn't thought
of that, but it might be true. (Suspecting that the patient's anger
might be of transferential origin, the therapist suggests a link between
past and present relationships--- an expressive element. This therapy
may be described as located at the midpoint of the supportive-expressive
continuum.)

Teaching Supportive Psychotherapy Although supportive psychotherapy is
the most widely practiced form of psychodynamically oriented
psychotherapy, teaching supportive psychotherapy poses challenges.
Supportive psychotherapy is not based on rigorous and internally
consistent or appealing theory, and it does not offer solutions to
intractable clinical problems. The field has no conferences, no stars,
and relatively few books. Education of psychotherapists throughout much
of the twentieth century was based primarily on principles developed by
psychoanalysts. In a short text for beginners, Balsam and Balsam (1984)
wrote, "The psychotherapist's central task is learning to understand . .
. the emotional experience of the patient" (p. 1). Treatment techniques
that had specific rationales in psychoanalysis were presented as
universal techniques required for all psychotherapy. If the patient
stopped talking, the therapist was advised to wait for him or her to
continue or to ask what he or she was thinking. The therapist was
advised to avoid direct answers to questions (Colby 1951, pp. 55--56).
In short, the treatment that was taught was intended "to relieve the
patient of distressing neurotic symptoms or discordant personality
characteristics" (Colby 1951, p. 3). This model provided no guidance
about how to work with patients who were inarticulate or poorly
educated, patients who had intractable social problems or severe
behavioral problems, or patients who were expected to drop out after a
few monthly or bimonthly visits. Psychotherapists who failed to discover
how to conduct supportive psychotherapy provided their

patients an irrational, unintegrated mixture of expressive assumptions
and supportive tactics. In a recent review, Brenner (2012) advocated for
a much more sophisticated approach to teaching supportive psychotherapy
in the twentyfirst century. He suggested that the mandate for competence
in supportive psychotherapy, the strong evidence base for supportive
psychotherapy, and the growing prominence of the recovery movement in
psychiatry all served to demonstrate the importance of greater
curricular attention to supportive psychotherapy in psychiatric
residency programs. Brenner articulated three important factors in
teaching supportive psychotherapy: its relevance for common factors
underlying all forms of psychotherapy; its role on a spectrum of
psychodynamically informed psychotherapies; and its value as a modality
that includes specifically definable techniques and aims. Brenner
highlighted several examples of the importance of supportive
psychotherapy, including helping patients with emotional regulation,
grief, impulsivity, reality-testing, self-esteem, responsibility-taking,
and healthy self-identification. Moreover, Brenner recommended teaching
supportive psychotherapy in diverse clinical rotations, including
inpatient and consultation-liaison services as well as ambulatory
settings. In time, residents who have received training in supportive
psychotherapy will observe that patients with the greatest psychological
strengths are suitable for treatment that is primarily expressive.
Nevertheless, the fact that a patient has the resources and
psychological characteristics needed to undergo expressive therapy does
not mean that expressive therapy is indicated. Providing more support
than needed may be effective but may deprive the patient of an
opportunity to make more impressive changes in his or her life. As
Hellerstein et al. (1994) pointed out, a strong case can be made for
employing the supportive (i.e., supportive-expressive) model for most
patients, shifting to more timeintensive expressive measures only to the
extent required. In all cases, treatment planning must involve
consideration of what the patient wants to accomplish. Supervisors
working with residents may note that the fundamental objectives of
supportive psychotherapy can be achieved by early career clinicians who
may not have much exposure to psychodynamic principles. Beginners who
cannot yet attempt expressive psychotherapy may be

competent at providing good supportive-expressive treatment. With
practice, therapists become aware of how a patient is responding to them
and then of how they are responding to the patient. Viederman (2008)
described a very active approach in which the clinician asks the patient
for memories about earlier times in life that are related to the
clinician's observations and interpretations and then communicates to
the patient an understanding of the patient's predicament. He wrote,
"The consultant enters the patient's world, develops a picture of him,
of his experience with people in his life, and communicates this in a
language which is familiar to him. This results in a climate that is the
essence of a supportive relationship" (p. 352). One of the many
satisfactions of being a psychotherapist is that the clinician improves
and continues to improve as the decades pass. Supervisors working with
residents who are learning supportive psychotherapy approaches may help
establish the groundwork for such professional growth.

Conclusion Supportive psychotherapy and the expressive psychotherapies
have different objectives and employ different techniques. The treatment
of an individual patient whose treatment plan calls for
psychodynamically oriented supportive psychotherapy involves both
supportive and expressive elements. The clinician must understand and
must be able to integrate both approaches. Psychiatric residency
programs must ensure that their graduates are competent in
psychotherapeutic approaches, including supportive psychotherapy.
Learning supportive psychotherapy can help reinforce the common factors
underlying all forms of psychotherapy, aspects of psychodynamically
informed psychotherapy, and specifically definable techniques and aims
of psychotherapy.

Principles and Mode of Action

2

Underlying Assumptions Supportive psychotherapy relies on direct
measures. The therapist is active and addresses conscious problems or
conflicts rather than underlying unconscious conflicts or personality
distortions (Dewald 1994). A major tenet of Freud's early psychoanalytic
work was that symptoms are caused by unconscious conflict; through
psychoanalysis, the conflict becomes conscious and is worked through,
and then the symptoms disappear because they are no longer
psychologically necessary. In supportive psychotherapy, it is not
assumed that improvement will develop as a by-product of insight.
Greater self-awareness or insight about the origin of problems is not
essential. In supportive therapy, the relationship between patient and
therapist is a relationship between two adults with a common purpose. As
in all professional relationships, one person provides a service that
the other requires. The professional person, the therapist, owes the
patient respect, full attention, honesty, and vigorous effort to
accomplish the stated purpose by using the knowledge and skills of the
profession. Adhering to these obligations is known as staying within
boundaries. Because the therapist is understood to be a whole person,
with professional training and life experience, and is not required to
be minimally communicative or to be a "blank slate" in the therapeutic
relationship, there is greater symmetry between the patient and
therapist than in other therapeutic relationships. This said, the
relationship in supportive psychotherapy is wholly focused on fostering
the overall health and well-being of the patient, on reducing symptoms
and sources of distress, and on bolstering his or her adaptive
strengths. The interaction may be friendly, but the two individuals do
not become friends. The therapist does not advise the patient on how to
vote, whom to marry, or how to decorate the home. The therapist does not
seek assistance from the patient. If the therapist talks at length,
describing

his or her own experiences, thoughts, or feelings, the therapist must
consider whether it is really for the patient's benefit or whether it is
because the therapist enjoys talking. Using the patient in this manner
is exploitation. When the stance is expressive, the therapist tries to
remain neutral and cautious when responding so that the patient's
perception of thoughts and feelings about the therapist can be analyzed
as projections of feelings associated with important figures in past or
present life. This projection is termed transference. The expressive
stance avoids responses that might encourage the patient to perceive the
therapist as a person with opinions, tastes, family, or even
personality. It is this technical maneuver that has produced the image
of the psychotherapist as an individual who parries all questions with
evasive answers or reflects all questions back to the patient. The
degree to which the therapist and patient discuss transference depends
on the type of therapy. In expressive therapies, analysis of
transference is a key element in the process of understanding the
patient's inner life. Although transference occurs in supportive
psychotherapy, as it does in all relationships, it is typically
discussed only when manifestations of transference threaten the
continuation of therapy. Because most psychotherapy is
supportive-expressive in practice, transference is not a taboo subject.
In relational therapies, which have been increasingly popular since the
1980s (Fonagy and Target 2009; Greenberg 2001; Mitchell 1988), intense
and ongoing examination of the patient-therapist interaction is a major
focus of the therapeutic process, and the therapist may disclose much
more than would be done in classical treatment. This is not an approach
to be undertaken by the novice therapist. Even at the supportive end of
the spectrum, it is often useful for the therapist to try to make the
patient aware of problems in their real-time interaction. THERAPIST 1:
You haven't said you disagree with me, but you have found something of
concern with every observation I have made today (a clarification that
might encourage the patient to be more frank, without examining
underlying issues). THERAPIST 2: Are you aware that when I have tried to
focus on steps you might take to manage better in daily life, you go
back to

talking about what your wife did wrong? (an observation in the course of
supportive-expressive therapy) THERAPIST 3: Are you aware that when I
ask you about your father, you talk about problems at work or the world
situation? (confrontation in the course of expressive-supportive
therapy) As stated earlier in this chapter, the supportive psychotherapy
relationship is a relationship between two adults with a common purpose.
The therapist encourages the development of positive feelings; if the
patient brings up the presence of these positive feelings, the therapist
accepts them without attempting to have the patient understand them. The
patient's positive feelings about the therapist, even if moderately
unrealistic, are useful for maintaining the therapeutic alliance and
potentially useful for identification with the therapist. (For further
discussion of the patienttherapist relationship, see Chapter 6, "The
Therapeutic Relationship.") PATIENT 1: You always have such a clear way
of thinking about things. I'm all over the place. You always know what
the problem is and what to do about it. THERAPIST 1: Thanks. It's easier
when you hear a description of a complex issue than when you're in the
midst of it. If negative feelings about the therapist or the therapy are
evident, or even suspected, they must be discussed because negative
feelings may threaten or lead to disruption of treatment. PATIENT 2:
Getting here seems to be more difficult. Things always come up at the
last minute. I apologize for being late. THERAPIST 2: We could try to
change your appointment time if that would help, but I wonder if you're
finding it more difficult now because you're having some doubts about
continuing. In expressive psychotherapy, the patient's reaction to
events in his or her current life may be discussed as possible
(unconscious) expressions of the patient's feelings about the therapist.

PATIENT: I was on the phone with customer service for half an hour. This
really drives me up the wall. It was worse than ever. Those people are
incompetent. I keep losing my temper. THERAPIST: Last week you were
complaining because I hadn't come up with a quick answer for all your
problems. Maybe you were especially angry with customer service and saw
them as incompetent because you were thinking I was incompetent and you
were angry with me. In supportive psychotherapy, however, events in the
therapy may be offered as illustrations or models for everyday life.
PATIENT: This really drives me up the wall. It was worse than ever.
Those people are incompetent. I keep losing my temper. THERAPIST: Last
week you were complaining because I hadn't come up with a quick answer
for all your problems. You were polite and thoughtful, and we were able
to discuss it, and you didn't seem to be "up the wall." Maybe you could
be as reasonable and controlled when you talk to customer service as you
are here with me. In the course of supportive psychotherapy and
supportive-expressive therapy, the therapist gives simple, direct
answers to personal questions, within the bounds of information that he
or she is willing to share with an acquaintance. The disclosure of
information that is ordinarily kept private is often associated with a
violation of the boundary that must separate the personal from the
professional. These are nuanced judgments in the course of supportive
psychotherapy--- for example, a patient who recently moved from another
state may inquire about the therapist's past moves after graduating from
residency and moving to a new community. The therapist must decide
whether responding with personal information will serve the therapeutic
alliance and the goals of the therapeutic work or whether it will
introduce complex transferential issues that are counter to the goals of
treatment. When the stance is primarily expressive, the therapeutic
strategy is based on the assumption that the patient's thoughts about
the therapist will reveal evidence of transference. In supportive
psychotherapy, the

transferential aspect may be more or less relevant in relation to the
goals of treatment.

Conversational Style Supportive psychotherapy is conducted in a
conversational style. Because conversation is the principal form of
interaction among adults, readers might wonder why it is necessary for
us to say anything about it in this book. When we first wrote about
supportive psychotherapy, it was important to convey to the beginner
that the therapist's task is not listening silently to a patient who has
been instructed to "say whatever comes to mind." Today, the psychiatry
resident who listens silently at length usually does so because he or
she does not know what to say, or expects the patient to pause at any
moment, or hopes that the next sentence will be important and that the
patient will soon get to the point. The beginning therapist probably
knows that by interrupting a silence too quickly, he or she may never
know what is troubling the patient. When the therapeutic stance is
supportive, the therapist will not wait long. Faced with a long pause,
the expressive therapist thinks, "Is there an indication for me to
speak?" In contrast, the supportive therapist thinks, "Is there a reason
for me not to speak?" The therapeutic interaction is conversational in
style, but it is not normal conversation. In normal conversation, the
speakers alternate: your turn, my turn. You tell me what happened on
your way to work this morning, and I tell you what happened to me on my
way to work; you talk about your pets, and I talk about my pets. In
therapy, the therapist is responsive, but it is always the patient's
turn. Physicians who are new to psychotherapy often have had years of
practice polishing a style of communication that is not responsive and
not supportive. They have mastered the art of obtaining the history by
asking questions. When every utterance is a question, the process is
interrogation. Miller and Rollnick (1991, p. 66), writing about
motivational interviewing, advised that one should not ask more than
three questions in a row because doing so implies an interaction between
an active expert and a passive patient. To maintain a supportive
conversational style, the therapist must be responsive. In the act of
responding, the therapist is giving something to the

patient. Except for narcissistic individuals who get satisfaction from
having an audience, people want to be given something in return for what
they give, and this giving, by an intelligent, interested person---the
therapist---is gratifying and reassuring. To maintain a conversational
style, the therapist responds both to what the patient volunteers and to
the patient's responses to questions. Compare the following two
interactions: PATIENT 1: I slept better most of the time. THERAPIST 1:
OK. PATIENT 1: But it's still hard being out of work; I'm just getting
by on my unemployment checks. THERAPIST 1: OK. PATIENT 1: I try to keep
busy, like you said. THERAPIST 1: OK. PATIENT 1: But I still feel bad
some of the time. THERAPIST 1: OK. (This is a dreadful, nongiving style
of response, not unusual in hospitals.) PATIENT 2: I slept better most
of the time. THERAPIST 2: I'm glad to hear it. And that's without
medication, isn't it? PATIENT 2: Yes. But it's still hard being out of
work; I'm just getting by on my unemployment checks. THERAPIST 2: When
you are used to working, unemployment insurance is important, but it
doesn't fill your life. PATIENT 2: I try to keep busy, like you said.
THERAPIST 2: Good. What are you doing? PATIENT 2: I've been cleaning my
basement, bit by bit. Not just the floor, but cleaning the old grit from
overhead pipes and things like that. It's not really important.
THERAPIST 2: It sounds like a project that isn't exciting, but you can
see the results of what you have done.

PATIENT 2: But I still feel bad some of the time. THERAPIST 2: I'm sorry
to hear it. We have to work on that. (The therapist's responses,
although not profound, indicate interest and concern.) The physician who
has many patients and little time is tortured by patients who are
diffuse and vague. To manage this problem, physicians develop habits of
asking leading questions, asking questions that include prompted answers
(including multiple-choice lists) or questions that invite yes/no
answers. THERAPIST 1: Did you leave school because you had to work to
help the family? (A better approach is "I'd like to know about your
decision to quit school.") THERAPIST 2: Did your mother think it was a
good idea for you to quit school, or did she object? (A better question
is "What did your mother say about your decision to quit school?")
THERAPIST 3: How much do you drink? A little wine with meals? (A better
question is "What is your usual use of alcohol?") The open-ended
question has the greatest potential for eliciting information. Prompts
and suggestions are appropriate when the patient is unable to respond to
a broad question. Prompts that elicit a "no" answer or multiple-choice
lists that fail to include a correct alternative may cause the patient
to infer that the therapist does not understand. The beginner therapist
who has overcome the habit of asking questions is at risk of falling
into unproductive agreeableness, always responding to the patient's most
recent words. The therapist asks a question, the patient gives a partial
answer and then moves to another topic, the therapist asks a question
about that, and the process is repeated, with the therapist never having
the opportunity to deal with anything useful. Beginning therapists are
often easily put off because if a patient's answer is not adequate, they
go on to another question instead of pursuing an answer to the initial
question. In short, asking too many questions is not good form, but if a
question is asked, it should not be abandoned without an attempt to get
an answer. The

therapist who does not attempt to understand the whole story sends the
message that he or she does not really care. Compare the following two
interactions: THERAPIST 1: Do you have any thoughts about any issues or
events that may have led up to your depression last year? PATIENT 1:
Nothing. It just happened. It came out of the blue. THERAPIST 1: Have
you ever felt suicidal? (The therapist, if curious about what led to the
depression, should have attempted to persist with that topic even though
suicide is also an important issue.) THERAPIST 2: What was happening in
your life in the month or so before the depression began? (persisting
with a general question that does not call on the patient to make
cause-andeffect connections) PATIENT 2: Nothing special. I went to work.
I came home. My husband was working. The kids were in school
(uninformative). THERAPIST 2: Let's take them one at a time. What about
work? What were you doing? What about coworkers? Any problems? Did
anyone you care about leave? Was your assignment changed? Your
supervisor? Advancement? (By deliberately offering multiple-choice
options, the therapist hints at topics that might be important.) PATIENT
2: Not really. Everything was routine (uninformative). THERAPIST 2: OK.
Tell me about your husband and children at that time. What was going on?
We are looking for things that might have been disturbing but that you
might have brushed aside at the time without paying much attention. (The
prodding question is asked in a supportive way. Although suggesting
answers to questions was described earlier as bad form, it may be used
as a tactic for educating the patient about important issues and
maintaining focus.)

Seeking more complete information about what the patient is saying is a
demonstration of interest and attention, so it is a supportive act,
provided that the pursuit of additional information does not take on the
quality of an attack. Emotionally attuned listening and clarification
seeking can be very reassuring to a patient, and much more information
may come forward in the interaction between the therapist and patient.
The key to obtaining complete information is often the wonderful phrase
"Give me an example." PATIENT 1: If I get mad at work, I just don't go
back. THERAPIST 1: Give me an example. What was the incident that got to
you? PATIENT 1: It was nothing. I was working a counter. A customer was
arguing with me. THERAPIST 1: So a customer started to argue with you.
Let's try to look at what happened. What did the customer say, and what
did you say? PATIENT 2: I have to do everything. My husband is helpless
in the house. I come home from work and I have to get dinner, even
though he's been home. THERAPIST 2: What do you mean by "helpless?" Does
he do any tasks at all? PATIENT 3: No, I never get angry. I can't
remember ever losing my temper. THERAPIST 3: Can you describe some
instance in which something displeased you a little?

Maintaining and Improving Self-Esteem Maintaining or improving
self-esteem is a major concern of supportive psychotherapy. One person
helps the self-esteem of another person by conveying acceptance,
approval, interest, respect, or admiration. The person whose daily life
and relationships are lacking or deficient in these qualities may
respond to any indication of their presence. The patient who cannot

form relationships with others, who is avoided by others, or who
perceives (perhaps correctly) that people look at him or her
disapprovingly, finds in the therapist a person who is accepting and
interested. The therapist's acceptance and respect are unspoken. The
therapist communicates interest in the patient by making it evident that
he or she remembers their conversations; recalls what the patient has
said; and is aware of the patient's likes, dislikes, and attitudes.
Acceptance is communicated by avoidance of arguing, denigrating, and
criticizing---verbal interactions common to many relationships,
including, unfortunately, many contacts between patients and health care
providers. Below are therapist responses that are negatively stated
followed by responses that are more positive, congenial, and
encouraging. THERAPIST 1: It doesn't make any sense to get an MRI
\[magnetic resonance imaging\] just because you forget people's names
(argument). THERAPIST 2: Forgetting names is usually the first memory
issue that healthy people experience. If that is the only problem, it's
not caused by the sort of thing that shows up on an MRI (respectful,
reassuring). THERAPIST 1: What are you trying to say? (denigration)
THERAPIST 2: OK, I am not sure I understand. Can you say more?
(encouraging clarification) THERAPIST 1: Didn't they tell you to take
your medication every day? (criticism) THERAPIST 2: A lot of the effect
is lost if you don't take your medication every day. If the dosage is
too large, we should discuss it. A smaller dosage might be the answer
(informative, nonjudgmental, inviting response). In their efforts to
boost or avoid lowering the patient's self-esteem, therapists need to
avoid language that is overpowering (directly or by implication) and
behavior that may make the patient feel diminished or

helpless, such as pomposity, overelaborate speech, or ostentatiousness.
The following are some overpowering statements: THERAPIST 1: I'm trying
to get you to understand . . . . THERAPIST 2: I'm going to medicate you.
THERAPIST 3: It's your imagination. Here are better ways to express the
same ideas: THERAPIST 1: I hope I'm being clear. THERAPIST 2: Let's talk
about medication. THERAPIST 3: When you hear something that people
around you don't hear, it's not imagination; it's an event in your brain
that's not triggered by something in the environment. Questions that
begin with the words why or why didn't you are often experienced as
attacks, and they should be avoided (Pinsker 1997). In the course of
growing up, most people learn that "Why did you do it?" is not so much a
search for information as a rebuke for having committed a certain act.
Similarly, "Why didn't you do it?" means "You should have done it."
Attack is inimical to self-esteem. Alternatives to why questions might
include the following: THERAPIST 1: Can you explain how it was that you
did it that way? THERAPIST 2: When you dropped out of school, what was
the reason? THERAPIST 3: Was there something about your behavior that
made them think it was necessary to call the police? Attacking questions
are accepted as a matter of course in most relationships, and they are
certainly customary in conventional medical practice, so reasonable use
of them will not destroy the therapy. The objective is to conduct
therapy with finesse, thus enhancing the prospects for success. When
possible, it is better to ask a general question than a narrow question.
For example, "What is your usual use of alcohol?" is a better question
than "Do you drink wine with meals?" It is also better

practice, when possible, to ask questions in a way that elicits a
positive response rather than a negative response. The therapist should
not be a person to whom the patient must too often answer "No." Asking
questions that are likely to be answered with a "no" implies that the
therapist does not understand the patient. The doctor-patient
relationship involves a person who has the power to give help and a
person who needs help. The doctor should give help in a skillful manner
that minimizes the inherent inequality of the transaction and
communicates respect for the patient. Respect is good for self-esteem
and good for the therapeutic alliance. Giving the patient vague,
dismissive explanations conveys lack of respect. PATIENT 1: I think this
medication is making me sleepy. PHYSICIAN 1: It hasn't been a problem
for most people. How's your appetite? (dismissive) PATIENT 2: I don't
feel any better. PHYSICIAN 2: Well, you look better. (If coupled with an
explanation that depressed people look better before they feel better,
this would be fine. As an abrupt response, it is dismissive and
argumentative.) Even educated, sophisticated patients tend to tolerate
disrespectful attitudes and behavior from health care providers because
patients are dependent on health care providers and cannot risk
animosity. The patient may employ the defenses of rationalization or
denial in order to avoid awareness of resentment. For many individuals,
the reality of needing care has a negative effect on self-esteem. The
health care provider should not rub salt into the wound. We recommend
that therapists discuss with the patient the reasons for asking specific
questions, explain to the patient the direction being taken, and ask the
patient for agreement on topics to be discussed. We refer to these
tactics as setting the agenda or showing the map. For patients, these
tactics help to prevent both the anxiety that may be associated with
going in unknown directions and the interrogatory atmosphere that
reinforces the idea that the patient is in an inferior position.

Defenses In the supportive approach, defenses are encouraged (supported)
when they serve their unconscious purpose---protecting the individual
from anxiety or other unpleasant affect. When therapy is primarily
expressive, defenses are identified and examined to discover the
underlying conflicts that made the defenses necessary. In supportive
psychotherapy, defenses are questioned only when they are maladaptive.
For example, a patient's denial as a strategy for not thinking about the
inevitably fatal outcome of his or her own life is adaptive, whereas a
patient's denial that leads to his or her refusal of potentially safe
and beneficial treatment is maladaptive. In expressive psychotherapy,
passive-aggressive behavior might be explored as an indicator of
unconscious hostility and a need to control others; in supportive
psychotherapy, the same behavior might be accepted as adaptive. When
dealing with defenses, the situation is fluid---a therapist may support
one defense and question another. Also, a therapist might recognize and
not question a defense early in treatment but question it later in
treatment. In maintaining the supportive stance in the therapist-patient
relationship, the therapist should consider it permissible and desirable
to explore the meaning of the patient's actions and thoughts. Whether
the therapist supports, ignores, or questions a statement that appears
to reflect a defensive position depends on the current situation,
including the context of the patient-therapist conversation (e.g., the
therapist must consider whether to interrupt the patient to raise a
question or to go along with the patient's flow). The following are
examples of different responses: PATIENT: I hated being in the hospital.
Every day someone would be acting up, and they'd jump on him with a
needle. I was glad I wasn't that bad off. THERAPIST 1: Yeah (accepts the
defense without comment). THERAPIST 2: Maybe you were afraid on some
level that it could happen to you. A lot of people equate mental illness
with being out of control, so if they find themselves in a hospital
because they have a mental illness, they are afraid they may be in
danger of being out of control (proposes an explanation for the

defense, using the technique of normalization to lessen the impact).
THERAPIST 3: Yes. Your condition was quite different. Severe depression
is one thing; a psychotic episode is another. That wouldn't happen to
you (encourages the defense). When does the therapist need to be
expressive? Expressive techniques can be used without altering the
supportive stance whenever the basic supportive techniques do not appear
to be enough to accomplish the patient's goals and it appears that the
patient's life can be improved by use of expressive techniques. As
stated in Chapter 1, "Evolution of the Concept of Supportive
Psychotherapy," the therapist must know whether his or her basic stance
with a patient is supportive or expressive---the therapist cannot
maintain both transference-encouraging neutrality and a real
relationship at the same time.

Psychodynamic Assumptions Many physicians begin psychiatric training
without having had exposure to psychodynamics or any form of
psychotherapy. Some trainees are from countries where psychodynamic
thinking has not been widely disseminated. Trainees may not know what to
talk about with a patient after completing the history, hoping that
improvement will occur, in some way, if the patient talks about his or
her past and feelings. For the absolute beginner (and no one else), we
offer the following words about psychodynamics. Psychodynamics is the
interaction between conscious and unconscious elements of mental life.
It is an explanation of the meaning of behavior. One of the tasks of
psychotherapy is to create order out of symptoms and dysfunctions. To
accomplish this task, the patient and therapist join in developing a
history or narrative in which these symptoms and dysfunctions make
sense. Cause-and-effect connections are established. Different schools
of psychodynamic thinking may derive different explanations at times.
The process of making a comprehensible story may be what matters most.
The following are a few examples of psychodynamic formulations.

Case Illustration 1

David, a man who is ordinarily self-sufficient and cheerful, becomes
demanding and uncooperative when hospitalized following a heart attack,
although he has been reassured that his prognosis is very good. A
psychodynamic hypothesis might be that the passive, somewhat helpless
role of hospital patient is anxiety provoking, and David is attempting
to compensate by assuming an overbearing attitude. Because he is unaware
that the enforced passivity is behind his unusual behavior, his behavior
is considered to be unconscious.

Case Illustration 2 After being criticized by his parents for watching
television all night, Mark, a patient with schizophrenia, becomes angry
with his parents and stops taking his antipsychotic medication.
According to his chart, he has been educated about taking the medication
and has verbalized understanding. He is not aware that "forgetting" to
take his medication may be psychologically motivated defiance.

Case Illustration 3 After returning home for Thanksgiving during his
first year of college, Zach, a healthy teenager, provokes a big argument
the day before he leaves, with the consequence that he is angry when he
leaves. He is not aware that part (not all) of him would like to stay
home and be dependent. By going away angry, he is protected from the
sadness that is part of his departure.

Case Illustration 4 Susan comes irregularly for clinic visits, each time
giving a detailed account of how other people mistreat her. After many
attempts to get Susan to examine her role in causing or maintaining at
least some of her troubles, the therapist raises the question of why
Susan has sought psychotherapy and whether it should be discontinued. A
psychodynamic hypothesis might be that because repeating familiar
patterns is an anxiety-reducing element of human behavior, Susan may be
setting up a situation in which she will be rejected, thus confirming
her expectations about relationships with people.

Unrecognized Emotions An assumption of psychodynamically oriented
therapies is that unrecognized emotions are often responsible for
current unpleasant feelings or maladaptive behavior. At times, simply
becoming aware of the emotions

may provide relief. More often, the discovery of the feeling must be
followed by conscious decisions about more effective methods of
coping--- this is the adaptive skills focus of supportive psychotherapy.
In the past, many patients' symptoms were related to what they perceived
as unacceptable sexual feelings---a problem that is less common today.
Unrecognized anger is a frequently seen problem ("getting the anger out"
was once proposed as a simple, curative tactic but is now recognized as
counterproductive). Other often-hidden feelings might be grief that was
not experienced at the time of an important loss, guilt or hopelessness,
or a wish to be admired or to be obeyed. Some individuals are scarcely
aware of any feelings at all; the term alexithymia has been used to
describe these patients. For patients with alexithymia, an important
objective is to recognize, acknowledge, identify, and label emotions
(Misch 2000). The general task is to incorporate awareness of feelings
into the fabric of memories and current life. The beginner therapist
often asks, "How did it feel?" or "How does it feel?" in response to
almost anything the patient says, with no intent or plan about what to
do with the answer. If the therapist and patient are working on the
problem of unrecognized feelings, the patient's feelings connected to
events in the past should be explored. Feelings should be explored if
the therapist and patient are examining coping strategies or if the
therapist is seeking opportunities to expand his or her empathic
understanding. Often, with respect to a current feeling, the question to
discuss must be "What is going to be done about it?" The question "What
did you think?" is as useful as "What did you feel?" because it pertains
to thought process, reality testing, or adaptive skills. In short, a
person who knows thoughts but does not know feelings needs to feel more,
whereas a person who feels too much needs to think and evaluate more.
Therapeutic dialogue often involves both feelings and thoughts; jumping
to adaptive solutions without understanding the patient's emotional
response is just as wrong as ignoring adaptive solutions altogether.
However, supportive psychotherapy often focuses on thoughts, especially
for more impaired patients who have problems with feelings and require a
more cognitive focus. The question "How did you feel?" is pertinent when
it initiates discussion of how the patient dealt with the feeling or, if
there was no

feeling, discussion of the possibility that this lack of feeling is of
itself an important finding. PATIENT: I asked the guy next door to go to
the mall with me, but he said he didn't have time. He doesn't have any
more to do than I do. THERAPIST: How did you feel about that? PATIENT:
It's all right. He doesn't have to. (evasive, denying emotional
response) THERAPIST: You're right. He doesn't have to. That's a correct
analysis (praise). But you're offering an analysis when I asked about
your feelings (confrontation; implied question). PATIENT: I didn't feel
anything. THERAPIST: You describe a situation in which most people would
feel disappointment or anger. That reaction won't control the other
person, but it's important to know what your feelings are because when
you don't, you can't make good decisions about things that affect you
(teaching, normalizing).

Maladaptive Behaviors Another tenet of psychodynamically oriented
therapy is that people often follow patterns of behavior that were
appropriate when established but now have become maladaptive. For
example, during adolescence, when it is important to reduce emotional
dependency on parents, many people assume a belligerent or defiant
style. This attitude may be appropriate at age 16 but may become a
continual source of trouble if it persists at age 26, 46, or 66. Some
people, once they see that they are clinging to a pattern of behavior
that is familiar and understandable but no longer useful, are able, with
determined effort, to change their habitual responses.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy focuses on the assumptions associated with
patterns of thought and provides tactics for overcoming these
assumptions. Although cognitive and psychodynamic approaches are usually
taught separately, tactics of both approaches are integrated in everyday
treatment.

The search for patterns that may explain symptoms or maladaptive
behavior is the expressive component of supportive-expressive
psychotherapy. Once the therapist has elicited the history, he or she is
concerned first about feelings and assumptions that are present but
unexpressed, then about feelings and assumptions that are lightly
concealed, and later about feelings and assumptions that have been truly
hidden. A long-familiar analogy is that psychotherapy is like peeling an
onion.

Psychogenetics and Early Life Experiences Psychodynamic explanations
tell about the interplay of factors in current life; they do not explain
the origins of the forces, emotions, or assumptions that affect
behavior. Psychogenetics is the search for these origins. When a
therapist says that a man who seeks to have as many sexual relationships
as possible is hypersexual, the therapist is offering a diagnostic
impression (not a DSM diagnosis). When the therapist says that the
patient acts this way to compensate for insecurity about his
masculinity, the therapist is making a psychodynamic hypothesis. When
the therapist says that the patient is insecure because he was afraid of
his overbearing father, the therapist is proposing a genetic hypothesis.
If the patient is readily able to form relationships but always ends
them by discovering faults in his partner and shifting from loving
behavior to quarreling, a psychodynamic possibility is that he is
unconsciously fearful of closeness or intimacy. The interpersonal and
emotional experiences of early life are important in the development of
the individual and his or her problems. Creating a meaningful
autobiography is in itself useful because during the process, what may
have appeared to be random events become connected into a meaningful
story. The problem for the beginning therapist is that some patients
talk endlessly about their terrible childhoods, emphasizing how they
suffered various forms of maltreatment. The inexperienced therapist may
feel hopeful that some good will come from allowing ongoing talk by a
patient who is avoiding any discussion about changing his or her
patterns or manner of relating to people. Venting can be a legitimate
supportive tactic that is useful when the patient has been unable to put
painful experiences into words, perhaps because he or she has been
afraid to do so or because

no one has been available to listen and understand. Recounting the same
story also may be adaptive when the patient's goal is limited to relapse
prevention and the therapist's objective is to preserve the status quo;
however, such retelling is maladaptive when the goal is to improve the
patient's life. Retelling can be especially maladaptive in individuals
with a significant trauma history for whom the retelling is accompanied
by tremendous distress.

Mode of Action Attempts to achieve the supportive psychotherapy
objectives of improved ego function and adaptive skills involve
teaching, encouragement, exhortation, modeling, and anticipatory
guidance. People in general, not only patients, respond to teaching and
instruction if they want to learn, if they want to improve their lot,
and if they trust the teacher. People may cooperate with the teacher to
please him or her. Such cooperation has been described in psychoanalytic
writing as a transference cure. The Menninger psychotherapy research
project found that changes that appeared to come about for this reason
proved stable and durable (Wallerstein 1989). Sometimes, advice or
instruction from another person, especially an authority figure, is a
catalyst, allowing the patient to accomplish change that he or she had
already formulated. The many approaches to psychotherapy have produced
competing claims. Extensive research has aimed to discover the active
ingredient in psychotherapy. Because all therapies have been found to be
effective, an important research question emerged: "What do all
therapies have in common?" A number of common factors have been found,
of which the therapeutic relationship or therapeutic alliance is perhaps
the most important (de Jonghe et al. 1992; Frank and Frank 1991;
Rosenzweig 1936; Westerman et al. 1995). If there is a good alliance
between patient and therapist, therapy is helpful. If there is not a
good alliance, little is accomplished. Therefore, the therapist must
make deliberate efforts to encourage a good relationship and avoid
actions that are inimical to a good relationship (for further
discussion, see Chapter 6). The patient's experience of "an atmosphere
of warmth, hope, caring, and authenticity" is important in the
therapeutic interaction (Brenner 2012, p. 262).

The patient's transference may cause him or her to unconsciously
perceive the therapist as having attributes associated with unpleasant
interactions in the past. The therapist, however, does not respond as
the figure from the past did, and in time, the old feelings become
muted, and the patient no longer needs to replay new relationships
according to the old emotional script. According to theory, this result
is accomplished without explicit analysis. Alexander and French (1946)
introduced the term corrective emotional experience to describe this
process. Corrective emotional experiences may occur at any point on the
spectrum of psychopathology and the spectrum of psychotherapies. Gabbard
(2017) summarized current thinking: "Now most clinicians and researchers
feel that insight through interpretation has historically been idealized
and that change also occurs through the experience of a new kind of
relationship in psychotherapy" (p. 94). Education and instruction are
potent agents for bringing about change in people's lives. Advice and
instruction are most likely to be followed when given by a person whom
the individual trusts and respects. The skillful therapist or teacher
gives instruction that is needed at the time when it can be absorbed and
used. The patient's mother may have said, "Clean your room." The
psychotherapist teaches, "It's not good for your self-esteem for you to
be surrounded by evidence that you can't keep some order in your life."
Sometimes, this approach is all that is required to bring about change.
In the 1960s, learning theory, which previously had been of more
interest to science-minded psychologists than to clinical psychiatrists,
was presented as the theoretical basis of behavior therapy (an approach
that had been demonstrated to be effective for many disorders), contrary
to predictions based on theories underlying psychoanalytic therapy.
Change, initiated by a therapy based on an educational approach, was
found to occur even if neither patient nor therapist understood the
historical origins of the problem. Education and instruction have been
accepted throughout history as strategies for changing behavior and
thought, although such changes cannot be guaranteed or predicted---when
a patient mentions a former therapist, it is remarkable how often the
patient tells us what that therapist told him or her to do. Research on
the process of learning, although focused on formal education, has led
to observations that new information is linked to what is already known,
that retrieving information repeatedly enhances

subsequent recall, and that elaborating on the material contributes to
learning (deWinstanley and Bjork 2002). Although the field of learning
theory has contributed potentially useful ways of explaining the process
of education and change, such as critical reflection (Mezirow 1998),
these ideas have not percolated through psychotherapy education. The
techniques of cognitive and behavior therapies are used somewhat
informally in supportive psychotherapy, usually without the emphasis on
homework. Faulty cognition and the persistence of automatic thoughts are
recognized as processes that often contribute to symptom formation and
to maladaptive behavior. In supportive psychotherapy, the therapist may
address faulty cognition when the patient is able to accept the
self-scrutiny entailed. Desensitization, a central theme of behavior
therapy, may contribute to the beneficial effect of history-oriented
psychotherapy in that it involves repeated safe exposure to once painful
memories (Goldberg and Green 1986). Patients at the most supportive end
of the supportive-expressive continuum find that simply being able to
talk to a person who is interested and accepting minimizes the
loneliness in their lives. Being able to talk about experiences and
worries brings relief, even when the patients receive no reassuring or
normalizing response. Identification with the therapist as a reasonable,
stable individual may promote stability and better relationships with
others. When associated with events that have been concealed, venting
can be curative. Repeating the same story month after month may be
comforting for the patient, even when he or she makes no progress. From
the medical perspective, maintaining the status quo may be a reasonable
and responsible objective. At the same time, however, the therapist
hopes to find opportunities to help the patient improve his or her
situation. The concept of change appears throughout the literature on
psychotherapy. At one end of the spectrum, change means lasting
personality change. At the other end, desirable changes may involve
changing specific behaviors, such as sitting in front of the television
all day, skipping medications, spending money foolishly, remaining in a
bad environment, or failing to control children. If simple advice is all
that is needed to get the patient to change habitual behavior, it is not
necessary to examine possible causes of the behavior. Often, however,
there are obstacles to bringing about change that the patient does not
verbalize. If the

therapist is to give useful advice, he or she must be familiar with the
psychological and emotional problems that may be operating. THERAPIST 1:
The last time you were here, we talked about the support group, and you
said you were going to talk to the social worker about it. I wonder what
happened that you didn't. ("What happened?" is not as attacking as
"Why?") PATIENT 1: I don't know. I had trouble with my car. I had to go
to the dentist. THERAPIST 1: I know a lot of people have trouble doing
too many things in one week. It's also an easy habit to get into and not
a good one (normalizing, exhorting, judgmental). THERAPIST 2: People who
have not been able to do much for a long time---it can happen with
illness---become fearful of doing new things. They think that they will
do something wrong or won't know how to fit in. Does that make any
sense? (teaching; confronting---i.e., bringing to the patient's
attention feelings or thoughts that had been outside his or her
awareness) PATIENT 2: I get very nervous when I meet new people.
THERAPIST 2: So we need to find a way to deal with the nervousness that
will make it possible for you to have the interview with the social
worker. Then you can determine whether the group might be of use to you
(scolding replaced by acceptance; moving toward constructive efforts).
These dialogues illustrate how even in work with the most impaired
individuals, the therapist must explore feelings and ideas of which the
patient has not been aware. This exploration is an expressive element.
If the therapy is to go beyond the simplest take-it-or-leave-it advice
and beyond criticizing the patient for being noncompliant, the therapy
must take into account psychodynamic considerations. Films and plays of
the 1950s often show a patient in psychotherapy or psychoanalysis
discovering an early traumatic experience, after which recovery is
immediate. In real life, once such discoveries are made, a

patient typically must work hard to change his or her ways of thinking
and responding. Although the importance of explaining origins is not as
great as once thought, an explanation of origins still has its uses. For
the patient to own a meaningful personal story is to give him or her a
feeling of mastery, and the creation of the story is a shared task for
patient and therapist. From the scientific point of view, the therapist
can never be certain whether the patient's story agrees with what
actually happened---or whether the apparent cause-and-effect connections
are valid. As an example of the latter, people who have been emotionally
and physically abused when they were children are more likely to be
abusive adults than are those who never received such treatment---but
this result is not inevitable. Therapists, as well as the general
public, often blur the distinction between anecdote and group data. The
methods of cognitive-behavioral therapy, many of which have been
incorporated into supportive psychotherapy, may be the principal
approach once the patient sees that the behavior that is causing
distress is the outcome of a plausible story. Misch (2000) advises the
supportive therapist to be like a good parent. The supportive therapist
is advised to comfort, soothe, encourage, and nurture the patient; to
set limits; and to confront self-destructive behaviors, all while
encouraging the patient's growth and self-sufficiency.

Conclusion Supportive psychotherapy is conducted in conversational
style, involving examination of the patient's current and past
experiences, responses, and feelings. In supportive psychotherapy, the
therapist is active and inquires and responds in ways that seek to
bolster the patient's strengths. Although the initial focus is on
self-esteem, ego function, and adaptive skills, as with other forms of
psychotherapy, the therapeutic alliance may be the most important
element. The therapist seeks to expand the patient's self-mastery by
helping him or her to become aware of thoughts and feelings that had
been outside awareness and to provide specific suggestions for more
adaptive living.

Assessment, Case Formulation, 3 and Goal Setting Assessment The process
of evaluation and case formulation is essential for all
psychotherapeutic approaches. The most important objective of the
evaluation process is to establish a positive therapeutic relationship
(alliance) with the patient. The patient is more likely to see himself
or herself as a partner in the diagnostic endeavor when the therapeutic
relationship is positive, which will lead to a more thorough and
informative evaluation. A positive therapeutic relationship can also
further the patient's interest in and commitment to psychotherapy. As
the patient evaluation unfolds, the evaluator can establish a positive
relationship with the patient by displaying an interest in what the
patient is saying. This is accomplished by listening attentively and
providing feedback on symptoms, problems, conflicts, and relationships.
The evaluator should respond to the patient with empathy, interest, and
responsive and explanatory comments so that the patient can begin to
understand his or her problems and conflicts. A central objective of the
assessment process is to diagnose the patient's illness and describe the
patient's problems so that the individual can be treated appropriately.
A thorough evaluation should help the clinician select the appropriate
treatment approach. The treatment plan should be individualized to meet
the needs and goals of the patient. The supportive-expressive continuum,
introduced in Chapter 1, "Evolution of the Concept of Supportive
Psychotherapy," is a useful way of thinking about and conceptualizing
the evaluation process. In this chapter, we combine the psychotherapy
continuum (lower labels on Figure 3--1) with an impairment or
psychopathology continuum (upper labels on Figure 3--1). Supportive
psychotherapy is indicated for patients on the left side of

the continuum (higher levels of psychopathology), whereas expressive
psychotherapy is better suited for patients on the right side of the
continuum (healthier patients).

Figure 3--1. Impairment-psychotherapy continuum. When a therapist meets
a patient for the first time, the therapist generally does not know the
extent of the patient's impairment, psychopathology, or strengths.
Therefore, the therapist should begin the initial interview by
attempting to understand why the patient has come for treatment. The
therapist should thoroughly evaluate the current problems and past
history of each patient. The technical approach will vary, from the use
of a more supportive approach for patients with higher levels of
psychopathology to a more expressive approach for healthier patients.
If, in the course of working with a patient, the therapist finds that
the patient has more significant psychopathology, the therapist may have
to quickly move into a more supportive mode. The degree of disturbance
encountered during the initial interview will determine how the
clinician proceeds in that interview. In this conceptualization,
supportive psychotherapy is indicated for patients with high levels of
psychopathology, whereas expressive psychotherapy is better suited for
healthier patients. We have found in our clinical and research work that
supportive and expressive psychotherapies produce similar results in
patients across the psychopathology continuum (see Chapter 9,
"Evaluating Competence and Outcome Research"). Therefore, supportive
psychotherapy is indicated for a wide variety of disorders across the
psychopathology continuum (for a full discussion of inclusion and
exclusion criteria for supportive psychotherapy, see Chapter 5, "General
Framework of Supportive Psychotherapy"). The efficacy of

supportive psychotherapy in higher-functioning patients is especially
enhanced when expressive and cognitive-behavioral techniques are
integrated into a supportive approach (Winston and Winston 2002). The
patient evaluation should be comprehensive and, if possible, should be
completed during an extended first session of at least 60 minutes. At
the end of the evaluation, the therapist should understand the patient's
problems, interpersonal relationships, everyday functioning, and
psychological structure. The evaluation interview should not be a series
of questions and answers. Instead, it should be more of an exploration
of the patient's life. The interview should be therapeutic, to help
motivate the patient for treatment and promote the therapeutic alliance.
In a supportive approach, a therapist may make an evaluation therapeutic
by using appropriate interventions, such as empathic clarifications and
confrontations. The evaluation should begin with an exploration of the
patient's presenting problems or areas of disturbance. Presenting
problems may include symptoms, relationship and self difficulties, work
or school issues, medical problems, and substance abuse issues.
Generally, symptoms should be explored first so that the clinician is
informed about the extent of the patient's psychopathology. Exploring
symptoms first is also helpful to the patient because symptoms are what
patients care about. Information about symptoms will enable the
clinician to adjust the evaluation interview to the patient's level of
psychopathology. With some patients, the extent of psychopathology will
be clear from the start, particularly if the patient has a loss of
reality testing. With other patients, psychopathology may be less
discernible and more time may be required. After the presenting problems
have been clearly delineated, the therapist should explore the patient's
history. We want to emphasize that therapists should not move on to an
exploration of the patient's history until all of his or her current
problems and symptoms have been thoroughly explored. Patients will often
bring up an important experience from their past while discussing a
current problem. When this occurs, the evaluator should say, "What you
are bringing up is important and I want to hear about it, but let's
first finish exploring the current issues in your life." Exploration of
the patient's history can be accomplished in many ways but should be
systematic and should cover relationships with parents, other

caretakers, siblings, grandparents, and other people in the patient's
life and household. Descriptions of these individuals should also be
obtained. Important issues to inquire about include trauma; separation
and loss; medical problems, psychiatric illness, and substance abuse (in
the patient and first-degree relatives); geographic moves; family belief
systems; school history; sexual development and experiences; identity
issues; and financial matters. Past psychiatric treatment, including
psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy, should be explored, as should the
patient's response to the therapist, because this knowledge can alert
the therapist to potential problems in the therapeutic alliance. As soon
as the therapist determines that the patient should be treated with
supportive or supportive-expressive psychotherapy, the evaluation
interview should promote the objectives of supportive psychotherapy.
These objectives are to ameliorate symptoms and to maintain, restore, or
improve self-esteem, adaptive skills, and ego or psychological functions
(Pinsker et al. 1991). A useful method of conceptualizing dynamic
psychotherapy, which encompasses both supportive and expressive
approaches, involves the triangles of conflict and person. The focus of
the triangle of conflict (Freud 1926/1959; Malan 1979) (Figure 3--2) is
on wishes, needs, and feelings that are warded off by defenses and
anxiety. In this model, a therapist who is pursuing a patient's feeling
is at the wish/need/feeling point of the triangle. As is often the case,
the patient may respond defensively to the exploration of feeling
(second point of the triangle). The patient also may respond with
anxiety (the third point of the triangle) because of fear of the
conflicted feeling.

Figure 3--2. Triangle of conflict.

In the triangle of person (Malan 1979; Menninger 1958) (Figure 3--3),
the three points all relate to people and include individuals in the
patient's current life and past life and the therapist or transference
figure. In expressive or exploratory psychotherapy, the therapist tends
to work on conflict situations using the triangles to explore wishes,
needs, and feelings that the patient may have in relation to an
important person in his or her life. When defenses interfere with
exploration, the therapist addresses them. Present and past issues are
addressed, and the transference relationship and its exploration are
emphasized.

Figure 3--3. Triangle of person. In supportive psychotherapy, the
triangles of conflict and person are used differently. In the triangle
of conflict, feelings generally are not pursued, anxiety is diminished,
and defenses are strengthened. In the triangle of person, the real
relationship with the therapist is emphasized, and the therapist works
primarily on present persons and current issues in the patient's life.
The following video vignette, which is presented as an enactment and is
available online at www.appi.org/Winston, illustrates the use of
supportive therapy in an initial evaluation (see Video Vignette 1).

Video Vignette 1: Assessment Mary, a 42-year-old woman, was referred by
her primary care physician because of depression, beginning at age 24,
and a number of other problems. She recently went through a divorce and
is having a great deal of difficulty finding a job. She has a history of
multiple episodes of depression and was hospitalized once for suicidal
depression.

THERAPIST: So as you know, Dr. Perry sent you to see me for an
evaluation. Can you tell me what the problem is? MARY: I just don't feel
right. I don't know. I can't seem to get anything done (responds in a
vague manner that could be defensive or a sign of disorganization).
THERAPIST: So you don't feel right and you haven't been able to get
anything done and you're at a loss (responds with a supportive
clarification that helps Mary to focus on the question at hand). MARY:
Yeah, I just sit around. I can't get started. Everything is just a mess.
I feel so bad \[becomes tearful\]. The therapist recognizes that Mary
may be depressed and asks a series of questions to determine whether
this is so and, if so, the extent of the depression. Have you been
feeling down? Have you been crying or feeling tearful? What is your
energy level like? Have you been tired a lot? Are you anxious, fearful,
jumpy? What about your sleep patterns? Are you having problems falling
asleep or are you sleeping too much? How is your appetite? Are you
losing or gaining weight? Are you maintaining your social relationships?
Do you find pleasure in your life? Do you go out? Are you working or
having difficulty at work? What is your attitude about the future? Do
you feel hopeful? Have you wished you were dead or wished you could go
to sleep and not wake up? Have you had any thoughts of killing yourself?
Have you been thinking about how you might do this? Have you had these
thoughts and had some intention of acting on them (Posner et al. 2009)?
Are you able to have sexual relations? Is sex pleasurable? Mary responds
that for the past 2 months, she has been consistently downhearted,
tearful, fatigued, and pessimistic about the future and has had
difficulty concentrating. She has trouble falling asleep, consistently
awakens during early morning hours, and is unable to get back to sleep.
Her appetite is poor, and she has lost approximately 10 pounds in the
past 2 weeks. She is preoccupied with death and has thoughts of killing
herself but has no defined plan. She rarely goes out, nothing gives her
pleasure or satisfaction, and she has no sexual desire or interest. She
stopped working a few weeks ago. She has never had a

manic or hypomanic episode. In the past, she was treated with
antidepressants, and during her last episode, she was treated with
paroxetine. Mary stopped taking her medication 6 months ago. The
therapist recognizes that Mary is in the midst of a major depressive
episode and has some cognitive difficulties. This level of
psychopathology places Mary on the left side of the continuum (see
Figure 3--1), which indicates that the therapist should continue the
evaluation in a supportive mode. THERAPIST: So it sounds to me as if
you've been feeling depressed. From what you've told me, it seems you're
depressed now and have been depressed several times in the past. These
things you're describing---tearfulness, fatigue, difficulty
concentrating, trouble sleeping, feeling bad, having a hard time getting
started--- all these things are symptoms of depression. (Naming the
problem makes it understandable and reassures the patient that each
symptom is not a separate condition.) MARY: I just feel so hopeless and
horrible. I feel like nothing's ever going to get better. It's just that
there are so many things. . .so many things that are bothering me. (The
therapist has begun to educate Mary about her depression. Education is
important in all forms of psychotherapy, especially in supportive
treatment. Education provides the patient with knowledge about his or
her difficulties

and

also

demonstrates

the

therapist's

interest

and

understanding, thereby promoting the therapeutic alliance.) Next, the
therapist explores how the current episode of depression began.
THERAPIST: We should try to look at this episode of depression. How long
ago did it start? (proposed agenda) MARY: Um, it got really bad 2 months
ago, but I have to tell you I haven't been feeling good, probably for
the past year. I don't feel myself. THERAPIST: Did anything in
particular happen? (continues to focus) MARY \[tearful\]: My husband
\[Edward\], who I've been married to for 14 years, I just found out that
he had an affair with this woman that he works with, and he had the
affair, and he left me. That's all I can say (begins to reveal important
material that may have contributed to the onset of her depression).
THERAPIST: I can see that this is really hard for you (empathic
support).

MARY: It's worse. I don't know what I did wrong. I feel so stupid. I
feel I can't do anything. I can't go to work. I can't face the people.
The people at work will think that I'm pathetic, and I'm too ashamed to
tell anyone. I don't like to talk about it (indicates that her husband's
infidelity and his leaving her led to a series of automatic \[negative\]
thoughts). THERAPIST: So have you been able to continue at your job?
(early focus on adaptive activity) MARY: Well, it's been a struggle. It
has been really hard. THERAPIST: What do you think your coworkers might
be thinking about you? (begins to explore Mary's automatic thoughts)
MARY: They think I'm pathetic . . . . I used to call my husband all the
time from work. I felt so lonely and I felt scared that I couldn't do
things right, and he would get so angry at me and he would say, "Why are
you calling me? Why are you bothering me? Can't you do anything for
yourself?" THERAPIST: You've been feeling incompetent? MARY: I feel so
incompetent and . . . THERAPIST: Can you give me a specific example of
this? (The therapist asks for a specific example because remaining at an
abstract or general level promotes vagueness and loss of focus.) MARY:
Oh, God . . . I mean, I was feeling incompetent. I remember this one
time when I was at work and I fell and hit my head, and my head was
bleeding and I needed stitches, and I called my husband to come help me
and bring me to the doctor to get stitches, and he got angry at me and
told me that he was busy and not to bother him and that I can't do
anything right. I just felt so useless after that (provides a clear
interpersonal example). THERAPIST: So you reached out to your husband
for help and not only did he not help you, but he also put you down for
it. This contributed to making you feel incompetent? (summarizes
patient's story) MARY: Well, yeah. I can't do anything right. I can't do
anything right . . . yeah. THERAPIST: I think that most people in that
situation would ask for help and reach out to somebody. So I think that
maybe you are making an erroneous judgment about yourself (normalizing
and then clarifying Mary's automatic thinking). MARY: You think so?

THERAPIST: Perhaps this is a pattern with you? (The therapist asks if
this might be her habitual manner of behaving.) MARY: Maybe . . . I
don't know? The therapist has elicited a concrete example of an
interaction with Mary's husband, an interaction that led her to think of
herself as incompetent and helpless. This way of thinking is an example
of automatic thoughts, which are quite common in depression. Mary's
thought processes would constitute an important area on which to
concentrate in supportive therapy for this type of disorder. In this
instance, the therapist has attempted to point out that Mary's negative
thinking was faulty, but the therapist has done so in a supportive
manner by asking if Mary agreed. In subsequent sessions, the therapist
should help Mary test her automatic thoughts herself. The therapist then
goes on to explore Mary's relationship with Edward, the history of their
marriage, and her past history. Mary is in the throes of a major
depressive disorder and has had four previous major depressive episodes
as well as milder, chronic depression for most of her life. Serious
difficulties in the interpersonal sphere, as well as personality
problems, limit her ability to function. The therapist, a psychiatrist,
concluded that Mary would benefit from medication and a supportive
psychotherapy approach employing some cognitive-behavioral techniques.
The therapist explained how both approaches---medication and
psychotherapy---would be helpful in treating Mary's depression, anxiety,
and problems in day-to-day functioning. Mary agreed with these immediate
treatment goals and stated that she thinks the medication and
psychotherapy are worth a try. The therapist explained when the
medication will begin to work and have maximum effect and discussed
possible side effects of the medication.

Diagnostic Evaluation Major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate to
severe Dependent personality disorder

Case Formulation For each patient, the treatment approach should be
based on the central issues emerging from the assessment and case
formulation. The case formulation is an explanation of the patient's
symptoms and psychosocial

functioning. The therapist's formulation governs what interventions will
be used as well as which issues in the patient-therapist dialogue will
be selected for attention. Case formulation depends on an accurate and
thorough assessment of the patient. Having a sense of the underlying
issues at the start enhances the therapist's ability to respond
empathically. At the same time, empathy for the patient helps the
therapist guide and plan therapy effectively. The initial formulation is
tentative and must be modified as more is learned about the patient
during the course of psychotherapy. Although the DSM-5 (American
Psychiatric Association 2013a) diagnosis is an important element of the
formulation, it is by no means the whole story. The diagnosis does not
illuminate an individual's adaptive or maladaptive characteristics such
as disappointments, his or her capacity for relationships, and how the
individual thinks about and interprets life's events, nor does the
diagnosis explain the unique life history of an individual. The DSM
diagnosis alone does not fully explain the patient or the problem. The
following case formulation approaches are derived from psychoanalytic
theory, including interpersonal and relational approaches, as well as
cognitive-behavioral approaches. In the following subsections, we
discuss the following case formulation approaches (Table 3--1):
structural, genetic, dynamic, and cognitive-behavioral. Supportive
psychotherapy uses elements of all these therapeutic approaches but
differs in how these elements are used. For example, a patient's
conflict may be clearly understood and formulated by the therapist but
never or only partially explored in psychotherapy. Although these
approaches have always been described separately, a great deal of
overlap exists, so some repetition occurs in the descriptions. Table
3--1. Types and foci of case formulations Type

Focus

Type

Focus

Structural

Concentrates on fixed aspects of an individual's personality within a
functional context; assesses strengths and weaknesses and overall level
of psychopathology

Genetic

Explores early development and life events that may explain the
patient's current situation

Dynamic

Highlights the content of an individual's current conflicts and relates
it to a primary lifelong or core conflict; examines mental and/or
emotional tensions that may be conscious or unconscious

Cognitive-behavioral Attends to the individual's automatic thoughts
(based on the person's core beliefs or negative schemas) and how they
can be addressed to change thoughts, behaviors, and moods

Structural Approach A structural case formulation (Table 3--2) attempts
to capture the relatively fixed characteristics of an individual's
personality, which is understood within a functional context (in
contrast with genetic and dynamic approaches, which are more content
based). Assessment of an individual's strengths and weaknesses and
overall level of psychopathology helps determine the clinician's
technical approach. A thorough structural assessment enables the
clinician to determine with some degree of accuracy where to place the
patient on the impairment-psychotherapy continuum (see Figure 3--1).
Table 3--2. Components of the structural approach (ego and superego) Ego
functions Relation to reality

Object relations Affects Impulse control Defenses Thought processes
Autonomous functions (perception, intention, intelligence, language, and
motor development) Synthetic function (ability to form a cohesive whole
or gestalt) Superego functions Conscience, morals, and ideals Structural
functions have been grouped together using Freud's (1923/1961)
structural approach of id, ego, and superego. These agencies refer to
the inner life of the patient. The following description of
psychological or ego functions is based on the work of Beres (1956) and
Bellak (1958). These categories are not mutually exclusive; there is a
great deal of overlap.

Relation to Reality Beres (1956) and Bellak (1958) described reality
testing and sense of reality as major components of relation to reality.
The term reality testing describes an individual's ability to assess
reality. Reality testing is impaired in the presence of faulty judgment
and is grossly disturbed in the presence of hallucinations or delusions.
Sense of reality relates to a person's ability to distinguish self from
other; presence of this ability indicates a stable and cohesive body
image. Examples of disturbances in this function are depersonalization,
derealization, and identity problems. Disturbances in relation to
reality indicate significant structural problems that place the patient
on the left side of the impairmentpsychotherapy continuum (see Figure
3--1). Such disturbances should point the clinician in the direction of
a more supportive approach. Impaired

relation to reality is a key indicator of structural deficits and should
always be thoroughly explored.

Object Relations Object relations refers to a person's capacity to
relate in a meaningful way to significant individuals in his or her
life. The function includes the ability to form intimate relationships,
tolerate separation and loss, and maintain independence and autonomy. It
also involves the sense of self and the ability to form a cohesive and
stable self-image without diminishing or overidealizing self or other. A
patient's relationships with others form the foundation of the
psychological functions constituting the structural approach. In all
forms of psychotherapy, evaluation of object relations is central in
determining a patient's placement on the impairment-psychotherapy
continuum. Patients who are withdrawn and not interested in others or
who have narcissistic, highly dependent, or chaotic relationships
generally require a more supportive approach and therefore are on the
left side of the continuum. Individuals who have had at least one
meaningful give-and-take relationship tend to be on the right side of
the continuum.

Affects, Impulse Control, and Defenses Affects are complex
psychophysiological states composed of subjective feelings and
physiological accompaniments such as crying, blushing, sweating,
posture, facial expression, and tone of voice. The range of affects
includes excitement, joy, surprise, fear, anger, rage, irritation,
anguish, shame, humiliation, sadness, and depression. The individual's
ability to experience a wide range of affects at some depth and to
differentiate between affects (as opposed to lumping them into a single
feeling such as primitive rage) need to be assessed. Does the individual
experience a wide variety and range of affects? Is the individual able
to tolerate love, anger, joy, sadness, and humiliation? What are the
predominant affects (Friedman and Lister 1987), and how regularly are
they invoked? The capacity to control impulses and to modulate affect in
an adaptive manner indicates a well-functioning defensive structure.
When impulse

control is faulty, the individual may engage in socially unacceptable
behavior, such as physically or verbally lashing out at others or making
inappropriate demands. The ability to delay gratification and to
tolerate frustration is another important aspect of impulse control.
Defenses mediate between a person's wishes, needs, and feelings and both
internal prohibitions and the external world. Individuals tend to use
the same kinds of behavior as patterned responses in reaction to
perceived danger, difficult situations, or painful affects. Defenses are
conceptualized as having both a developmental and a hierarchical
organization. Three levels of defenses have been described: immature,
intermediate, and mature. Examples of immature defenses are projection,
hypochondriasis, acting out, sarcasm, and avoidance. Intermediate
defenses include forgetting, intellectualization, displacement, and
rationalization. Among the mature defenses are altruism, anticipation,
suppression, sublimation, and humor (Vaillant 1977, ). Primitive
defenses, poor impulse control, severe affective instability, and
shallow affect are indicators of structural deficits that place an
individual on the left side of the continuum and suggest the need for a
more supportive approach.

Thought Processes The ability to think clearly, logically, and
abstractly should be assessed. High levels of primary process or
primitive thinking are a good indicator of severe psychopathology.
Significant limitations in the ability to think logically suggest the
need for a more supportive approach as opposed to an exploratory one.
Dysfunctional and automatic thoughts should be identified so that
cognitive-behavioral approaches can be applied.

Autonomous Functions Autonomous functions---perception, intention,
intelligence, language, and motor development---are believed to develop
in a relatively conflict-free manner (Hartmann 1939/1958). Although
these functions generally are not impaired in patients on the right side
of the impairment-psychotherapy continuum, they can be affected in
patients with significant psychopathology.

Synthetic Function Synthetic function (Nunberg 1931) is the individual's
ability to organize himself or herself and the world in a productive
manner so that the individual can function in a harmonious and
integrated way. Synthetic function is the psychological ability to form
a cohesive whole, or gestalt, by putting together and organizing the
other functions. For example, a young man meets several men and women
for the first time at a dinner party. He engages each individual in a
friendly and open manner with an appropriate affect. He is thoughtful,
coherent, and humorous. In this example, the young man synthesizes the
ego functions of object relations (friendly and open), appropriate
affect, thoughtfulness and coherence, and a high-level defense or coping
style of humor.

Conscience, Morals, and Ideals Conscience, morals, and ideals derive
from the internalization of aspects of parental figures and social
mores. Freud (1926/1959) conceptualized these elements as aspects of the
superego. Severe impairments in these functions can interfere with the
patient-therapist relationship. For instance, if a patient is not
truthful with the therapist, achieving success in psychotherapy may be
difficult. The following case provides the basis for a structural case
formulation.

Case Illustration: Structural Case Formulation Bert, a 24-year-old man
with panic disorder, has developed the belief that his coworkers are
saying derogatory things about him and want to hurt him physically. His
relationships are characterized by an absence of concern for self or
others, and this lack of concern often puts him at risk. He uses women
to satisfy his sexual needs, abruptly leaving them and giving untruthful
excuses. At times he becomes enraged with the women he is seeing and is
physically abusive. His aggressive and violent behavior evokes fears of
retaliation. He both uses and sells drugs. He has a history of beginning
schools and jobs, quitting when he encounters difficulties, and blaming
others for his failures. Bert has impaired reality testing, consisting
of ideas about others talking about him and plotting against him. His
adaptive skills are poor, as demonstrated by his inability to work or to
complete school. Relationships are conducted on a need-satisfying basis,
without concern

for others. Bert is often sadistic but then becomes self-defeating and
self-punishing. He exhibits impaired frustration tolerance and poorly
controlled impulses, and his displays of rage may indicate a limited
repertoire of affective responses. He uses immature defenses, such as
projection, acting out, and denial.

Genetic Approach The genetic approach to case formulation involves
exploration of early development and life events that may help to
explain an individual's current situation. The genetic approach follows
the development of the child from birth to late adolescence or early
adulthood. Life presents many challenges, conflicts, and crises. These
events can be traumatic, depending on the severity of the event, the
developmental stage of the child experiencing the event, and the quality
of the child's support system at the time of the event. Events or
conditions important in a child's development include the loss of a
significant person, separation, abuse, the birth of a sibling, birth
defects and developmental deficits, learning problems, illness, surgery,
and substance abuse. Although a single event can have a traumatic effect
on an individual, it is often negative experiences in day-to-day life
that lead to significant conflict, psychopathology, and
characterological problems. Examples of negative day-to-day events
include constant criticism, devaluing and abusive behavior of parents,
parental conflict, and significant parental psychiatric problems. An
example of a persistent difficulty or traumatic situation is the
experience of a young boy growing up with a violent alcoholic father who
is demeaning and at times physically abusive. Persistent trauma such as
that caused by unresponsiveness of a parent may be more subtle and
difficult to evaluate. For instance, a narcissistic mother may use her
daughter for her own self-enhancement. She may ignore her child's real
qualities, demanding behavior that the child is unable to deliver or can
deliver only at considerable cost to herself.

Dynamic Approach The dynamic approach is useful with mental and/or
emotional tensions that may be conscious or unconscious. The therapist
using this approach focuses

on conflicting wishes, needs, or feelings and their meanings. In a
conflict situation, an individual wards off or defends against wishes,
needs, or feelings. The dynamic approach highlights the content of an
individual's current conflicts and relates them to a primary lifelong or
core conflict (Perry et al. 1987). In contrast to structural case
formulation, which is based on an individual's relatively fixed
characteristics and functioning, dynamic case formulation is concerned
with meaning and content. The dynamic approach focuses on current
conflicts, whereas the genetic approach focuses on a person's
developmental history, including childhood and adolescent traumas and
conflicts and their possible meanings. Childhood conflicts tend to be
revived and relived in adult life. A useful approach to understanding
the dynamics of an individual, particularly the core conflict, involves
mapping central relationship patterns. Understanding central
relationship patterns requires exploration of three aspects of
interpersonal interactions: 1) what the person wants from others, 2) how
others react to the person, and 3) how the person responds to others'
reactions. These categories form the basis of the core conflictual
relationship theme (CCRT) method, an approach that relies on
"narratives, called relationship episodes, that patients typically tell
and sometimes even enact during their psychotherapy session" (Luborsky
and Crits-Christoph 1990, p. 15). The CCRT is composed of the patient's
wishes or needs from others, how others respond (their actual responses
as well as their responses from the patient's perspective), and how the
patient responds to others. Understanding and using the CCRT method
provides the clinician with a central organizing focus. The CCRT method
can be used differentially with patients according to their position on
the continuum. The following case illustrates a dynamic conflict as well
as its genetic or historical basis.

Case Illustration: Dynamic Case Formulation Tim is a passive 48-year-old
man whose father has become increasingly debilitated and demanding, a
state made worse by early signs of dementia. His father often telephones
with complaints and demands, even though Tim has been consistently
helpful. After these calls, Tim finds himself wishing that his father
appreciated him. He becomes ridden with anxiety

and often expresses anger toward his wife and friends, later feeling
guilty about this behavior. At work, he has become increasingly anxious
and perfectionistic, and he worries that his boss dislikes him and will
criticize him. The dynamic explanation is that Tim has ambivalent
feelings toward his father, consisting of anger and possibly a wish for
his father to die, combined with positive feelings based on earlier
experiences. He becomes anxious and defends against these feelings or
wishes by displacing the anger he feels toward his father onto his wife
and friends. The anxiety serves as a signal of unacceptable feelings.
His boss is viewed as an authority figure and has become linked with his
father, who is both loved and hated. In general, Tim is passive and
avoids confrontation. He fears making a mistake and being humiliated.
Tim's wish to be appreciated by his father can be identified using the
CCRT method. The response of the other, his father, is lack of
appreciation combined with hostility. The response of the self is
displacement of anger onto Tim's wife and friends and a feeling of being
unappreciated. The genetic basis of Tim's current conflict is related to
his childhood experience of his father being both highly critical and
concerned and loving. This early experience has resulted in mixed
feelings toward his father, consisting of love and rage with
accompanying anxiety, guilt, and lack of assertiveness.

Cognitive-Behavioral Approach Although case formulation has not been
widely used in cognitivebehavioral therapy, models have been developed
that are helpful in assessing an individual's problems in cognition
(Persons 1989, 1993). Cognitive-behavioral therapy is initially directed
at automatic thoughts, which are based on core beliefs or negative
schemas. Overt and underlying beliefs are closely linked and are
expressed as thoughts, behaviors, and moods. Core beliefs are addressed
later in the course of therapy. The cognitive-behavioral case
formulation model, as adapted from Tompkins (1996), has the following
components: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.

Problem list (including automatic thoughts) Core beliefs Origins
Precipitants and activating situations Predicted obstacles to treatment
Treatment plan

The description of Tim (see "Case Illustration: Dynamic Case
Formulation" in the previous subsection) will be used to illustrate
these six components of cognitive-behavioral case formulations. The
problem list is a complete list of the patient's difficulties and
presenting complaints. It includes the dysfunctional thinking
responsible for maladaptive behavior and disturbed mood. Tim's mood
problems are anxiety, anger, and feelings of guilt. His problematic
behavior is his inappropriate anger toward his wife and friends. His
automatic thoughts ("I am flawed" and "I will make mistakes and be
humiliated") lead to passivity and lack of assertiveness. Core beliefs
are hypotheses about the patient's self-schemas and views of others and
the world. Tim's core belief is a pervasive sense that he cannot do
anything right. This belief makes him especially vulnerable to the
opinions of others. The origins of core beliefs are early experiences,
generally involving parents or parental figures. Tim's core belief
appears to have derived from his relationship with his overly critical
father. Core beliefs are generally activated by situations or events
that are stressful or problematic for the patient. The deteriorating
health of his father precipitated Tim's current difficulty and brought
him into treatment. Obstacles to treatment should be anticipated if
possible. Obstacles in Tim's case might be reflected in the
patient-therapist relationship. Fear of criticism can emerge in relation
to the therapist and lead to increased patient passivity in the
treatment situation. Tim may be reluctant to complete homework
assignments because he may fear that the therapist will be critical. A
well-conceived and comprehensive treatment plan should emerge from the
case formulation. This plan should include goals and the types of
interventions to be used. For Tim, the goals should include decreasing
his anxiety, reducing or eliminating his anger toward his wife and
friends, and decreasing his difficulties at work. The interventions
should consist of cognitive restructuring of Tim's thinking about his
father and relaxation therapy (including meditation) to reduce anxiety.

The Four Approaches Compared and Applied A number of similarities exist
among the structural, genetic, dynamic, and cognitive-behavioral
approaches as used in dynamic (supportive and expressive) and
cognitive-behavioral therapies. The concept of core beliefs

and their origins is similar to the idea of the genetic case
formulation, which provides the origins of structural and dynamic
factors. The notion of activating events in cognitive-behavioral therapy
is analogous to the precipitation of genetic and dynamic conflicts.
Obstacles to treatment often relate to the therapeutic relationship, and
thus the concept of obstacles is similar in genetic and dynamic
approaches. Cognitive-behavioral therapy adds a different dimension to
case formulation and the treatment approach, particularly when thinking
problems are present. Dynamic and genetic approaches do not involve a
major focus on thinking, but the structural approach does include
evaluation of an individual's thought processes. The following
subsections provide case formulations and diagnostic assessments of
Mary, the patient evaluated in Video Vignette 1 in the "Assessment"
section earlier in this chapter.

Structural Approach Mary is an intelligent woman with limited insight
and judgment. Although her reality testing is intact, her adaptive
skills are impaired. She has difficulty functioning, caring for herself,
and working. Her object relations are on a dependent need-satisfying
level. Mary has low self-esteem, a result of early experiences with her
mother and sisters and more recent experiences with her husband. Her
depression has intensified her feelings of inadequacy. The defenses Mary
uses are at the immature level and consist of avoidance, denial, and
projection. Predominant affects are sadness and anger. Mary has many
negative thoughts about herself and is somewhat impulsive.

Genetic Approach Mary is the youngest of three girls born to older
parents. Her parents did not expect a third child, and her mother
considered aborting the pregnancy. Mary grew up with a sense of not
being wanted by her mother. Mary felt she was the least favored child
compared with her sisters, who were admired by their mother for their
intelligence and beauty. Her mother's attitude toward Mary interfered
with her development of a positive selfimage, resulting in faltering
self-esteem. When Mary was 14 years old, her father---with whom she had
a predominantly positive relationship---

suddenly died. At that time, her mother became less available and more
critical of Mary. The death of her father, who had been a source of
comfort during her adolescence, may have added to Mary's impaired
self-esteem and neediness.

Dynamic Approach Mary is a needy, dependent woman who wishes to be cared
for. The patient's core conflict revolves around her wish to be wanted
and cared for by others (mother and husband). When the response of
others is to abandon her (father's death), criticize her, or favor
others (mother favors her sisters; husband favors his lover), she
becomes depressed and withdrawn, with diminished self-esteem. Her wish
to be cared for is an expression of her need to feel she has a right to
exist.

Cognitive-Behavioral Approach Mary's problems include depression,
interpersonal difficulties with her husband and coworkers, and an
inability to maintain day-to-day functioning. Her automatic
thoughts---"I can't do anything right" and "I need someone to care for
me"---are based on Mary's core beliefs that she is worthless, a failure,
and in need of constant support, without which she cannot function. The
origins of her core beliefs are her mother's and sisters' view that she
was weak, sickly, and not as capable as her sisters. Precipitants of and
activating situations for Mary's difficulties are her separation from
her husband and the discontinuation of her medication for previous
depression. The obstacles to treatment are Mary's severe neediness and
her fear that the therapist will view her as inadequate.

Goal Setting For patients requiring supportive psychotherapy, organizing
goals should be as follows: 1. Amelioration of symptoms 2. Improvement
of adaptation 3. Enhancement of self-esteem

4. Improvement of overall functioning Setting goals in psychotherapy is
important in guiding the treatment. Both therapist and patient must
agree on the treatment objectives. The goals set within the first few
sessions should be viewed as preliminary and open to change. Both
immediate objectives for each session and ultimate goals (Parloff 1967)
for treatment should be considered. For example, an immediate in-session
objective for Mary might be to develop a mutually agreed-on plan for
helping her return to work within a short time period. An ultimate goal
for Mary would be to promote job stability and improve relationships
with coworkers. Clearly outlined goals help motivate patients and
promote the therapeutic alliance as patient and therapist work toward a
common end. The goals of treatment should be derived from the patient's
problem areas in order to enhance motivation to change and to promote
therapeutic clarity. The goals of supportive psychotherapy are different
from the goals of expressive psychotherapy, which are symptom and
personality change through analysis of the patient-therapist
relationship and through development of insight into previously
unrecognized feelings, thoughts, needs, and conflicts. In the past, it
was assumed that long-term changes in conflicts and personality could
not occur in supportive psychotherapy. Results of studies by Rosenthal
et al. (1999) and Winston et al. (2001) have suggested, however, that
supportive psychotherapy can produce personality changes in patients on
the healthier side of the impairment-psychotherapy continuum. The goals
of therapy should generally be the patient's. In the event of
disagreement regarding goals, the therapist enters into an exploration
of the problem. In the case of Mary, one of the mutually agreed-on goals
was to resolve her depression and to prevent future episodes of
depression. During Mary's previous episodes of depression, she stopped
taking her medication when she was no longer depressed. Therefore, an
important goal for Mary is to continue taking her medication to help
prevent future depressive episodes. After the therapist explored the
reasons Mary stopped taking her medication and educated her about the
risks of discontinuing, she agreed with this treatment goal.

Setting realistic goals is important, especially with patients who have
severe psychopathology. Some patients may have grandiose fantasies or
magical wishes that need to be modified. Mary had the unrealistic
expectation that her husband would return to her, which she thought
would solve her problems. Treatment goals should never be regarded as
fixed and unchangeable. For example, once Mary's depression is resolved,
she may want help with expanding her social network and improving her
interpersonal relationships.

Conclusion Assessment of the patient's problems, symptoms, and character
structure is critical for arriving at a complete diagnosis, case
formulation, and treatment plan. Case formulation should be
comprehensive---encompassing structural, genetic, dynamic, and
cognitive-behavioral approaches. We have illustrated this process by
presenting a case example from an initial assessment and case
formulation of a patient, as well as describing the setting of treatment
goals for this patient.

Techniques

4

In Chapter 2, "Principles and Mode of Action," we described the
following principles of supportive psychotherapy: 1) the interaction
between patient and therapist is conversational; 2) the transferential
aspects of the relationship are subordinate to the reality aspects of
the relationship; and 3) the therapist relates to the developmental
needs of the patient. Rosenthal (2009) characterized these principles,
as well as the need to take direct action to maintain the frame of
treatment, as contextual techniques because they underlie all supportive
psychotherapy and are deemed necessary for its conduct. In this chapter,
we describe specific techniques (Table 4--1) that are interventions (a
term often used to describe the actions of a therapist). These
techniques are employed to maintain the therapeutic alliance--- without
which nothing can be accomplished---and to achieve the objectives of
supportive psychotherapy (described in Chapter 1, "Evolution of the
Concept of Supportive Psychotherapy"): maintaining or improving
selfesteem, ego function, and adaptive skills. Table 4--1. Supportive
psychotherapy techniques Alliance building Expressions of interest
Expressions of empathy Expressions of understanding Sustaining comments
Self-disclosure Repairing a misalliance Esteem building Praise

Reassurance Normalizing Universalizing Encouragement Exhortation Skills
building---adaptive behavior Advice Teaching Modeling adaptive behavior
Anticipatory guidance Promoting autonomy Enhancing ego functioning
Reducing and preventing anxiety Conversational style Sharing the agenda
Verbal "padding" Naming the problem Normalizing Rationalizing Reframing
Minimization Modulating affect Supporting defenses Limit-setting
Expanding awareness Clarification Confrontation Interpretation

Source.

Adapted from Rosenthal 2009.

Alliance Building The term therapeutic alliance implies that the work of
forming and maintaining bonds is intrinsically therapeutic (Kozart
2002). The therapeutic alliance has been demonstrated to be one of the
most critical predictors of the outcome of any form of psychotherapy
(Horvath and Symonds 1991; Westerman et al. 1995). Thus, the therapist
using supportive psychotherapy works purposefully to build and maintain
the therapeutic alliance. The therapist sustains the conversation,
expressing interest, empathy, and understanding, in order to support the
connection between patient and therapist. When the therapist suspects
that the patient holds unrealistic positive feelings about him or her,
perhaps because of transference, it is typically not discussed. Threats
to the alliance are always a concern, whether caused by the patient's
life circumstances, the therapist's actual behavior, misinformation, or
transference. The therapeutic alliance, misalliance, and the repair of
ruptures in the relationship are discussed more fully in Chapter 6, "The
Therapeutic Relationship." The beginning therapist may not know where to
start with a new patient. It is a good idea to begin by discussing
whatever it is that the patient wants to talk about. The therapist must
then decide whether to dwell on that topic or to move on to other topics
that are more fruitful or important in the therapist's experience. For
example, when the patient has recently been hospitalized, medications
are a priority topic. The first questions to ask are 1) whether the
patient is taking medications regularly and 2) whether he or she is
experiencing any unwanted or uncomfortable effects. When a patient does
not take medication as prescribed, the physician often accuses the
patient of being noncompliant. Focusing instead on unexpected or
unwanted effects of the medication helps to transform the conversation
from adversarial to collaborative. Later, the therapist can broach
psychological issues that might affect willingness to take medication.
Possible issues include not wanting to feel overpowered by medication
and not wanting to accept the existence of illness. The therapist should
discuss details of daily life with a nonfunctioning individual and
should seek opportunities to discuss the individual's adaptive

skills. A person with a chronic disabling condition ought to have the
opportunity to talk about it. The therapist should make an effort to
know how the patient understands his or her condition and what feelings
are related to it. The patient may have fears about the future that are
not expressed. Depression accompanies many conditions and may be a
patient's response to discovering that he or she faces a life of
disability or a response to looking back over lost years and family
tension. The therapist should know about the people in the patient's
life. Higherfunctioning patients are likely to have important
relationships, to think about their interactions with others, and to
bring up their relationships for discussion. Lower-functioning patients
(and some elderly patients) may lead lives almost devoid of
relationships and may talk at length about their symptoms or abstractly
about their mental problems. The therapist should make an effort to know
about family, friends, acquaintances, and coworkers and, in the case of
an isolated patient, persons with whom the patient has even brief
contact, such as caseworkers, probation officers, receptionists, guards,
and meal servers. THERAPIST 1: Did you have contact with anyone in the
last few days? PATIENT 1: My sister-in-law called. THERAPIST 1: Tell me
about her. PATIENT 1: She's gross. THERAPIST 1: Can you describe her?
(This is a broader and less demanding question than "Why don't you like
her?") THERAPIST 2: Who are the people in your life now? PATIENT 2: No
one. The only people I know use drugs. THERAPIST 2: Is there someone you
talk to most days? THERAPIST 3: You say your son will come if you call
him. Does that mean he doesn't come if you don't call? PATIENT 3: He'll
drop what he's doing if we need him, but to come on a Sunday afternoon?
Forget it. THERAPIST 4: Tell me about the people who live in the
residence.

THERAPIST 5: Girlfriend? Is this someone you've known for some time?
Some well-spoken or well-educated patients ruminate endlessly and
unproductively about their introspections and their speculations about
the childhood origins of their trouble, without ever saying a word about
their current activity or the people in their lives.

Esteem Building The supportive techniques of praise, reassurance, and
encouragement are directed primarily to self-esteem concerns. Through
his or her attitude, the therapist conveys acceptance, respect, and
interest in the patient.

Praise A good supportive technique is to express praise when the patient
has accomplished something. Praise can be interspersed throughout a
conversation, sprinkled in like salt from a saltshaker. Praise may
reinforce the patient's accomplishments or improvement in adaptive
efforts, provided that the patient is likely to agree that the praise is
deserved. THERAPIST 1: Telling your mother that you knew you had been
rude was a good step. Do you agree? THERAPIST 2: You're able to make
this very clear. THERAPIST 3: It's good that you can be so considerate
of other people. (Note, however, that in some contexts, being too
considerate may be seen as a symptom, and a statement that the patient
is considerate might be presented as a confrontation.) False praise or
praise that is meaningless to the patient is worse than saying nothing.
Falsity and deception are incompatible with any good relationship.
PATIENT: I was always afraid of my mother.

THERAPIST: What were you afraid of? PATIENT: She came in this morning
and said, "Why are you still in bed?" She doesn't respect me. They argue
a lot. I was 15 before I realized that she was crazy. THERAPIST 1: You
explained that well. (This is a supportive comment but, in this
instance, false praise. Patient has mixed past and present and his
mother's attitude toward him and her relationship with her husband.
Thought-disordered responses can be "decoded," but the patient cannot be
said to have explained the situation well.) THERAPIST 2: It's hard for
you to describe these things. You're making a big effort (accurate and
useful). When the therapist expresses praise for something that the
patient cannot feel good about, the praise will be ineffective and may
even have a negative impact. PATIENT: I really have been feeling bad. I
don't do anything. I manage to eat, but most of the time I'm a blob.
THERAPIST 1: Did you do anything last week besides sit around at home?
(Not content with global self-description, the therapist seeks
specifics.) PATIENT: Well, I went to a movie . . . . THERAPIST 1: That's
great! PATIENT: Yeah. (The therapist does not appreciate that being able
to do nothing but go to one movie represents failure to this once
high-achieving patient.) An important strategy for preventing
communication failure is to seek feedback. PATIENT: Well, I went to a
movie. . . . THERAPIST 2: That was good! Were you pleased with yourself?
What do you think?

PATIENT: Not really. It's nothing. I used to be active all day and all
night. If the most I can do is go to a stupid movie, I'm in bad shape.
THERAPIST 2: I think it's good that you got out. It's diversion. It's a
good step. (Instead of arguing and making the situation worse, the
therapist should have engaged the patient by returning to his bad
feelings.) THERAPIST 3: So even though you got out and went to a movie,
you don't count it as "doing anything?" (The therapist makes an effort
to understand the patient before expressing an opinion. None of the
therapists in this illustration were in empathic contact with the
patient.) Therapists need to find opportunities to respond with honest
praise. Too much praise may seem contrived or insincere. The healthier
the patient (the closer to the expressive end of the
impairment-psychotherapy continuum; see Figure 3--1 in Chapter 3,
"Assessment, Case Formulation, and Goal Setting"), the less praise is
called for. With patients who are the least impaired, the therapist
should express praise only when it is the socially expected response
(e.g., congratulations for an accomplishment). Complimenting a patient
for persisting with a difficult area in therapy may be useful. Praise
coming from the therapist's approval of what the patient is doing is
actually opinion or judgment. The best praise reinforces the patient's
steps toward achieving previously stated goals. PATIENT: I took my
lithium every day last week. THERAPIST 1: Good (judgmental, but
appropriately so). THERAPIST 2: Good. That improves your chances for
avoiding another episode (reinforces desirable behavior but is still
authoritarian). THERAPIST 3: Good. You said you were going to do
this---not skip a single dose---and you did it. What do you think? (The
therapist reinforces self-control and discipline and seeks feedback and
further engagement.)

Reassurance Reassurance is a familiar tactic in general medicine. Like
praise, reassurance must be honest. The patient must believe that the
reassurance is based on an understanding of his or her unique situation.
Reassurance that is given before the patient has detailed his or her
concerns is likely to be doubted. When the topic pertains to the
therapist's domain as an expert, the therapist must limit reassurance to
areas in which he or she has expert knowledge. Therapists can reassure
patients about effects and side effects of certain medications, but they
cannot reassure patients about long-term effects of a medication that
has just come on the market. Therapists can say, when true, that no side
effects have been reported. It is correct to say that most people
recover from an acute episode of psychosis within a few weeks or that
most people recover from bereavement within a year or so, but it is
never correct to say that a treatment is certain to be successful. A
therapist can tell a person with schizophrenia that the disease often
stops getting worse after some years and that later, the patient may
begin to improve. A physician can reassure a chronic patient that he or
she will continue to provide care to the patient because this may be
more important than a cure. It is never acceptable to offer reassurance
that is simply what the patient (or family) wants to hear. If the
patient demands reassurance and this reassurance is outside the
therapist's expertise, the basis for the reassurance should be made
explicit. PATIENT: All day long when my son is in school, I'm sure
something bad is going to happen. THERAPIST: You see terrible things on
the news, but you know the odds are that nothing bad happens to most
people most of the time. (This is not expert knowledge; it is based on
knowledge that comes from general education and popular information.)
PATIENT: I'm having a hard time finding food that isn't genetically
modified. It's dangerous. The people in stores don't know, and I get the
runaround when I call the 800 numbers. THERAPIST: I know a lot of people
are worried about this, but from what I read in the paper, there have
been no reports of anything

actually happening to anyone. (The therapist knows only what he reads in
the papers.) It's important to try to keep up with scientific studies
about this and to keep in mind that in your total diet, the quantity of
foods that you worry about may be relatively small. The therapist's role
is to teach strategies for dealing with fearfulness about the unknown,
not to reassure fearfulness away. Normalizing and universalizing, for
most people, are palatable forms of reassurance. PATIENT 1: When my
grandmother died, I didn't really feel bad. My mother was so upset, but
I wasn't. It made me feel guilty. THERAPIST 1: That's not unusual.
Unless there's a very close relationship, children often accept the
death of a grandparent as a matter of course (normalizing and possibly
absolving). PATIENT 2: When I came out to my parents, my mother wanted
to know what she had done wrong, and my father acted like I was a
criminal. I still hate them. THERAPIST 2: We know that this happens a
lot of the time. When your parents were young and forming their
knowledge of the world, the experts said that homosexuality was caused
by the parents doing something wrong. In those days, homosexuality was
classified as a subtype of psychopathic personality. Haven't you come
across other gay men who have had similar experiences with their parents
and who feel the same way about them now? (The therapist normalizes the
patient's feelings and encourages understanding rather than expression
of feeling.) PATIENT 3: I know I shouldn't be in this program. I'll
never understand Lacan. THERAPIST 3: Neither will I. (Using oneself as a
standard is risky, but here, the therapist assumes she will be seen as a
representative educated person and the patient's peer.) Adages and
maxims are a form of normalizing.

THERAPIST 1: You can't make your \[adult\] children like each other
(reassurance given as an authority). THERAPIST 2: I don't know of
studies, but we know from newspapers, literature, and the Bible that
siblings often don't get along (normalizing reassurance given as an
educated person). THERAPIST 3: There's a saying: "You can't make your
child eat, sleep, or be happy." I guess we could add "or get along with
a sibling" (normalizing using a maxim). THERAPIST 4: I have never liked
my brother either (inappropriate self-disclosure that serves no useful
purpose and crosses the boundaries of the professional relationship).
Reassuring and normalizing must not extend to pathological and
nonadaptive behavior or to opportunistic, hostile interactions with
others. The objectives of supportive psychotherapy are most effectively
advanced when reassurance is coupled with enunciation of a principle or
a rule (i.e., teaching). PATIENT: Whenever I go anywhere, I have this
fear that I'm going to lose control. Therapist 1: You won't lose
control. (Reassurance as an authority is useful but not as potent as
reassurance that reinforces the patient's strengths or adaptive skills.)
THERAPIST 2: I don't think you will lose control because you have had
this fear for a long time and you have always been able to maintain good
self-control (reassurance based on patient's history and reinforcement
of adaptive behavior). THERAPIST 3: People with social phobia always
fear losing control, but actually losing control is not part of the
condition (reassurance based on a principle).

Encouragement Encouragement also has a major role in general medicine
and rehabilitation. Patients with chronic schizophrenia, depression, or
a passive-dependent

style are often inactive, mentally and physically. The therapist might
encourage patients to maintain hygiene, to get exercise, to interact
with other people, to be more independent, or to accept the care and
concern of others. Rehabilitation requires small steps. Many people
discount small steps, seeing each one as being of no great importance.
Therapy with patients who have disabilities calls for ingenuity in
identifying tasks and activities that can be conceptualized as
acceptable small steps. PATIENT 1: I don't see why I should waste time
in occupational therapy. I'm not going to get a job painting flowerpots.
THERAPIST 1: Occupational therapy isn't intended to be job training for
flowerpot painting. The idea is to allow people to have the experience
of staying in one place and completing a task; it's about being able to
cope with detail, with structure. It's also, for some people, an
opportunity to stop thinking about their psyches or their problems.
(Therapist addresses both the "small steps" element and the diversionary
element.) PATIENT 2: I'm tired of not getting anywhere. My father is
willing to pay and I'm going to start college in the fall. THERAPIST 2:
Before you take such a big step, I'd suggest taking an adult education
course at the high school or community college. It wouldn't be all that
you want, but it's a low-risk way to see if you can handle regular
attendance, pay attention, complete assignments, and feel comfortable
with other people. (Enrolling in a degree program and failing is not
effective rehabilitation; it is bad for self-esteem. This intervention
might also be categorized as advice.) Encouragement is powerful because
people want to believe that their efforts will lead to something.
Encouragement invokes the world of childhood; much like a parent, the
therapist can offer specific encouragement that provides the patient
with care, compassion, and comfort. Exhortation is a more insistent form
of encouragement.

PATIENT: I'm eating OK, I sleep well, but I can't get going. My
apartment's a mess. And they want me to take one of those "welfare"
jobs. THERAPIST: A demoralized person is convinced his efforts will come
to nothing, so he doesn't try. The only way out of it, once you are
eating and sleeping normally, is to begin doing things. Any kind of
work, even beneath your level, can help you to change your perception
and begin to see yourself as a person who can function. Then you can
move to something meaningful. The discussion of encouragement thus far
has dealt with only one of the two meanings of the word encourage---that
is, "to stimulate, to spur." The other meaning is "to give hope."
Therapists also use encouragement to give patients hope. PATIENT: All I
was able to do last week was go to a movie. I must be in bad shape.
THERAPIST: One of the worst things about depression is that it makes you
unable to even imagine things being better. If you think of something
that was good in the past, it's evidence that supports how bad you are
now. That's the illness. It may be hard to believe, but these
medications usually make a difference and help the depression to lift.
For now, do what you can. Does this make any sense?

Skills Building: Adaptive Behavior Guiding the patient to better
adaptive behavior by employing the techniques of advice, teaching, and
anticipatory guidance is a major element of the supportive approach. As
stated in Chapter 2, direct measures are used. When the patient is
significantly impaired, the therapist addresses evidences of impaired
ego function. With most patients, the major focus of skills building is
interpersonal transactions. Video Vignettes 2 and 3, featured at the end
of this chapter and available at www.appi.org/Winston, illustrate this
element of therapy.

Advice and Teaching Advice and teaching are appropriate in areas where
the therapist is professionally expert, such as adjustment, mental
illness, normal human behavior, interpersonal transactions, reasonable
living in society, and possibly participation in hierarchical
organizations. It is important for the therapist to be familiar with the
standards and customs of the patient's world. The challenge for the
therapist is knowing when to transition from giving advice to helping
the patient find his or her own sources of advice and information.
Offering advice to a dependent patient can be gratifying but may deprive
the patient of the opportunity to grow. Ideally, giving advice should
involve teaching about general principles or methods of problem solving.
If the patient senses that the therapist is proposing advice that is
clearly not in response to his or her needs and instead reflects the
prejudices or convictions of the therapist, the patienttherapist
alliance will be damaged. THERAPIST: You should do regular exercise.
PATIENT: What for? THERAPIST 1: Everyone should. Obesity is a major
problem in this country (possibly true but presented as a general truth;
the patient must infer its relevance). THERAPIST 2: A number of studies
have shown that exercise reduces symptoms of depression. It can reduce
the amount of medication needed (includes advice relevant to the
patient's condition). Advice is meaningful to a patient when it is
pertinent to his or her needs. Good advice that is not in step with the
patient's perceived needs is like a commercial or a sermon: possibly
true but not personal, which may damage the patient-therapist bond. In
terms of transference, a patient may experience boilerplate advice or
false praise as a replaying of a past relationship in which someone on
whom the patient was dependent failed to meet the patient's needs. Every
therapist should know which of his or her ideas are based on personal
convictions or idiosyncrasy. Advice about activities of daily living is
appropriate for the seriously impaired. Advice about daily living should
not be given to those who are

not impaired, even though it might make their lives better. THERAPIST 1:
When15 you get up in the morning, you should get dressed and make your
bed. It's important to have a structure and a routine. THERAPIST 2:
Taking an entry-level job would be a big comedown, but when a person
hasn't worked for a long time and doesn't have connections, it's often
the only way to get back into the work world. If you later attempt to
get back to your old level, it provides evidence to a prospective
employer that you are able to do a day's work. THERAPIST 3: People who
are interested in what you do usually don't want all the details. They
may be interested to know that you enjoyed a movie, but they may not
want to hear the whole story. Try stopping and noticing whether the
other person asks a question indicating that he or she wants to know
more. THERAPIST 1: They offer you free credit, but you're better off not
getting into debt (mature wisdom). THERAPIST 2: Let's see if we can work
out a strategy about what you should do when you are upset so you don't
have to come to the emergency room and say you are suicidal (adaptive
skills). THERAPIST 3: I think you should make a plan to begin cleaning
up your apartment because it's bad for your self-esteem to be surrounded
by evidence of your inability to function (rationale explained).
THERAPIST 4: If you don't do something about your apartment, it's
possible that someone will make a complaint to the health department
(anticipatory guidance that borders on criticism). The therapist should
not give advice on issues about which the patient can make his or her
own decisions. Abstaining from offering such "advice" is one of the
distinctions between psychotherapy and social conversation. PATIENT: You
know I worry about everything. Do you think it's safe to use my credit
card on the Internet? I read that they can steal

your identity. THERAPIST: Yes. I've read about that. I think the
psychotherapy question is not whether I think it's a good idea but how
you come to a decision when there are different opinions or when you
have competing pressures. The therapist can generally provide advice
based on what the patient has reported. Providing advice based on
surmise, even when the patient seeks the advice, is unprofessional.
PATIENT: My boyfriend humiliated me in public again yesterday. I
screamed at him when we got home, and he said I was too sensitive. I
can't take it anymore. THERAPIST 1: Tell him that if he does this again,
you're leaving. (Unless the therapist is totally aware of the
unconscious forces that have kept them together, such advice should be
left for family or friends to give. If the patient leaves and is then
unhappy, she may blame the therapist for giving bad advice.) THERAPIST
2: Are you able to talk with him about what bothers you at a time when
neither of you is angry? (implicit advice) Teaching is more important
than advice. Teaching involves principles, which may be based on
technical knowledge or on the therapist's knowledge as a rational,
informed person who is familiar with the unwritten rule book of life.
The therapist's behavior teaches the patient by example. The term
lending ego was once used as a metaphorical statement that the
therapist's model of reasonableness, self-control, and organization was
beneficial to the patient. THERAPIST 1: You tend to put up with things
until you become furious; then, for example, you scream at people.
Dealing with a problem before it becomes extreme is usually a better
approach. THERAPIST 2: Even if you are right, people do not like to be
told what to do.

Anticipatory Guidance Anticipatory guidance, or rehearsal, is a
technique that is as useful in supportive psychotherapy as it is in
cognitive-behavioral therapy. The objective is to anticipate potential
obstacles to a proposed course of action and then prepare strategies for
dealing with them. For patients who are more impaired, guidance must be
more concrete. THERAPIST: What's your plan? PATIENT: I'm going to begin
reintegrating into society (nonspecific). THERAPIST: What will be your
first step? (aware that a nonspecific, vague response is not a plan)
PATIENT: Well, maybe I'll go to the senior center. My son's wife said
she'd drive me and bring me home. THERAPIST: Can you think of any
problems that could come up? PATIENT: She might have to stay late at
work. THERAPIST: What could you do if that happened? PATIENT: It's near
the library. I could wait there, I suppose. THERAPIST: Good idea. What
else? How do you think you will react to being there? PATIENT: I
wouldn't know anyone. THERAPIST: That's hard for almost anyone. What
will you do? PATIENT: I suppose I could introduce myself to someone who
doesn't look too senile. THERAPIST: Yes. And maybe you could ask the
director or someone in charge to introduce you to a few people. People
running these programs appreciate that it's hard for a newcomer. What if
you give it a few days and still don't feel good about it? Anticipatory
guidance is especially important with patients who have chronic
schizophrenia because they are especially likely to be apprehensive in
new situations, unsure of their ability to grasp social cues, unsure of
appropriate responses, fearful of rejection, and unable to maintain

prolonged effort. This technique is also important for patients with
substance abuse, who often fear rejection and may unwittingly invite it.
Anticipatory guidance may be helpful and supportive in contexts other
than rehabilitation. PATIENT: I'm seeing my internist next week about
this indigestion and weakness. THERAPIST: I hope that you start with the
most distressing symptom rather than with the first things that you
noticed, like feeling tired. Are you willing to rehearse what you will
say to explain your problem to the doctor? And if anyone asks "Do you
understand?" and you are not completely sure, say, "Would you go over it
again?" Prevention of relapse is an important supportive psychotherapy
objective. The substance abuse literature includes practical lists of
topics to discuss with patients to prevent relapse (e.g., Marlatt and
Gordon 1985, pp. 71--104): Identifying high-risk situations and using
anticipatory guidance for dealing with them Coping with negative
emotional states Coping with interpersonal conflict Coping with social
pressure Identifying relapse and using anticipatory guidance to deal
with it Little modification is needed to apply these lists to the needs
of nonaddicted patients with mental illness.

Reducing and Preventing Anxiety The supportive psychotherapist intends
not only to deal with the patient's overt anxiety (a symptom), but also
to prevent the emergence of anxiety, which can exacerbate impairments in
ego functioning. The techniques intended to accomplish these objectives
include reassurance and encouragement, which were discussed earlier in
the section "Esteem

Building," because anxiety invariably has an adverse effect on esteem.
Supporting or strengthening of defenses has been discussed not as a
technique but as a principle or strategy (see Chapter 2). In this
section we identify a few of the more common techniques to support
defenses. The structured setting of therapy, the holding environment
(Winnicott 1965), has an anxiety-reducing effect that contributes to the
efficacy of all forms of therapy. The therapist models adaptive,
reasonable, and organized behavior and thinking in countless ways; this
modeling is educational and at the same time reassuring and calming. The
therapist should make every effort to avoid the interrogatory style,
which involves asking continuous questions and giving little---the style
of medical history taking or the style of a trial attorney
cross-examining a witness. To minimize anxiety, the therapist shares his
or her agenda with the patient, making clear the reason for questions or
topics. THERAPIST 1: I want to ask questions that will test your memory
and concentration. THERAPIST 2: Your relationship with your daughter,
you said, was a major worry. Is there anything new there? THERAPIST 3:
Did you grieve when your father died? Some people have little response
and it's all right---but some people who don't have any response have it
bottled up inside, and that can be a problem. Above, therapist 3 gave a
longer explanation. The use of extra words, even excessive words, can
provide padding that reduces the impact of an intervention that the
patient may find difficult or uncomfortable. The supportive
psychotherapist avoids forcing the patient out on a limb or requiring
the patient to make a stark response. The following two therapists are
trying to obtain the same information, but the second uses more words.
THERAPIST 1: Do you experience sexual stimulation when you see someone
being hurt by another person? (Very blunt) THERAPIST 2: This may seem
like an odd question, but it's relevant when someone has a history that
involves as much physical

conflict as you have had: Do you sometimes experience sexual stimulation
in connection with pictures of torture? This could include paintings of
martyrs in museums. It's not rare. All those great paintings show that a
lot of people have found excuses to portray and look at torture. On the
other hand, a person can be involved in a lot of violence and not have
this response. (If the patient says no, he is not in conflict with the
therapist because he has been given permission to say no. If he says
yes, he is in good company.) One of the highly regarded interventions
enunciated by Pine (1984) is to tell the patient in advance that
something might be anxiety producing. This tactic is effective for
minimizing the occurrence of anxiety in treatment. THERAPIST: I want to
return to a topic that we had to leave once because it upset you. I'd
like to know more about what happened when your mother remarried and her
husband's children moved in. The therapist can be even more protective
by asking the patient to give permission to go on with an
anxiety-provoking topic. THERAPIST \[continuing\]: Do you think you can
handle talking more about this matter?

Naming the Problem The patient's sense of control may be enhanced, and
thus anxiety minimized, by naming problems. The need for control is one
reason why people classify and count things. PATIENT: I'm so stupid. I
had all those people for dinner, and I didn't allow enough time for the
rice to cook, and I thought I was smart to make salad early, but then
there wasn't enough room in the refrigerator, and I didn't think to ask
everyone if they eat meat. What kind of example am I for my daughter?

THERAPIST: Sounds like this is just evidence of your organization
problem. We have talked about it, and you have made progress. Let's talk
about some specific things you might have done differently. (The
objective of decatastrophizing is approached by reducing what appears to
be a multitude of problems to a single problem with a name.) Naming the
problem can also be used to meet the familiar medical responsibility of
explaining the diagnosis, prognosis, and proposed treatment. PATIENT: My
mother says I shouldn't lie down so much, but it feels better when I do.
I read the ads every week, but the jobs don't pay enough and there's no
future. I don't have much money left. It would be great if I won the
lottery. There was one job that might have had something, but I would
have to commute, and I hate that. THERAPIST: This has been going on for
a long time. You no longer have signs or symptoms of depression, so the
current medication seems right. I think your problem is demoralization.
That's a condition in which a person is convinced that her efforts will
not succeed, so she does nothing. The only way out is to begin doing
things, anything. Small steps can lead to small successes. It's a
rehabilitation approach. It affects self-esteem and confidence. (The
therapist names, explains, and gives advice---techniques of supportive
psychotherapy).

Rationalizing and Reframing Reframing or paraphrasing looks at something
in a different light or from a different perspective. PATIENT:
Everything was going well and then I realized I was talking and talking
and talking. I've done this so many times. It's as if I have no control.

THERAPIST: But in the past, you didn't know you were doing it and didn't
figure out what had gone wrong until some time later. Now you see it
when it happens. That's an advance (reframing ---the events are
unchanged but given a different emphasis). PATIENT: I was so stupid. I
got a parking ticket and I could have been back before the meter ran
out. I wasn't paying attention. THERAPIST: Yeah. That's a tough one. If
you figure it's bound to happen occasionally, you can think of a couple
of parking tickets a year as a routine cost of having a car
(rationalization---patient benefits from discovering that therapist, who
represents the adult world, does not think she is stupid).
Rationalization is a powerful tactic for avoiding unpleasant thoughts or
feelings. PATIENT: My son doesn't come very often. THERAPIST: Yes. A lot
of young people are completely caught up in work and home. And you
manage to get things done without his help (rationalization and
encouragement). Rationalization is also useful in more expressive
psychotherapy. PATIENT: My son doesn't come very often. THERAPIST: It
sounds like you are disappointed, possibly angry (hoping to explore
feelings of which the patient appears to be unaware). The therapist
should challenge a patient's defense of rationalization when it is
pathological. PATIENT: Yes, I bring things home all the time. My husband
says it's junk, but I'm saving a lot of money by not buying new things
all the time. THERAPIST: But you told me last time you were here that
your husband threatened to leave. Maybe the problem is that you

can't control your obsessive-compulsive symptoms (challenging patient's
rationalization that she is saving money). The challenge in use of these
techniques is to avoid sounding fatuous and to avoid argument or
contradiction. PATIENT: I feel as bad as ever. I don't think the
medication is any good. THERAPIST 1: You look a lot better to me
(contradiction---not uncommon in physician-patient discourse). THERAPIST
2: People who are recovering from depression usually look better and eat
better as the medication begins to work, and this happens before they
feel better (disagreement, but the therapist is conveying expert
information that may be useful to the patient). THERAPIST 3: You have to
get up and do things. You can't stay in bed all day waiting to feel
better (argumentative and not true in every clinical situation).
THERAPIST 4: If you had continued taking the medication as you were
supposed to, you wouldn't be in this position (pedantic). Often,
therapists negate what the patient says, thinking that this tactic is
useful education. It doesn't help. PATIENT: I was feeling bad. I was
thinking about how I used to get up and go to work every day, and I got
good pay. I was a somebody. THERAPIST: Well, you have social security
now (unempathic reassurance or reframing that misses the point of the
patient's situation may have a negative impact on the therapeutic
relationship).

Expanding Awareness

Clarification, confrontation, and interpretation are useful techniques
to make the patient aware of thoughts or feelings of which he or she had
not previously been aware.

Clarification Clarification involves summarizing, paraphrasing, or
organizing what the patient has said. Often, clarification simply
demonstrates that the therapist is attentive and is processing what he
or she hears. Clarification is an awareness-expanding intervention. Both
in and outside of psychotherapy, people say things without appreciating
the significance of what they have said. PATIENT: I can't get things
done. I have to sell the house, but first I have to get some things
fixed, and I don't do them. My ex-wife keeps harassing me with court
papers about unpaid child support. I think the medication is working,
but it takes the edge off my creativity. She's relentless. I'm bipolar.
Don't they have to take that into account? My car broke down again, too.
THERAPIST: It sounds like you're saying that you're overwhelmed.

Confrontation As a technical term, confrontation does not imply
hostility or aggression. Instead, it means bringing to the patient's
attention ideas, feelings, or a pattern of behavior that he or she has
not recognized or has avoided or defended against. In the following
dialogue, which is a continuation of the comments presented in the
preceding section, "Clarification," the therapist uses confrontation.
PATIENT: I'm living alone in that big house. If I sell it, I can get a
smaller place and have money left over, but I just don't do anything.
I'm so depressed. THERAPIST: It sounds like you are avoiding doing the
one thing that would provide you enough money to pay your bills and give
your ex-wife what she wants. (The therapist knows that depression is a
universally used word and that the patient who

says "I'm depressed" does not necessarily meet the criteria for a
depressive disorder.) Human beings are frequently unaware of significant
feelings. For example, in the past, when psychotherapy practice first
originated, a patient would often be unaware of what was then perceived
as unacceptable sexual feelings. Anger can also be outside of the
patient's awareness. Hidden anger may be directed toward authority
figures, people who are more successful, those who are manipulative, or
those who are dependent and passive. Anger may be the emotional response
to paranoid ideation. The discovery of anger does not always lead to
reduction of symptoms or impaired function. Resentment (e.g., of
parents, children, partners, coworkers) is related to anger and is often
accompanied by guilt or shame. It is often perceived as a negative
emotion. For example, being excessively dependent on another person is
often associated with resentment. Grief may be a hidden emotion,
especially for individuals who do not grieve the death of someone close.
Delayed grief may also be present in individuals with schizophrenia
whose lives have long been disrupted. After reaching stabilization with
antipsychotics, these individuals may finally be able to grieve for the
years they have lost or for any suffering they may have caused others.
Some individuals are so scared of vulnerability that feelings of
intimacy and caring are kept out of awareness. The list of avoided
feelings can go on and on. To simply name the feeling and move on is a
supportive technique. When exploring a patient's hitherto unexamined
feelings and assumptions, the therapist should seek to learn about other
instances of whatever has been discovered. The therapist should talk
about the implications of the discovery with the patient, seek to
understand the basis for it, and ultimately determine what is to be done
about it.

Interpretation There is no agreed on definition of interpretation. Many
authors use the term to characterize any proffered explanation of "the
meaning of the patient's thoughts or the intent of his behavior" (Othmer
and Othmer 1994, p. 87). Others limit the term to a linking of current
feelings, thoughts, or

behaviors with events of the past or with the relationship with the
therapist. Linking these elements is important for achieving the
objectives of expressive psychotherapy. In supportive psychotherapy,
links between patient and therapist are generally made only when
necessary in order to avoid disruption of treatment. THERAPIST: You
haven't said you disagree with me, but you have found something wrong
with every suggestion I have made. From what you have said about your
problems at work, it's possible that you do the same thing with other
people (a link between the therapist and current behavior; in supportive
therapies, such a link may help with efforts to improve adaptive
skills). Insight about historical cause-and-effect relationships is not
an objective of the most supportive approaches. Creation of a patient's
biography or narrative that makes sense of symptoms and dysfunctions is,
however, a useful shared task and often a tactic for reducing anxiety,
as stated in Chapter 2.

Conclusion Supportive techniques can be enumerated and mastered. With
practice, the therapist can apply these techniques in many situations.
More lengthy elaboration of techniques can be found in a handful of
books. Especially useful are works by Novalis et al. (2020), Pinsker
(1997), Rockland (1989), Wachtel (1993), and Winston and Winston (2002).
Guidance about understanding patients can be found in the thousands of
books on psychodynamics and psychotherapy written in the last 80 years
and in the literature.

Video Vignettes 2 and 3 Video Vignettes 2 and 3 (available at
www.appi.org/Winston) are enactments illustrating the spectrum of
psychopathology and the associated spectrum of treatment (see Figure
3--1 in Chapter 3, "Assessment, Case

Formulation, and Goal Setting"). Video Vignette 2 illustrates the
difficult treatment of an uncooperative patient who has severe,
persistent mental illness. Therapy is entirely at the supportive end of
the supportiveexpressive continuum. Video Vignette 3 illustrates
supportive-expressive treatment to right of the midpoint of the
continuum.

Video Vignette 2: Severe, Persistent Mental Illness in an Uncooperative
Patient Jerry is a 21-year-old man who was diagnosed with
schizoaffective disorder when discharged from the hospital 4 weeks ago.
He had been admitted because of selfinjury following an argument with
his mother. He was referred to the clinic for continuing care. Since
completing high school 3 years ago, he has spent most of his time
watching TV, playing computer games, or surfing the Internet. He has
never had a close relationship. This is Jerry's third visit to the
clinic. The therapist has observed that he is grandiose, that his
thought processes are characterized by idiosyncratic connections and
assumptions, and that he is negativistic. An important supportive
measure is honest praise for the patient's efforts. When Jerry is
negativistic and rejecting, he may perceive a therapist who praises him
as an ally of hostile forces. The therapist's immediate objective is
that Jerry continue in treatment and take the prescribed medication, so
her main concern is establishing a therapeutic relationship; she tries
to avoid anything that might be taken as criticism and is cautious about
praise. She offers advice carefully, with explanations. As often happens
in an interview with a new patient who has a significant thought process
disorder, the therapist at times does not know what Jerry is talking
about. She does not want to agree with anything unrealistic but at the
same time does not want to challenge him or ask too many questions.
THERAPIST: So, what's been happening? JERRY: Not much (uncommunicative).
Actually, I just started working. It's a few blocks from where I live.
THERAPIST: Tell me a little about that (asking for elaboration in
general terms; doesn't want to appear demanding). JERRY: It's mostly
fixing computers. I started yesterday. It's a friend of my mother's.
THERAPIST: How does it seem after 1 day? JERRY: It doesn't make any
difference (negativistic and pessimistic). It's just like staying at
home watching TV. It's really no different.

THERAPIST: What about the fact that you can earn some money? (trying to
identify an asset) JERRY: I don't care about making money. THERAPIST:
How many days a week will you work? (trying to maintain conversation
without seeming confrontational) JERRY: Well, there's a movie rental
business. I'll look after that and fix computers. Maybe 3 days a week?
THERAPIST: OK, so it keeps you busy? (neutral facilitator) JERRY: It's
nothing. THERAPIST: I'd say it's too early to know if it will work out,
but it's my impression that you don't want to commit yourself
(clarification without contradicting). JERRY: \[no response\] THERAPIST:
Is there anything about the job that you might find difficult? (looking
for opportunity to attempt anticipatory guidance) JERRY: I can fix most
any computer. It's usually just that someone's screwed them up (a
positive statement at last). THERAPIST: Right, well I heard that the
first thing they told every new computer user was that you can't break a
computer (still trying to establish dialogue). JERRY: They're stupid.
THERAPIST: So you have a job; it seems like you're quite good at this
job (praise)--- but it doesn't give you any pleasure. Do I understand
that correctly? (clarification and asking for feedback) JERRY: Yeah.
It's just like staying at home, watching TV (agrees with therapist's
perception). THERAPIST: I could go on to another topic, if you'd like.
(The therapist introduces a new topic, "showing the map"---sharing the
agenda, asking permission---so that patient will not perceive the
questioning to be interrogation.) JERRY: \[grunts assent\] THERAPIST:
Let me ask you this: How are things with you and your mother and your
brother? JERRY: My brother is home from school this week, and my mother
has been really getting on my nerves. She actually lost her job. It puts
a lot of pressure on me. THERAPIST: What happened? (conversational
response; avoiding narrowing focus)

JERRY: I don't know. She may have a new job. She might start today or
tomorrow. Some guy has to call her. (The patient talks about his mother,
not about his long-standing conflicts with her.) THERAPIST: Do you think
that she understands how depressed you were when you were in the
hospital? (The therapist tries to maintain focus on the patient's
relationship with his mother.) JERRY: I don't know. Maybe. Therapist:
Tell me a little bit about the pressure she puts on you (maintaining
focus and seeking specifics). JERRY: Well, I feel like I have to make
money. THERAPIST: So---you kind of think she doesn't get it. Kind of
like she really doesn't understand. (The statement is an implied
question---a tactic for avoiding direct questions that might be
experienced as interrogation.) And you know, it's funny---some people,
they don't really understand mental illness. They think that you can
just sort of snap out of it---like it's in your control how you feel (an
empathic comment and at the same time another implied question). JERRY:
I don't try to explain. Some people, when I talk, they listen. Other
people, no. I don't bother with them. (The patient is referring to his
self-image as an unappreciated teacher.) THERAPIST: Well, you can try
again; you never know (vaguely positive; puzzled about patient's shift
of subject from mother to "people"). Jerry dismissed the therapist's
efforts to reinforce what seemed to be an adaptive step: getting a job.
Because the therapist is hopeful that this will help to boost Jerry's
self-esteem, she attempts to stay with that topic and refrains from
approaching Jerry's conflict with his mother, even though she knows that
this is important. In the next video segment, Jerry makes reference to
impairment of sense of self. The therapist deals with this concretely,
not naming it as a problem. The therapist's values are in evidence when
she suggests that helping people might give Jerry satisfaction at work.
She explores the extent of his conviction that making money is
wrong---that is, his grandiose rejection of most people's motivation.
When Jerry accuses his mother of being "negative," the therapist
surmises that this is projection and that he is angry because he wants
to maintain his dependent relationship with her.

THERAPIST: What would you say about your mood now? (Avoiding
confrontation, the therapist elects to start a new line of
inquiry---without her usual attention to mutuality.) JERRY: About the
same. It's hard to explain. It's sort of like a reflection of where I
am. If I'm in a positive place, I can be positive. If I'm in a negative
place, I'm negative. (The patient's description suggests a defect in his
sense of self, an egofunction deficit.) THERAPIST: How's the work
environment? Is that a positive place for you? (hoping to find a
behavior or an attitude that she can reinforce) JERRY: Any place you go
where the sole purpose is to make money is negative (usual contrary,
negative response). THERAPIST: Even if you're helping people?
(potentially argumentative---the therapist hopes to find a way to
reinforce the idea of work as adaptive behavior) JERRY: I'm not helping
anybody. THERAPIST: What if you worked as a volunteer to help
people---you wouldn't be making any money. If it wasn't about money, do
you think that would be a negative environment? (testing internal
consistency of patient's thinking) JERRY: It would be negative at home.
My mother would be angry with me because I wasn't making any money. (The
patient shifts from the therapist's question about work environment and
returns to criticism of his mother.) When I was teaching English, I
didn't charge anybody. But my mother, it would drive her up the wall if
she found out that I wasn't charging anybody. THERAPIST: Well, your
mother needs money for rent, food for the two of you and your brother,
who's still in school. Don't you think that would be helpful? (The
therapist's argumentative question is intended to communicate what she
believes are appropriate values.) JERRY: It's not that. The only reason
she can't get a job is because she's always so negative about
everything. Everyone she talks to thinks, "I'm not going to hire this
person; this person's going to be a problem." THERAPIST: How do you know
this? (checking on reality testing) JERRY: Her tone, the things she
says; it's hard to explain. Just the way she talks to people. It gives
the impression that she's a negative person. Everything's going to be a
problem. That's why she can't get a job. The guy who said he would call
her

about the job---she called him, and it sounded like she was the boss.
The way she acts, it causes her problems. It's not that I'm not helping.
It's hard to help someone who doesn't help herself. (His helping his
mother and her helping herself are not the same, but he uses the words
as if they are the same concept; the therapist used "help" to mean
"beneficial.") THERAPIST: When I suggested that you may be interested in
trying to contribute to your family's support, you shifted to talking
about what's wrong with your mother (confrontation, introducing the idea
of examining unconscious motivation). When you talk about your own
motivations, things sort of get fuzzy and inconsistent (identifying a
problem). The therapist wanted to reinforce some aspect of the work
situation, but the patient's negative attitude prevailed. He said that
his mother was a negative person and because of this had trouble getting
a job. Probably, he wants to be supported by her. When the therapist
suggested that it would be helpful if he provided money for the family,
she used the word help to mean "beneficial"; Jerry construed help to
mean improving oneself. Later, if the therapeutic relationship becomes
more solid and Jerry becomes able to look at what he is doing, the
therapist can try to show him that mixing different meanings of a word
(i.e., a thought process disorder, which is an ego-function problem)
interferes with understanding and with communication. JERRY: What I
really like to do is analyze things---analyze my life, the places I go,
what I do (grandiose disdain). The result is always negative. I don't
see the point of why people do the things they do. I see things in a
different way. I see things correctly. The way I look at it, nothing I
do is really going to change the way things should be. It's like people
just decided to live the way they do. THERAPIST: Tell me, did something
happen? (conversational response to the grandiose statement) JERRY:
Everywhere I go, everyone's trying to make money. Just look at them.
There's no point to what they do. They go to work, they come back from
work, they go to sleep; the next day they go back to work (patient's
first elaborated response--- about his grandiose disdain for people).
There's no point. It's not like they're becoming better at anything;
it's not like they're evolving. THERAPIST: I wonder if you feel that you
can evolve when you're watching TV (deliberately argumentative as an
attempt to overcome patient's apparent lack of involvement and to
encourage further conversation).

JERRY \[sighs\]: I'm one man alone, and I can't change anything just
being one person. If I try to do something positive with myself, nothing
good is going to come of that because I'm just one person. THERAPIST: It
sounds like you're really discouraged (empathic clarification). If you
could do something really positive that you really wanted to do, what do
you think that would be? (hoping to identify an interest with potential
for adaptive action) JERRY: If I went to college, I would study
philosophy---but then where would I be? It's not like I can go to an
employer and say, "Hire me; I'm a philosopher." There's no place for
people who think about things these days (therapist missed opportunity
to praise his awareness of reality). The patients in the hospital---
they were more willing to listen to me. They realized that they needed
something, and they could get it from me. People on the outside---they
don't want to absorb anything. They're not ready to listen to anything.
So it was better in the hospital. I could talk to people, and I felt
that communication had some purpose. THERAPIST: It's hard to change
people (tracking, paraphrasing, empathic). JERRY: It doesn't change the
fact that people need to change. THERAPIST: Have you ever thought about
the way that you react so perhaps you wouldn't get so upset?
(challenging maladaptive aspect of patient's position) JERRY: I think
it's appropriate to be upset. THERAPIST: You've given a lot of thought
to your situation---perhaps more than most people---and your conclusion
is that maybe you should do nothing because it all seems hopeless
(praise and clarification, tracking). It doesn't seem to matter whether
your conclusions are correct or not because the isolation you describe
usually leads to depression (avoids abstract argument; gives advice
based on professional mental health expertise).Everyone needs activities
that are good for them---something for their self-esteem---teaching,
making money, doing something like that, something that they can feel
good about. It doesn't have to be important in and of itself. It could
just be something that you like to do. It doesn't have to generate a
degree or a career or be the basis of an education (gives advice and
explains the rationale). And when I say "something that's good for your
self-esteem," I don't just mean feeling superior. I mean something that
really makes you feel good. Not feeling superior because you can see the
folly in the human condition and feel better than other people (advice).
What do you think? (solicits feedback)

JERRY: Sounds like a waste of time (still negativistic). THERAPIST:
Well, perhaps you should give it some thought before our next
appointment. The therapist stated her position about self-esteem, making
every effort to avoid being critical or argumentative. She did not go
into Jerry's portrayal of himself as the teacher whom all the hospital
patients wanted to listen to. She explained the rationale behind her
advice. Her objective at this point is to establish a relationship based
on honesty and openness. In the same visit, she discussed Jerry's use of
medications, paying attention to possible uncomfortable effects and to
his apparent lack of confidence that anything will help.

Video Vignette 3: Supportive-Expressive Treatment Ann is a 28-year-old
woman whose presenting problem is chronic depression. After high school,
Ann worked for several years, saved some money, and is now enrolled at a
community college. She has a history of relationships that turned sour.
Ann described being sensitive to slights and felt she was often treated
unfairly, but she did not seem to have ever been delusional or
pathologically suspicious. It was noted at the time of initial
assessment that she often jumped from one topic to another, and this was
thought to be a manifestation of anxiety, not thought disorder. The
diagnosis was personality disorder not otherwise specified and
depression. Ann has been attending the clinic for 4 months. She is
reasonably well integrated and has the capacity to think about her
mental processes, interpersonal relationships, and the patient-therapist
relationship. In this video, the therapist responds empathically,
praises Ann's efforts, explains her reasons for questions, involves Ann
in setting the agenda, praises her efforts, answers questions directly,
maintains focus despite Ann's tendency to jump to other topics, and
offers guidance about alternative ways of thinking about what had been
perceived as criticism. THERAPIST: How have things been going since our
last meeting? (the initial question involves reference to therapeutic
relationship.) ANN: I wasn't so down this week. I got to shop a little
bit. But sometimes when I'm there and looking through things, I find it
hard to make a decision when there are

two or three things I'm looking at (indecisive). And sometimes I
realize, "Wow, here I am staring at these things, and people are looking
at me and wondering, 'What is she doing?'" (self-conscious) But I just
kind of push it out of my mind and get over it. THERAPIST: That's good.
I'm glad you were able to get more done this week (praise, expressed
personally). Let me ask you---when you had trouble making a decision
when you were shopping, did it lead to any problems? (The therapist
elects to focus on adaptive skills.) ANN: No. Like I said, I got over
it. I was able to sort of move through it. But I guess, since I brought
it up, maybe I didn't fully get over it and that's why I'm talking with
you about it (volunteers psychological connection). THERAPIST: What were
you buying? I want to understand how this may be interfering with your
life. (Explains reason for question---a demonstration of respect for the
patient---which is good for self-esteem) ANN: I was buying gloves, and I
was just trying them on, seeing how they looked, if they were warm, how
they felt. It wasn't anything as ridiculous as trying to pick out the
perfect onion to bring home for dinner (patient is sardonic---evidence
of observing ego). THERAPIST: You said you got over it, and then you
said you wouldn't have brought it up if it wasn't a big problem, so you
seem to be kind of saying that it is a problem and that it isn't a
problem. So I'm wondering if you think we should talk about this?
(clarification, then involvement of patient in setting agenda) ANN: I
think we've talked about it enough. I think we can skip it. I will say
that when I got home, I got a call from my mom, and she can really be a
pain sometimes. I didn't want to talk to her, but I did for a little
bit, and I just told her that I'd been shopping and that I was OK, and I
didn't want to give her the full report on my life. I don't know. I
don't know if she felt like I was brushing her off. I felt a little bit
guilty afterward (sensitive to potential impact of her behavior).
THERAPIST: How did you handle her call? (Initial focus is on action, not
feelings.) ANN: I was polite. I told her what I'd been doing, that I was
shopping, and that I felt OK. I didn't really spend much time with her.
I hope that was OK for her. THERAPIST: It seems like you felt like you
were brushing her off. Were you rude enough to feel guilty? Or did you
feel guilty because you didn't do what she wanted you to do? In other
words, you didn't want to talk to her (still focused on action, but adds
inquiry about underlying feelings).

ANN: I don't think I was rude. Probably it's how I felt. I just didn't
do what she wanted. I didn't speak with her longer or spend more time
with her. THERAPIST: It sounds like you were asserting your will
(emphasis on action). ANN: Yeah . . . yeah, I guess I was. THERAPIST:
That can sometimes be very difficult (normalizing, empathic). ANN: Yeah.
My last therapist used to say that it's all right sometimes to say what
we mean, and we can have these ideas that might upset us, but as long as
we don't act on them, that it's OK. What do you think? THERAPIST: I
think that's generally true (direct answer to a question). ANN: Yeah, I
guess. I was thinking \[when talking to her mother\], "I wish you'd just
leave me alone. Maybe all this wouldn't have happened---all this trouble
that I have in my life---if it wasn't for you." It's my life after all.
She just really screwed me up when I was a kid. THERAPIST: You know, you
did say that you weren't rude in that situation (reinforcing acceptable
social behavior). How do you feel that you handled yourself? (not
revisiting childhood, staying with action and self-perception) ANN: I
think I was good. I don't think she really had a clue that I didn't want
to talk to her. THERAPIST: It sounds like you were pleased with yourself
(reinforcing good adaptive action). ANN: Yeah, I was. I used to think a
lot that things might happen to her, and I'd have these thoughts, and
I'd get very, very scared. I would see my mom getting hit by a car, and
all these terrible things happening to her, and I would really think,
"Oh, these are going to happen." My last therapist told me that it's
really OK---these are just thoughts---and that my thoughts aren't going
to make things happen, and that I should just relax a little bit about
that. And really, my mom wasn't so bad. Maybe I was just too sensitive
as a kid. I don't have the same fantasies anymore, but I do get annoyed
when she calls. Like I said, I went shopping, and I was looking for
gloves, I got some food, and I wasn't really feeling down. That's good.
I don't know if it's because of the medication. I don't want to believe
it's just all about the medication. I hope it's also something within me
and our therapy, but I don't know. I'm trying to get my act together and
decide what I want to do in my life.

THERAPIST: OK. You know, you just said a lot of different things. (The
therapist is concerned that patient may have an ego-function problem,
i.e., scattered thinking.) And I think something that's important is to
look at one thing at a time. Sometimes when you say a lot of things and
you're thinking a lot, it can make you feel more disorganized and more
anxious. So I think one thing that's very important is that we kind of
take one thing at a time (explains her concern; gives advice). All the
things you said could be very important---you talked a little bit about
medication, your relationship with your mother, fears when you were a
child. There are a lot of different things, and all of them are
important, but perhaps we should talk about each one separately, one at
a time. ANN: OK. So, all I know is that when I finish school, I don't
want to live around here anymore (not responding to therapist's
teaching). THERAPIST: Do you have any thoughts about what I had said
before about your mixing ideas? (maintaining focus) ANN: Oh, about that?
Yeah---I mean, you're probably right. Sometimes I know that I'm doing
it. THERAPIST: What about what I said before about jumping around in
your thoughts as making you feel more tense? Do you think that's
accurate? (reiterating the point and asking for feedback) ANN: Yeah, I
think it's possible. And maybe I'll go to Boston. If it's not too big
and there's a lot going on, you know, all those schools. Or maybe even
to the South. THERAPIST: How do you think you're going to decide?
(focusing on the process of decision making, not the issues being
decided) ANN: I don't know. I'll flip a coin. Of course it depends on
whether I have a boyfriend at the time, I guess. THERAPIST: It bothers
you that you have trouble with decisions, but from the way you are
speaking, it sounds like you are actually able to make decisions just
fine. Do you agree? (Contradicting the patient is generally not
supportive, but patient agrees.) ANN: Yeah, I guess so. I don't really
have to make any decisions now about where I'm going to go after school.
I still have time. THERAPIST: Sometimes when you bring up your
uncertainty about the future, it's not really a current problem; it's
sort of like you're reciting your flaws. Maybe that's a familiar pattern
for you, and you're aware of the fact that you are not called on to

make a decision right now (naming the problem, possibly challenging a
defensive pattern). ANN: I don't know. Maybe. THERAPIST: Sometimes,
repeating familiar patterns can be a source of comfort (education about
mental process). It's important for you that you don't think you've
discovered something new every time you do it (guidance). ANN: OK.
THERAPIST: Sometimes, when you bring up things that you may feel are
problematic right now, they may not really be what your main issues are
that brought you into treatment. Sometimes, what the mind does is to
focus on these sorts of things, which makes it easier to not talk about
some of the more vital issues. I think that it's sometimes easier to
think about these more neutral types of things. I'm not saying you do
this on purpose, but sometimes the mind has a funny way of doing that.
What do you think of that? (Therapist continues education about
defensive styles, being excessively wordy to avoid sounding overbearing;
then asks for feedback.) ANN: I can understand that. Maybe. I've been
described as having a "grasshopper mind." (Patient agrees.) THERAPIST:
In some circles, people describe that as charming. And then oftentimes,
some people may say that it's a little bit annoying. The therapist
suggested that Ann could alter her tendency toward scattered thinking
simply by becoming aware of it, and she provided reasons for being
concerned about this behavior. In future sessions, the therapist might,
if necessary, look for sources of unconscious anxiety that might play a
part in causing this behavior. Whenever the therapist becomes aware of
it, she will point it out to Ann and then structure the conversation so
that topics are finished before being abandoned. "Say whatever comes to
mind" is not the rule for supportive psychotherapy. The therapist
praised evidences of adaptive behavior, and she praised Ann's
description of her problem, intending to enhance her self-esteem. The
therapist did not become involved with the specifics of choices Ann
described, choosing instead to discuss the decision-making process. In
the next video segment, the therapist continues with the tentative
confrontation that Ann's symptoms served a defensive function. The
therapist also tentatively confronts Ann about the possible underlying
provocative intent behind what Ann describes as a simple

question. In each instance, the therapist is tentative to avoid
increasing Ann's anxiety or appearing overbearing because such behavior
would be inimical to her self-esteem. THERAPIST: How are you doing with
school? Are you still able to study? (The therapist returns to current
function with a new topic.) ANN: Yeah. It's not bad. I get bored
sometimes, but it's better than it used to be, definitely. But there is
this one instructor in my economics class, and I swear he has it in for
me. He asks me questions in class; he's always looking at me. I asked
him a question once, and he answered it in a way that showed he thought
I was stupid or something. I'm sure it was a put-down. THERAPIST: That
really sounds unpleasant. You thought you were being put down
(empathic). And I think this is an important worry---perhaps we can stay
with this? (The therapist wants to maintain focus and also to involve
the patient in setting the agenda.) ANN: Yeah, OK. Since then, I've just
kept my mouth shut, and I'll probably pass the final. But there's
something else that's bothering me. I've been wondering whether it's the
medication. I wonder if I'm holding back because I am afraid that more
is going to be expected of me, and I'll begin to be resentful if I can't
meet that expectation. Then I might drag my feet and get depressed
again. I just don't want that. THERAPIST: That's a very complicated
idea, and you're quite insightful. You expressed your concerns quite
clearly (praise). But something you have to maybe be careful about is
almost overintrospecting when you're depressed (education; tentative, to
avoid a challenging approach). It's almost like having a pimple that you
keep picking at. It can serve to distract you from other issues that are
going on and kind of keep you down and keep you feeling quite bad. What
are your thoughts about this? ANN: It sounds like you're saying that I'm
being too sensitive, and I should just cheer up and snap out of it. (The
therapist's educational effort was not successful.) THERAPIST: No, I
don't think it's that way---I think that's superficial. I didn't mean to
be sort of superficial like that. (The therapist attempts to repair the
rupture without going into relational aspects of the miscommunication.)
ANN: OK, so what do you mean? I should just be OK and live in the
present? I don't understand. (Continuation of therapy is not threatened,
so transference issues are not discussed.)

THERAPIST: That to me sounds a little bit like a slogan. I don't mean to
be giving you slogans or anything. The point I really want to get across
to you is that you feel very depressed, and you are very aware of your
thoughts---you're introspective--- which can be good, because you have
this awareness. But sometimes there's almost too much awareness
(exhortation)---and there's awareness of negative consequences, and
there's kind of a fixation on these negative consequences. There's
something called mindfulness (education). And it seems that you are
being mindful, in that you are considering your inner world and your
thoughts. However, with mindfulness, it's important to kind of leave
your thoughts as is--- they belong to you---and then sort of let go. And
not be too concerned about all the negative consequences and all the
what-ifs. Just to sort of step back and be aware of your thoughts
without feeling that you have to solve all your problems and act on all
your thoughts and worry so much (expert advice). ANN: Oh, so sort of
like, because they're just going to come and go---and I don't need to be
so entwined with them? OK, I understand. And thanks for the explanation.
I really didn't mean to be disrespectful before. THERAPIST: That's OK.
You know, I didn't really take it as disrespect (direct response). And
if it's OK, however, I'd like to sort of switch gears right now and talk
a little bit about what happened in your economics class. (By pointing
out that she is "switching gears," the therapist avoids authoritarian
style of questioning.) I know that you had asked a question in class---I
was wondering about that (staying with specifics). ANN: Yeah, so the
question I asked was, "Wouldn't it be more sensible to teach economics
as a psychology course?" Then I would actually get useful credits for my
major. What do you think? THERAPIST: I read in the newspaper that some
important people in economics are emphasizing the social and
psychological aspects of it (indicates source of information that is
outside professional knowledge). But the question that I think is
important for us to address is what your intent was when you asked the
question in class. I wonder if on some level you weren't being a little
provocative with your question? (defines the focus of therapy,
confrontation) ANN: Well, I don't think I was trying to be provocative.
I thought it was a good idea. Maybe if economics was in psychology, I
wouldn't dislike it so much. THERAPIST: Sometimes people don't always
like to be told that what they're doing is wrong (education about
universals of behavior). And even though you did put

it as a question, it doesn't mean that you weren't really making a
statement (indirect question about adaptive behavior). ANN: Yeah, but
this is college. Aren't you supposed to be able to say anything, to
express yourself, to try new ideas in college? THERAPIST: Yes, you're
right---it is college. But also you have to be realistic about this.
It's a community college. They're hard-working people who are there just
like you, just to learn. They're not training graduate scholars. I'm not
so sure it's the best place to bring up a deep debate like the one you
had mentioned (teaches about priorities, reinforces current program).
ANN: Yeah. I mean, maybe so. I guess it was just getting off topic, or
something. THERAPIST: Can you buy that? (requests feedback) ANN: Yeah, I
do, I understand. THERAPIST: OK. Well, I do want to stay with this a
little longer (personalizes question). What was your professor's
response to this, ah, question? (uses extra words to maintain
conversational \[not interrogatory\] style) ANN: He said something like,
"That's a novel idea; I don't think they'll do this." THERAPIST: It
seems like you didn't really like that. And I wonder what you didn't
like about that answer? ANN: It was obviously the word novel. You
know---"novel"---it sounded very sardonic and sarcastic to me. I don't
know. THERAPIST: I understand that, but I think it's also important to
be realistic and try to understand where the teacher is coming from,
too. His priority is to get through the class and to make sure that the
material gets taught---not necessarily to engage in a deeper, more
philosophical debate. Does that sound OK? (education about the rules of
life) ANN: Yes, it makes sense. Because Ann's level of integration
places her slightly to the right of center on the psychopathology
spectrum, the therapist was able to employ some interventions that are
characteristic of expressive-supportive treatment, although the
therapist's overall stance continued to be supportive. The therapist
addressed mental processes and unconscious motivation, as well as
content. The focus was on Ann's verbal coping or adaptive behavior. At
times, the therapist padded her statements with extra words to avoid
sounding abrupt or challenging.

A few weeks later, the therapist addresses Ann's automatic
self-criticism and raises the possibility that role transition, which is
one of the main foci of interpersonal therapy, is a factor in her
discomfort. The therapist supports adaptive behavior, is empathic and
optimistic, and raises the possibility of anticipatory guidance when Ann
speaks of an upcoming date. The therapist supports defensive positions
rather than exploring them. ANN: Everything is OK, but there is
something funny. My English lit class instructor pulled me aside the
other day and said, "You know, you're better than your grades. You're
always making small mistakes---c'mon, get it together." I understand she
was trying to be helpful, but I went home all sad and down and depressed
again, just beating myself up (automatic thoughts) because I know that I
screw up all the time (exaggeration). Everyone has always told me, "Good
job; I'm glad that you've decided to go to college, and you didn't just
stay working some job." But I don't know---I'm thinking I'm in over my
head and that maybe I'm just not going to be able to do it, and I'll
find some way to ruin it again, especially if I slip back into my
depression (negative thoughts). Sometimes I wonder if my mom hadn't been
so critical of me, maybe I wouldn't have all this insecurity. THERAPIST:
I'm sorry to hear that you had to go through with this, but perhaps it's
not such a catastrophe (empathic and optimistic response). We did talk a
few weeks ago about how quick you were to see the negative implications
of your teacher's remarks and to start feeling very bad about yourself
and very critical of yourself when you looked at his remarks in a
certain light (follow-up on earlier topic). And it also seems like in
this situation, perhaps you did something similar. You sort of
exaggerated the significance of what she said, and you took it very,
very personally---and then you started criticizing yourself. And I'm
wondering if you were able to connect the insight about yourself when
you began this round of worry? (establishing that there is one theme and
not a multitude of problems) ANN: No. I just thought that she was
telling me that I make mistakes and that I'm over my head, that it's too
much for me. THERAPIST: (Because the patient doesn't see the connection,
the therapist decides to move on.)Well, I have a question that may seem
a little bit off topic from what we have been discussing. What would you
say is the biggest difference between your current life and the way you
lived for the past few years? (gently introduces a new topic---role
transition)

ANN: When I was working, I was always doing things. Whatever I did, I
knew immediately what to do---whether it was the right thing or the
wrong thing. I got paid, and I knew what I was getting paid for. Now
that I'm in school, I have no idea. I take a test, I turn in my exam---I
get the grade a week later. Everything is so indefinite. It's not very
comfortable. They told me not to overdo it and that I should go along
with the plan. And I've been doing that, but if I want something more
now, then I feel that I just can't go asking to bring it back. I don't
want to look like I'm complaining. I know that school is a good idea.
It's been what I've wanted to do all these years when I was unable to do
it before, and I had to drop out. It's been my one goal to get back, and
now I'm back. But sometimes I just really think that I can't make it. I
don't know. I just think, all this time has gone by, and I could have
been earning my way since that time that I dropped out. THERAPIST: I
think you put it very well (praise for being articulate). And I think a
lot of people would find it very difficult adjusting to a new schedule
(normalizing, education). A transition is a hard thing for a lot of
people. You were working, and then you go back to school. And that's a
big transition (offering partial explanation for patient's
difficulties). Now, a lot of change has happened, and you discussed a
lot of changes. But it's important to remember that sometimes it can
take months to really adjust (education). And just because you're having
some difficulties initially with the adjustment doesn't mean it's always
going to be that way. It's also to be expected (reassurance). ANN: OK,
so what do I do about it? THERAPIST: Something you can do is that you
can remind yourself when you get discouraged that you're doing something
that's very hard for a lot of people to do ---you're changing your life
(advice). And that doesn't mean that college is too hard for you or that
you're not up to it---or that perhaps you made the wrong choice. But
it's hard and it's normal for it to be hard (exhortation). And as far as
not making stupid mistakes, do you have any ideas about what you can
do---now that you recognize the problem? (reinforces progress; avoids
trap of proposing solution to a competent person) ANN: I guess I can
just try harder. THERAPIST: Do you think there is anyone you can turn to
for help? (a question intended as advice to help patient find a
solution) ANN: I know that in the guidance office, I had seen some
material before about how to study more effectively and stuff. It's
funny, because when I first saw it, I

thought, "How stupid is this?" But maybe I'll just go back and take a
look at that again. I think it probably would be helpful. THERAPIST: So
if you look into it, it may be quite useful; it may actually not be a
waste of time (cautiously reinforcing the plan). ANN: Yeah. You know,
remember the guy that I told you about before? Well, he called.
THERAPIST: The one who you met at lunch? (demonstrates that she
remembers the story) ANN: Yeah, yeah. His name is Michael, and we're
actually going to get together this Friday. THERAPIST: So, what do you
think? (open-ended facilitator) ANN: I don't know; I'd like to meet
someone nice, and I hope he is. I guess I'll have to tell him that I'm
depressed and I take medications. But I probably don't have to tell him
that right away. Right? THERAPIST: That's a good point. Honesty is
important; however, the fact that you have been depressed doesn't define
you. It's not something you should feel you have to tell him on day one
(specific advice). ANN: Yeah, but if it's going to be something that
turns him off and makes him not like me, I'd rather know at the
beginning than before I get too involved with him. Then I'll just be
more depressed afterward. THERAPIST: That makes sense. As you said, you
don't have to tell him right away (supports adaptive approach). Do you
have a plan for this date? (open-ended question) ANN: Do you mean are we
going to bed together? I don't know yet. THERAPIST: Well, I was being
more general. I was more referring to any issues you may have about this
meeting that you think perhaps we should talk about? (exploring
possibility that anticipatory guidance might be helpful) ANN: No.
THERAPIST: Well, during all our meetings, we've talked quite a bit about
a lot of things; we've talked about depression, school life, your
mother, your past. But there's really been nothing about the men in your
life and the past relationships you've had with men. And I know that one
of the things you had told me in the beginning is that your depression
started at the end of a relationship and that it was quite a

nasty breakup (concerned that patient's offhand approach might reflect
denial). ANN: Yeah, it was. No, no---there haven't been any more
relationships. Most of the guys in my school are complete idiots. That
being said, I do think I'm ready to move on, and this is only a date.
And I'll see how it goes. THERAPIST: Well, that seems reasonable. Moving
on is a good way to put it (responsive praise). ANN: I know I haven't
spoken about it, but I am worried about my ex. He has a new girlfriend,
and I know that she was in a car accident. And knowing him, he's
probably all involved fixing the car, taking care of her. He doesn't
have any money, and I know he can't afford this. He just gets way too
involved all the time. THERAPIST: Well, help me understand this a little
bit. He dumped you, right---and now you are worrying about him. How do
you account for that? (considers exploring what may be the defense of
reaction formation) ANN: Yeah, that's true. I know it doesn't make
sense. I was very upset at the time obviously, when he dumped me, but I
try not to be mad at people for too long. He hasn't done anything
recently to make me mad. I don't know. I just try not to be mad at
people. THERAPIST: So you're a generous person (compliment). Does your
worrying about him affect your ability to do what you want to do? Most
people, when someone dumps them, feel quite angry and quite hurt. They
may even take pleasure in that person's misfortunes. Do you think it's
possible that your concern for him is kind of a mask for your continuing
anger about the ending of the relationship? It's funny---that's the way
the mind works sometimes. It doesn't have to be that way, and it may not
be that way, but it is something to think about. (Use of excess verbiage
is padding to avoid seeming challenging or causing anxiety.) In this
video segment, the therapist was able to praise Ann for her insightful
selfdescriptions. She instructed Ann about a frequent source of distress
that is an area of major concern in interpersonal therapy. The therapist
did not elaborate but plans to return to the topic. She did not offer
concrete advice about how Ann might try harder but rather supported the
idea that Ann could develop a solution on her own. If Ann had said she
wanted to talk about the upcoming date with a new man, the therapist
would have attempted to present several common scenarios to consider how
Ann might respond and to explore her fears or likely automatic critical
thoughts. Because Ann did not want to talk

about the date, the therapist accepted her choice. The therapist
suspected that Ann's concern for the well-being of her ex-boyfriend
might be reaction formation to mask underlying anger. Had the therapist
attempted to go further in this direction, the therapy would be
categorized as expressive-supportive; because the therapist did not
pursue unconscious feeling, the therapy continued to be
supportive-expressive.

General Framework of Supportive Psychotherapy

5

Indications and Contraindications For years, supportive psychotherapy
was described as the treatment for individuals considered unsuitable for
expressive therapies---persons who were difficult to treat or for whom
expressive techniques were expected to fail (Rosenthal et al. 1999;
Winston et al. 1986). From this perspective, supportive psychotherapy
was said to be indicated for people with 1) a predominance of primitive
defenses (e.g., projection and denial); 2) an absence of capacity for
mutuality and reciprocity, exemplifying an impairment in object
relations; 3) an inability to introspect; 4) an inability to recognize
others as separate from oneself; 5) inadequate affect regulation,
especially in the form of aggression; 6) somatoform problems; and 7)
overwhelming anxiety related to issues of separation or individuation
(Buckley 1986; Werman 1984). The findings of the Menninger psychotherapy
study, however, indicated that patients treated with supportive
psychotherapy made greater than expected gains (compared with patients
who received psychoanalytic treatments) and may have achieved lasting
character change (Wallerstein 1989). In addition, data support the
premise that higher-functioning patients for whom expressive treatments
have traditionally been indicated respond just as well to supportive
treatment. The target complaints and psychiatric symptoms of
higher-functioning patients diminish (Hellerstein et al. 1998), and,
because of supportive psychotherapy interactions, patients develop a
more differentiated and adaptive self. These changes can be measured as
lasting reductions in intensity of patient-rated interpersonal problems
after termination of treatment (Rosenthal et al.1999). Studies of
individuals with depression suggest that supportive psychotherapy is
valuable in the context of moderate depression (Driessen

et al. 2016), but studies do not consistently demonstrate superiority of
supportive psychotherapy over cognitive-behavioral or
psychopharmacological treatment (Arnow et al. 2013). That said, a recent
study of individuals with depression revealed a strong preference for
supportive psychotherapy over cognitive-behavioral therapy and
psychodynamic psychotherapy (Yrondi et al. 2015). Taken together, these
studies suggest that supportive psychotherapy may play an important role
for some, but not all, individuals with depression. Similarly, studies
of individuals with schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders indicate
that supportive psychotherapy cannot substitute for traditional
psychopharmacological treatment but is a valuable adjuvant treatment
strategy for strengthening overall psychosocial functioning (Harder et
al. 2014; Lysaker et al. 2015). Studies suggest that supportive
psychotherapy can also play a positive role in the treatment of
individuals with personality disorders, such as borderline personality
disorder (Jørgensen et al. 2013; Vinnars et al. 2005). Supportive
psychotherapy may have an especially important role in the treatment of
co-occurring conditions. An interesting study suggested that
cognitive-behavioral therapy and supportive therapy had value in the
care of individuals with depression following traumatic brain injury
(Ashman et al. 2014). A rigorous meta-analysis found that supportive
psychotherapy, as with other psychotherapies, reduced symptoms of
depression and improved coping in individuals with advanced cancer
(Okuyama et al. 2017). Findings suggest that supportive psychotherapy
not only is applicable to patients for whom traditional expressive
treatments are not indicated but can also be used successfully with
patients with a wide spectrum of problems and with higher-functioning
patients. Indeed, the most widely used form of psychotherapy is
supportive psychotherapy with some expressive elements. Luborsky (1984)
and others have developed various forms of supportive-expressive
psychotherapy that have produced positive results in clinical trials.
Supportive psychotherapy may be the best initial approach when
psychotherapeutic intervention is being considered (Hellerstein et
al. 1994). The therapist should move away from supportive psychotherapy
only when there is a positive indication for another specific treatment.
There are several indications for which supportive psychotherapy

has the best contextual fit and specific efficacy (see also Chapter 8,
"Applicability to Special Populations").

Indications Indications for supportive psychotherapy described in the
older literature are essentially a statement of contraindications for
expressive treatment. These indications for supportive psychotherapy
conceptually fall into two groups, which are not really discrete: 1)
crisis, which includes acute illnesses that emerge when the patient's
defenses are overwhelmed in the context of intense physical or
psychological stress, and 2) chronic illness with concomitant impairment
of adaptive skills and psychological functions. Crisis Crisis is an
indication for supportive psychotherapy among relatively wellfunctioning
and well-adapted individuals who have become symptomatic in the context
of acute, overwhelming, or unusual stress. Under other circumstances,
persons in this group might be referred for expressive treatment because
these individuals have good reality testing, a capacity to tolerate and
contain affects and impulses, good object relations, an ability to form
a working alliance, and some capacity for introspection. For this group,
supportive psychotherapy is usually delivered in an acute-care or
episodes-of-care model. For example, a high-functioning patient
developed a marked depressive reaction to the change in her body image
after a mastectomy. This reaction was accompanied by a loss of
selfesteem, a negative attitude toward her work, and problems with
social relationships. The patient benefited from an empathic therapist's
psychological support, which helped her to begin to grieve the loss of
her breast, her feeling of bodily integrity, and her health. As she
worked through her loss, she began to revise her expectations and plans
and gradually returned to the usual routines of her everyday life. The
following subsections detail some of the diagnostic and situational
indications that fall into the category of crisis.

Acute crisis. Acute crisis is not a diagnosis but rather a general
description for patients whose customary coping skills and defensive
structures have been overwhelmed by an (often unexpected) event,
resulting in intense anxiety and other symptoms (Dewald 1994). Crisis is
the state that individuals experience when they are faced with actual,
impending, or possible loss, such as a life-threatening illness, loss of
liberty for a criminal offense, loss of personal or public safety (e.g.,
after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001; after devastating
hurricanes and flooding), or loss of a loved one. (For a more complete
discussion, see Chapter 7, "Crisis Intervention.") Supportive techniques
may even be implemented in the middle of expressive therapies when there
is a crisis for which support is clinically indicated. Adjustment
disorders in relatively well-compensated people. People in crisis may
meet criteria for an adjustment disorder. Adjustment disorders are time
limited, lasting no more than 6 months (American Psychiatric Association
2013a). Supportive psychotherapy can help a patient to manage
uncomfortable feeling states and improve or develop coping strategies
during the episode. The focus of treatment is 1) to reassure the patient
that symptoms are time limited, 2) to reduce stress by clarifying and
providing information about what the patient is having difficulty
adjusting to, and 3) to support novel coping and problem-solving
methods, including environmental change (Misch 2000). At its best,
supportive psychotherapy facilitates a more rapid diminution in symptoms
and resolution of the episode of illness. In addition, the treatment may
help prevent the condition from becoming chronic. Medical illness. For a
large number of medical conditions, supportive psychotherapy is the only
treatment recommended. An understanding of the individual's innate
defensive, cognitive, and interpersonal styles (i.e., core character and
personality) enables the therapist to assist the patient in developing
better coping strategies (Bronheim et al. 1998). Supportive or
supportive-expressive psychotherapy has been recommended for or has
shown utility in the following areas: reducing pain intensity and
interference with normal work, sleep, and enjoyment of life in patients
with HIV-related neuropathic pain (Evans et al. 2003); reducing the
frequency

and impact of stressful events in patients with primary (Hunter et
al. 1996) or metastatic (Classen et al. 2001) breast cancer; and
treating HIV-positive patients with depression (Markowitz et al. 1995),
patients with pancreatic cancer (Alter 1996), cancer patients with
depression (Massie and Holland 1990; Okuyama et al. 2017) or chronic
pain (Thomas and Weiss 2000), and hospitalized patients with
somatization disorder (Quality Assurance Project 1985). Substance use
disorders. Early in the treatment of substance dependence, the therapist
focuses on development of a therapeutic alliance, both to assist
treatment retention and to create a context within which the patient can
begin cognitive and motivational work to assist recovery efforts
(O'Malley et al. 1992). Kaufman and Reoux (1988) suggested that for
patients with substance dependence, expressive therapies (when
appropriate) should not commence until the patient has implemented a
concrete method of maintaining sobriety because expressive therapies
provoke anxiety that may trigger relapse. A broader discussion of
substance use disorders is found in Chapter 8. Acute bereavement. Acute
bereavement is profoundly difficult and can overwhelm the coping skills
and defensive operations of patients with poor ego strength. These
patients generally experience such symptoms as selfreproach, social
withdrawal, and an inability to maintain job or interpersonal
functioning and anxiety and depressive symptoms such as insomnia and
anorexia (Horowitz et al. 1984). Supportive psychotherapy provides the
patient with an empathic holding environment in which he or she can talk
and vent about pain and hostility, have his or her self-esteem directly
supported through reassurance and appropriate praise, gain direction for
activities of daily living, and reality-test his or her role in the life
and death of the deceased. This process supports the use of healthy
defensive operations, concrete assistance for routine activities the
patient is not able to perform, and appropriate reaching out as a
measure against the tendency to remain socially withdrawn (Novalis et
al. 1993). Alexithymia. Patients who are typically characterized as
alexithymic demonstrate characteristics that make expressive therapy
difficult, if not

impossible. These characteristics include severe restriction of affect,
a seeming lack of capacity for introspection, an inability to articulate
feeling states, and a diminished or absent fantasy life (Sifneos 1973,
1975). When these patients become symptomatic because of stressors such
as acute medical illness, they may become somatically preoccupied and
have greater difficulty with coping but remain unable to communicate the
effect of the stress on their affective experience. Supportive
psychotherapy can specifically address alexithymia by working directly
on somatic experiences and personal metaphors and helping the patient to
recognize, acknowledge, identify, and label emotions, increasing his or
her sense of mastery and self-esteem (Misch 2000). Chronic Illness
Compared with individuals in crisis, patients with chronic mental
illness are traditionally treated with supportive psychotherapy and are
more likely to receive longer-term therapy (Drake and Sederer 1986;
Kates and Rockland 1994; Werman 1984). Patients with chronic mental
illness typically have lower self-esteem related to deficits in adaptive
skills and ego functioning. Patients with chronic mental illness include
not only those with primary mental disorders with a chronic or
intermittent course (formerly Axis I disorders) but also those who have
moderate to severe personality disorders and whose idiosyncratic
interpersonal styles, adaptive skills, and ego deficits are chronic,
pervasive, and maladaptive (Sampson and Weiss 1986). The majority of
psychotherapy patients in outpatient psychiatric clinics have probably
been treated with dynamically informed supportive psychotherapy. Some
chronic conditions not usually associated with severe mental illness can
be damaging to adaptive and psychological functioning and may be helped
by supportive psychotherapy. These conditions include later stages of
severe medical illness from which the patient is not expected to
recover. Supportive psychotherapy has been shown to assist in reducing
suffering and in maintaining self-esteem, adaptive skills, and ego
functioning for as long as practicable in patients with chronic illness
(e.g., cancer; Thomas and Weiss 2000).

Contraindications

Because supportive psychotherapy is based on the factors common to all
psychotherapies, it is contraindicated in relatively few circumstances
(Frank 1975; Pinsker et al. 1996). Hellerstein et al. (1994) argued that
supportive psychotherapy is the appropriate default approach to
psychotherapy and that supportive psychotherapy can be applied over a
wide range of psychopathology and situations. Supportive psychotherapy
is contraindicated when psychotherapy itself is contraindicated. This
list of contraindications is short. Novalis et al. (1993) suggested that
supportive psychotherapy is unlikely to be effective in delirium states,
other organic mental disorders, drug intoxication, and later stages of
dementia; these are conditions in which any psychotherapy would be
expected to fail. Individuals who seek help and yet chronically reject
all help that is offered (help-rejecting) do not make good use of
supportive interventions. These individuals may become worse as they
repeatedly confirm that the therapist's good will and concrete advice
are not useful. Individuals who lie or malinger as a matter of course do
as poorly in this treatment as in other treatments. Psychopathic
individuals who establish a pattern of pseudomutuality in the
therapeutic relationship either quickly understand the lack of
opportunity for real gratification and drop out of treatment or become
focused on attempting to use the relationship to inappropriately gratify
real or imagined needs. In the latter case, in order to elicit the
therapist's good will and expected personal gain, the patient may come
across as increasingly needy or may become coercive. There are few
contraindications for supportive psychotherapy. A more formal
cognitive-behavioral treatment appears to be more effective than
supportive psychotherapy for a number of conditions, including
Tourette's disorder (Wilhelm et al. 2003); acute adolescent depression
(Brent et al. 1997), although cognitive-behavioral therapy does not have
a better effect on the long-term outcome of adolescent depression
(Birmaher et al. 2000); major depression (Arnow et al. 2013); panic
disorder (Beck et al. 1992); obsessive-compulsive disorder (Foa and
Franklin 2002); and bulimia nervosa (le Grange et al. 2007; Walsh et
al. 1997). The integration of supportive psychotherapy and
cognitive-behavioral therapy is discussed at length by Winston and
Winston (2002).

Initiation of Treatment The therapist essentially conducts supportive
psychotherapy in the first session with a patient, during which the
therapist determines whether or not supportive psychotherapy is the
treatment of choice (see Chapter 3, "Assessment, Case Formulation, and
Goal Setting"). Supportive psychotherapy is conversational in style and
serves as the context for all patient-therapist interactions. History
taking, payment negotiations, interchanges on the rules and conduct of
therapy, goal setting, and lengthof-treatment discussions are conducted
within a supportive framework in the first session. The ground rules of
supportive psychotherapy should be made explicit. The therapist should
obtain the patient's agreement about the ground rules. The therapist may
need to temper the message depending on certain characteristics of the
patient, including educational level, ego strength, reality testing, and
the context of treatment. The overall idea in creating an unambiguous
format for the rules of engagement in supportive psychotherapy is to
reduce anxiety by setting clear limits. For example, two clear-cut rules
are that 1) no physical aggression and no verbal abuse can be used
during sessions and 2) patients should not come for treatment in an
intoxicated state.

Office Arrangement Seating Seating for supportive psychotherapy is best
arranged in a manner that is welcoming, friendly, comfortable, and
professional, just like the treatment itself. The therapist should
provide adequate lighting that is not harsh and comfortable chairs that
are neither too close nor too far apart so that participants can sit
upright and see and hear each other easily. Under these arrangements,
the therapist can pick up nuances of verbal tone, facial expression, and
body language, which are important because supportive psychotherapy
relies on a dynamic understanding of the patient. The therapist is
sensitive to unconscious communication, even if the therapist

does not make that awareness explicit to the patient in the form of
confrontation or interpretation. Physical distance can be varied in
response to clinical need. For example, respecting the patient's need
for distance, the therapist may sit a little farther away from a patient
who expresses paranoid ideation. The therapist should not be too far
away or the patient's anxiety may increase because talking face to face
with someone for an extended length of time from some distance (e.g., 10
feet) is socially unusual. Sometimes patient and therapist need to be
closer than usual, for example, when the therapist is conducting
supportive psychotherapy sitting next to a patient who is confined to a
hospital bed.

Amenities In the past, the literature about supportive psychotherapy
framed the therapy as a treatment for the most impaired individuals. It
was suggested that---in contrast to the abstaining, nongratifying
position of the therapist in some expressive treatments---the supportive
psychotherapist provide small comforts to the patient in his or her
office in the form of a box of tissues on the table or a small plate of
cookies or other treats by the door. All psychotherapy should be
provided in a humane and respectful fashion in a reasonable setting, and
we suggest that this aim can generally be achieved without feeding the
patient to enhance his or her positive image of the therapist. Providing
food for a patient is concretely accommodating, and although it provides
a supportive relationship, it is typically reserved only for the
patients with the greatest challenges in functioning. The therapist's
provision of practical items (e.g., bus tickets) and snacks for the most
impaired patients may help to sustain the therapeutic alliance. Gifts
from the therapist to the patient are not expressly prohibited if a gift
is related to the therapy, such as an informational manual, or if an
institutional practice has been developed to supply items of need to the
neediest patients (Novalis et al. 1993; Roberts 2016). In certain
cultural contexts, provision of food and gracious acceptance of small
gifts are entirely appropriate (Roberts 2016) and always should be
acknowledged and explored in therapeutic interactions.

Initiation and Termination of Sessions The therapist is expected to
begin and end sessions on time. This temporal framing is respectful to
both the patient and the psychotherapist. In supportive psychotherapy,
the therapist does not focus on occasional lateness; however, when a
patient demonstrates a pattern of lateness, the pattern can be explored
within the supportive framework. In expressive treatment, the therapist
labels the pattern of lateness and adheres to the assumption that
lateness is due to resistance or other unconscious processes. The
therapist encourages the patient's verbalization, with the objective of
exploring the resistance and enabling the patient to express his or her
wish or feeling, which is generally related to the therapist or therapy.
In supportive psychotherapy, the therapist is free to discuss matters of
lateness from a practical point of view. Keeping appointments is an
adaptive behavior; arriving late to a meeting that is genuinely in the
patient's best interests is not. The therapist can attend to such
lateness using a collaborative, problem-solving approach. A pattern of
missing sessions can be addressed in the same way. The following
dialogue illustrates a supportive psychotherapy approach to lateness.
PATIENT: Sorry, I'm late again. I just don't know---I was sure I gave
myself enough time \[angry\]. No matter how I try, I'm always late to
everything! I do everything wrong! I should just go home! (overinclusive
negativism, nihilism, defeatism) THERAPIST: I know it can feel that way
because it's frustrating to have a habit that gets in the way, but even
the hardest habits can be broken \[engaging smile\]. Are you sure you do
everything wrong? If that were the case, you wouldn't have made it here
at all today, and you might have forgotten your socks! (slogans, humor;
challenges the negative self-statements) PATIENT: OK, OK, maybe not
everything \[begrudging smile\]. I just hate it when I'm late! It feels
like someone's got a fix against me, no matter how hard I try
(esteem-lowering experience of powerlessness, projection).

THERAPIST: That can't make you feel good about yourself. Perhaps we can
look at how you decide what time to leave? Sometimes people leave
themselves some extra wiggle room in case of any unforeseen events so
that they have enough time to get to an appointment. That would increase
your sense of control over things and help you feel better. Want to give
it a shot? (empathy and anticipatory guidance) PATIENT: Sure. Similarly,
a patient may establish a pattern of continuing beyond when the session
was scheduled to end, which might have different unconscious
motivations, all amenable to discussion in the context of supporting ego
function and adaptive skills. With some patients and in certain cases,
the therapist might determine that extending a session is
therapeutically appropriate. For example, when a patient is unavoidably
detained by traffic but is in a crisis, the therapist might choose to
give the patient extra time if the schedule allows or might briefly
connect and reschedule the patient's next appointment if an earlier date
is available. Similarly, the therapist is clinically compelled to take a
few extra minutes to address "doorknob issues" (Pinsker 1997)---issues
brought up as the patient is exiting the session---if they are
clinically provocative and raise the therapist's acute concern. Concerns
about not gratifying the patient's infantile wishes should be
entertained but should take second place to reasonableness, which the
therapist should always be modeling. The therapist might decide not to
extend a session because doing so would support maladaptive, regressive
behavior without reasonable clinical or environmental justification.
Choosing not to extend a session also models behavior for the patient.
The therapist must balance limit setting with promotion of autonomy and
independence (Misch 2000) (see Chapter 2, "Principles and Mode of
Action"). Sometimes, the therapist must get up, open the door, and
firmly show the patient out. If the patient continually resists the
therapist's efforts to stop on time, the therapist can choose to cue the
patient at intervals about how much time is remaining in the session,
thus offering anticipatory guidance. The experienced therapist uses
these

strategies to wind down a session before time is up so that patients are
not in the middle of a hot topic at the session's end (Pinsker 1997).

Timing and Intensity of Treatment Sessions The timing and intensity of
treatment sessions should be set through an agreement between patient
and therapist, with the proviso that timing and intensity may change on
the basis of clinical need, such as when a crisis arises. In expressive
treatments, the ideal is to have a constant interval between sessions,
which are held at the same time and on the same day of the week,
creating a stable frame. Although the frequency of visits is less fixed
in supportive psychotherapy, setting a specific, repeated time to meet
tends to reduce anxiety. Similarly, the length of a session should
generally be fixed but may be subject to variation when clinically
appropriate and based on when the therapist can accommodate the patient.
Fixed frequency and length bring stability to the framework of the
therapeutic interactions.

Phases of Treatment Beginning In the beginning of therapy, the therapist
pays a great deal of attention to supporting the formation of a
therapeutic alliance because the therapeutic alliance increases the
likelihood that the patient will remain in treatment and will have a
good outcome (Gunderson et al. 1984; Hartley and Strupp 1983). Over the
first few sessions, the therapist should attempt to come to a reasonable
understanding of the patient's target complaints and presenting symptoms
and acquire a working knowledge of the patient's general level of ego
function and object relatedness, as well as his or her adaptive
strengths and deficits. From these data, the therapist synthesizes a
case formulation and hypothesizes areas of acute and chronic deficit in
defensive operations, adaptive skills, and ego functioning that should
be directly addressed through supportive interventions (see Chapter 3).
As the therapist gets to know the patient better, the therapist
fine-tunes his or her understanding of the patient's ego functioning and
adjusts the intensity of supportive and expressive interventions
accordingly. The therapist may require an extended amount of time to
develop a clear understanding of the

issues of patients who are cognitively impaired because of psychosis,
severe obsessive thinking, or mood disorder or of patients who become
flooded with anxiety or dysphoria when focusing on certain details
during therapy. Once the therapist and patient agree on the goals and
objectives of therapy (see Chapter 3), the therapist must consider
issues of acuity and timing. For example, after a recent psychiatric
hospitalization for psychosis, a patient arrives in therapy wanting to
talk about whether he should return to college in the fall. The
therapist's clinical understanding is that the patient must secure a
stable and structured environment in which to live so that he can plan
his near-term future appropriately. Without that stability, the patient
runs the risk of increased stress, disorganization, and decompensation.
However, the patient has brought up neither the imminent loss of his
housing nor his plans to deal with that loss. The therapist understands,
before the patient does, the need to address issues in a different
order. Allowing the patient to "see the map" before exploring the
territory is an important supportive approach that reduces anxiety and
emphasizes that therapy is a rational and collaborative process
(Rosenthal 2002). The therapist can explain how the topic about to be
discussed is specifically connected to self-esteem, to a specified ego
function, or to a specified adaptive skill for dealing with psychiatric
symptoms or general social interaction. Such explanation is also
consistent with motivational interviewing approaches, in that the
therapist asks the patient's permission before giving direct advice or
prescribing solutions to problems (Rollnick and Miller 1995). The
therapist must accept that at times, however, the patient will reject
the proposed agenda. Middle The therapeutic alliance usually functions
as a foundation for treatment in supportive psychotherapy rather than as
the vehicle for change (Hellerstein et al. 1998). The therapist
continues to monitor the alliance with the patient during the course of
treatment and attempts to optimize the alliance by continuing to use the
same attention as in the initial phase of treatment. This therapeutic
attunement to the patient contributes to the patient's experience of
being understood and supported by the therapist. In the middle phase of
therapy, if therapy is proceeding well, the patient begins to accept
that the therapist is truly capable of understanding and supporting him
or her, and

this acceptance can serve as a corrective emotional experience. Positive
transference and regard for the therapist are allowed to accumulate
unless they become grossly pathological. In supportive treatment, the
middle stage can and often does go on indefinitely, especially with
patients for whom support helps to maintain adaptive skills or ego
functions. During the course of treatment, new intermediate goals may
arise for the patient in the context of life events or increases in
adaptive function. An increase in a patient's adaptive function presents
an opportunity for the therapist to review goals and to offer praise for
meeting goals, as well as an opportunity to offer the patient
reassurance and other support for self-esteem regarding goals that have
not been accomplished. In supportive psychotherapy, the therapist can
use well-structured psychoeducational and skills-building interventions
and can encourage the patient to pursue his or her interests and
initiatives. The therapist can present expert knowledge about the
patient's disorder and its effect on functioning in order to increase
awareness so that the patient's decisions are better informed. The
supportive psychotherapist uses these kinds of educational interventions
early and frequently when working with patients living with addiction,
which may increase patients' motivation for behavioral change. If the
patient arrives with a pressing agenda in relation to an acute
interpersonal conflict or an inner need, the supportive therapist can
shift the balance from therapist-directed to patient-directed processes,
keeping both the patient's goals and the therapist's objectives in mind.
Termination A formal termination process is not part of supportive
psychotherapy. Therapy ends when the goals of treatment have been
reached or when the patient elects not to continue. If the therapist
believes that the patient's decision to stop is a product of
ego-function disturbance (e.g., grandiosity), symptoms (e.g.,
hopelessness), or faulty adaptive skills (e.g., inability to manage
regular visits), the therapist attempts, without arguing, to explore the
problem. Even when the therapist has a psychodynamic hypothesis about
the patient's motivation, the therapist must balance this hypothesis
against the principle that the patient is free to stop when he or she
wishes.

Therapy may also terminate because of external factors, such as
relocation or another life event that forces an end to the current scope
of work. At the end of formal treatment, gains are summarized and an
agenda is articulated for the patient's continued work without regular
visits to the therapist. An important part of concluding treatment is
for the patient to reflect on and celebrate important milestones that he
or she has achieved (Rosenthal 2002). Supportive psychotherapy differs
from expressive treatment with regard to termination. In supportive
psychotherapy, the patient and therapist do not work through their
relationship and the patient is not asked to mourn the loss of an
important object or work through ambivalent feelings (Rosenthal 2002).
Because constant, positively held objects are frequently too few in the
lives of many patients in supportive psychotherapy, the therapist does
not encourage the patient to let go of the relationship, which is based
on the real relationship and not on transference. The analogy of school
is useful for supportive psychotherapy. The teacher works in the school
even when the student is not enrolled in classes; likewise, the
therapist continues to work even when a particular patient has moved on
from treatment. The patient's treatment can be framed as an organized
set of courses, each with a beginning, middle, and end. When the
patient's goals are achieved, the course of treatment is concluded. Just
as the student who has a worthwhile experience may return for more
courses (Pinsker and Rosenthal 1988), the patient is always told that he
or she can return if the need arises.

Long-Term Versus Brief Psychotherapy For patients with chronic mental
disorders for whom supportive psychotherapy is primarily aimed at
maintaining adaptive and ego functioning toward overall health and
well-being, treatment is likely to be framed as an ongoing relationship
without a time limit unless constrained by external factors, such as the
patient's financial resources, insurance coverage, or continued-stay
criteria in a mental health clinic. Treatment does not need to go on
interminably if the goals of therapy have been met. Brief therapy is
typically indicated when the psychopathology is expected to be time
limited, such as when the patient has an adjustment

disorder or a terminal illness, or when an acute loss or crisis
overwhelms a patient's defenses and he or she becomes symptomatic. In
supportive psychotherapy, the model of treatment does not focus on
character change through emotional insight, so treatment is complete not
when core conflicts have been resolved but rather when symptoms have
been reduced to comfortable levels or when more competent coping
strategies have been developed. A patient may return for more treatment
when in a crisis or in order to strengthen failing defensive operations
or in order to work on something new.

Professional Boundaries The therapist guides the dialogue with the
patient's therapeutic needs in mind. The therapist never takes a turn to
discuss his or her own needs. The dialogue is conversational to reduce
awkward, anxiety-provoking silences. The therapist's empathic
relatedness allows him or her to know when silence will make the patient
withdraw and feel overwhelmed and when his or her quietness will allow
the patient to manifest an important affective response, as shown in the
following examples. PATIENT 1 \[after a long pause, a tentative smile\]:
Boy, it's been raining nonstop for so long. THERAPIST 1: Sure has! Isn't
it interesting? Folks often chat about the weather when they're not sure
what else they have in common to talk about. It's kind of neat---there's
always going to be weather. I wonder if you'd like to talk about how all
that rain has affected you, but we can also discuss strategies to talk
with people; you told me that's been a problem (normalizing,
generalizing, collaborating, anticipatory guidance). PATIENT 2 \[after a
long pause, tears well up\]: I can't believe she's really gone.
THERAPIST 2: \[silent\] (attentive, quiet; empathic concern) In
expressive treatment, to prevent gratification of the patient's wishes
and to promote elaboration of transference material, the therapist
typically

avoids self-disclosure of any sort. In supportive psychotherapy, the
therapist may judiciously disclose personal information to the patient
in a purposeful and supportive manner. The paradigmatic model of
therapeutic selfdisclosure is found in Alcoholics Anonymous and other
self-help groups, in which a speaker's lived experience becomes an
object lesson for listeners seeking support for their recovery efforts.
Many reports on individual behavioral, cognitive, and
cognitive-behavioral therapies suggest that deliberate self-disclosure
can be clinically useful (Psychopathology Committee of the Group for the
Advancement of Psychiatry 2001). Simon (1988) observed that therapists'
decisions about deliberate self-disclosure are generally related to
several criteria: modeling and educating, promoting the therapeutic
alliance, validating reality, and fostering the patient's sense of
autonomy. As a rule, self-disclosure by the therapist is appropriate
when it is in the interest of the patient's treatment. If
self-disclosure is in the therapist's interest (e.g., when it takes the
form of venting, bragging, complaining, or seductiveness), it is
exploitation. Information that is a matter of public record is typically
the easiest to reveal in the context of supportive treatment. More
private information or personal experience requires more deliberation
(Roberts 2016). In supportive psychotherapy, the therapist looks for
ways to add facilitating comments or interjections that normalize the
interaction and to respond to inquiries in a manner that is both
appropriate and technically supportive. PATIENT \[after a long pause\]:
I was thinking, are you married? THERAPIST 1 \[if the therapist chooses
to answer\]: What are your thoughts about this? (traditional expressive
psychotherapy--style response) THERAPIST 2: Yes, I am. I noticed you
seemed to think a while before you asked me. Was it a little
uncomfortable to think of asking me that? (empathic concern) PATIENT
\[short pause, blushing\]: Yes, I thought it might be weird to ask.
THERAPIST 2: One of the rules here is that you get to speak your mind.
It's good you were able to ask me, even though it made

you uncomfortable. People who are able to master their fears tend to get
more accomplished (praise with modeling of adaptive behavior). At times,
a patient will ask a question that is that is obviously inappropriate or
extremely personal in nature in order to annoy or provoke anxiety in the
therapist. PATIENT: I know you're married, but do you still masturbate?
THERAPIST: My sexual habits are personal, but we should talk about
sexual issues if you are having concerns or problems with sex (clearly
reiterating a boundary rule and then offering the patient a chance to
discuss sexual concerns). Patients with more severe disorders may have
difficulty at times differentiating the friendly but professional
relationship from friendship. The therapist clarifies and reinforces the
boundaries in a respectful, nondemeaning way, without being evasive or
insincere. PATIENT: I've got some Aerosmith tickets! So, we could meet
at the box office and I could give you one. How about that? THERAPIST:
That's really kind of you. I know that the tickets are special to you,
and I want you to understand that I really appreciate that you're
thinking of me. It makes me think that our work together is valued by
you. But for future reference, I'm not allowed to receive gifts of more
than nominal value from my patients. Also, people who have given a lot
of thought to these things have decided that it's probably best to keep
therapy relationships separate from other kinds of relationships, like
friendships, so that nothing interferes. PATIENT: Ah, c'mon, doc. It's
just a concert ticket! It would be fun. THERAPIST 1: You know, I was
never much into heavy metal music. I didn't like it when I was younger,
so I really wouldn't want to go now even if we knew each other under
different circumstances (responds truthfully but evasively).

THERAPIST 2: I'd prefer to keep our time together focused on our work,
which is about getting things done in a very special and professional
way, not about friendship. I'm sorry if that's a disappointment. Can we
talk about this some more? (takes responsibility for the therapeutic
boundary but is real and empathic in the relationship) Because
supportive psychotherapy is more verbally interactive than traditional
expressive treatment and because the therapist has more opportunity to
be a real figure in relating to the patient, greater flexibility is
allowed for moving traditional boundaries. For example, to normalize
what a patient is struggling with during day-to-day functioning after
losing a parent, the therapist may empathically disclose his or her own
pain and loss of motivation during a state of grieving. Although the
repertoire of therapist behavior and speech is broader in supportive
psychotherapy, with a less abstemious relationship, more opportunities
arise for the therapist to use the therapy to gratify his or her own
needs and violate the patient's boundaries. The therapist must always
avoid the narrow but clear domain of unacceptable behaviors that can
exploit patients, including sexual contact, borrowing money, or
accepting favors or information from the patient that benefit the
therapist (e.g., stock tips, chores, or advice based on nonpublic
information) (AMA Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs 2015; American
Psychiatric Association 2013b; American Psychological Association 2017).

Conclusion Supportive psychotherapy is generally indicated as the
starting place for a treatment relationship between therapist and
patient and thus has few contraindications. Other forms of treatment are
undertaken only if specifically indicated and only with the patient's
agreement. The length and intensity of supportive treatment vary
according to a patient's need and motivation, and termination does not
require working through ambivalent feelings about the therapist.
Treatment is focused on real relationships, including the patient's
relationship with the therapist, but the patienttherapist relationship
should be discussed only when it becomes

problematic. Compared with expressive treatment, supportive
psychotherapy allows a broader range of supportive behaviors by the
therapist; however, supportive psychotherapy is still constrained by
clear guidelines about permissible patient and therapist behavior in the
treatment setting.

The Therapeutic Relationship

6

Pinsker (1997) and others (Misch 2000; Novalis et al. 1993) described
general principles of supportive psychotherapy that are related to the
patient-therapist relationship. Some of these principles are listed here
and are discussed more fully in this chapter. 1. To help sustain the
therapeutic alliance, positive feelings toward and positive
transferences to the therapist are generally not a focus in supportive
psychotherapy. 2. To anticipate and avoid a disruption in treatment, the
therapist is alert to negative, distancing patient responses. 3. When a
patient-therapist problem is not resolved through practical discussion,
the therapist moves to a discussion of the therapeutic relationship. 4.
The therapist can modify the patient's distorted perceptions using
clarification and confrontation but not interpretation. 5. If indirect
means fail to address negative transference or therapeutic impasses,
more explicit discussion about the relationship may be warranted. 6. The
therapist uses only the amount of expressive technique necessary to
address negative transference. 7. The therapeutic alliance may allow the
patient to listen to the therapist present material that the patient
would not accept from anyone else. 8. When making a statement that the
patient will experience as criticism, the therapist at times might have
to frame the statement in a palatable or supportive manner or first
offer anticipatory guidance.

Transference: Supportive and Expressive Approaches

Transference refers to the feelings, fantasies, beliefs, assumptions,
and experiences concerning the therapist that do not originate in the
therapist or in the patient's relationship with the therapist but rather
are outgrowths from the patient's earlier relationships, unconsciously
displaced onto the therapist. Transference phenomena arise in all
therapies, but the role assigned to transference in supportive
psychotherapy is different from the role assigned to it in expressive
psychotherapy. In the most expressive psychotherapies and psychoanalysis
(one end of the expressive-supportive psychotherapy continuum described
in Chapter 1, "Evolution of the Concept of Supportive Psychotherapy"),
transference phenomena are of pivotal importance for identifying
intrapsychic conflicts, and therapeutic gain is ascribed to the
emotional working-through of these relationships. The patient-therapist
relationship as expressed through transference phenomena is a major area
of focus and engagement, whereas the working alliance or real
relationship serves as a backdrop from which the patient's observing ego
can peer onto the stage (Figure 6--1).

Figure 6--1. Roles of transference and the real relationship in
expressive and supportive psychotherapy. Source.

Adapted from Pinsker et al. 1991.

When working at the supportive end of the supportive-expressive
psychotherapy continuum, the dynamically aware therapist recognizes
transferences and uses them to guide therapeutic interventions.
Transferences are not generally discussed, however, unless negative
transference threatens to disrupt treatment. The real relationship
between the patient and the therapist takes center stage (see the
"Supportive" diagram in Figure 6--1). Between supportive and expressive
psychotherapies, where almost all psychotherapy takes place, a mixture
of approaches to transference material occurs. Supportive and expressive
techniques can emerge at appropriate times in treatment (Gorton 2000),
but both the rationale for and content of transference interventions by
the therapist are different in supportive and expressive treatments.
Supportive therapists track transference material but address it only
when necessary. Focusing on positive transference material in supportive
psychotherapy is generally unnecessary. PATIENT: Doctor, you always give
me the right advice, even when I'm not on the ball or I have some wrong
idea. How'd you get so smart? THERAPIST: Thanks, but I can't take all
the credit. I had good teachers, and I have learned a lot of effective
principles from working with patients (accepts the positive statement
but modulates it slightly with reality testing). Negative transference
is more typically a focus in supportive psychotherapy because such
transference can be a threat to the integrity of the treatment and
normally adds to the patient's suffering when acted on outside the
treatment setting. In supportive and supportive-expressive
psychotherapy, the therapist clarifies often and confronts at intervals
but interprets infrequently, if at all. The therapist's interventions
assist the patient in recognizing and addressing maladaptive behavioral
or construal patterns that are reflected in behavior with the therapist;
a goal of these interventions is to increase the patient's self-esteem
and adaptive functioning. The patient's behavior with the therapist in
supportive

treatment is understood to be illustrative of the patient's behavior
with others. In expressive treatment, transference clarification and
interpretation are important interventions. In this treatment, the
patient's characterological and core neurotic defenses are often
expressed through positive and negative transference phenomena. The
therapist's transference interpretations and clarifications assist the
patient in gaining insight and working through unconscious conflicts; a
goal of these interventions is character change. In expressive therapy,
relationships between the patient and other people are used to
illuminate the central patient-therapist relationship. The content of
the therapist's transference interpretations also differs in expressive
versus supportive modes. The precision and comprehensiveness of an
interpretation may vary depending on the level of the patient's object
relations and defensive functioning, the patient's progress in
treatment, and the strength of the therapeutic alliance. Interpretations
often resemble clarifications and confrontations rather than
interpretations in the strict sense. Typically, the healthier the
patient, the better he or she will tolerate a precise and comprehensive
interpretation without damaging the therapeutic alliance. The therapist
can present interpretive ideas in a supportive manner (Winston et
al. 1986). In working with patients who are more impaired on the
continuum, the therapist rarely makes full interpretations but may make
incomplete interpretations (leaving out genetic references and
generalizing \[Pinsker et al. 1991\]) or inexact interpretations
(diluting infantile fears with other plausible explanations \[Glover
1931\]). THERAPIST 1: So, keeping your room messy is a way for you to in
a sense be independent and to do things in your own way in your own
space, as compared with how it is at work, where everything must be
annoyingly in its place and on time. Is there a downside? (supports
self-esteem, makes a connection to angry feeling, contrasts patient's
style with real-world expectation, opens a dialogue on adaptive skills)
In the midst of an expressive treatment, the therapist might use
interpretation.

THERAPIST 2: So, keeping your room messy is a way of setting things up,
hoping your mother cleans it up. She's supposed to make it OK, and you
get anxious about it. Then you become enraged and feel you have little
control (makes a primary connection to a genetic figure and to the role
of aggression in staving off anxiety when dependency needs are not met).

The Therapeutic Alliance In supportive and supportive-expressive
psychotherapies---for example, brief supportive psychotherapy
(Hellerstein et al. 1998), brief adaptive psychotherapy (Pollack et
al. 1991), and supportive-expressive psychotherapy (Luborsky 1984)---an
early and strong therapeutic alliance (which is reflective of the real
relationship) is predictive of positive outcome in treatment and thus is
a major focus of treatment (Westerman et al. 1995; Winston and Winston
2002). Because patients with a weaker therapeutic alliance are more
likely to drop out of psychotherapy (Sharf et al. 2010), purposely
promoting and maintaining a strong alliance has practical utility. In
the early days of psychoanalysis, Freud acknowledged that transference
included a personal relationship with the patient, which he called
rapport or unobjectionable positive transference. He considered this
relationship necessary to maintain the motivation needed to collaborate
effectively and therefore maintained that the relationship was not to be
interpreted (Gill and Muslin 1976; Safran and Muran 2000). This view is
the earliest evidence of a principle within psychodynamic treatments for
managing a strong therapeutic alliance, and Freud's view provides a
basis for not interpreting positive transference in supportive
psychotherapy. As the concept of the therapeutic alliance began to
develop, the focus shifted to the working relationship between the
patient and therapist and began to be framed as a working alliance, with
elements of the real relationship separate from the transference
(Greenson 1965, 1967; Zetzel 1956). Current conceptions of the alliance
are broader and include all collaborative elements within the
therapeutic relationship. Current conceptions seem a commonsense fit
with the construct of supportive psychotherapy (Horvath et al. 2011).
The strength of the therapeutic

alliance hinges on the extent of patient-therapist agreement on
therapeutic tasks and goals, the patient's capacity to perform the
therapeutic work, the therapist's empathic relatedness and involvement,
and the robustness of the affective bond between patient and therapist
(Bordin 1979; Gaston 1990). The patient's perception of collaboration
toward a common therapeutic goal may be related to treatment outcome
(Cailhol et al. 2009). The therapeutic alliance is most likely the
therapeutic foundation for change rather than the vehicle for change, as
hypothesized for more expressive treatments (Gaston 1990; Hellerstein et
al. 1998; Horvath and Symonds 1991). The tacit emotional learning that
occurs as a result of the interaction with the therapist appears to form
the core of the growing therapeutic alliance (Scaturo 2010). Therefore,
the therapist fosters the alliance through active measures, acting as a
tolerant and nonjudgmental role model (Misch 2000). Direct measures that
support the patient's selfesteem further support the therapeutic
alliance, which has a basis in the real relationship. The patient may
have a fantasy about the therapist's capacities (transference), but the
therapist is actively engaged with the patient in a real relationship
and is often providing concrete help to the patient.

Misalliance: Recognition and Repair To promote effective psychotherapy,
the therapist must pay attention to rifts in the patient-therapist
alliance and make concerted efforts to repair them. In supportive
treatment, because the therapist is active, there is greater opportunity
to say the wrong thing or to step on the patient's toes. At the same
time, to avoid anxiety that might interfere with a positive alliance,
supportive psychotherapy does not emphasize exploration of conflict. In
the event of a rupture, the supportive psychotherapist has ample
opportunity, as well as breadth of strategies, to intervene effectively.
Less constraint is placed on the ways in which the therapist might
communicate his or her distress at being misunderstood by the patient,
as well as his or her sincere regret at having unwittingly impugned or
patronized the patient or raised a subject that the patient found
intrusive, anxiety provoking, or simply unpalatable. Supportive measures
are the first line of repair for ruptures in the alliance (Bond et
al. 1998). When the therapist anticipates or notices a misalliance, he
or she attempts to address the problem practically, in the

context of the current situation, before moving to symbolic or
transference issues (Pinsker 1997). The following vignette demonstrates
how a therapist addressed a misalliance (see Video Vignette 4, available
at www.appi.org/Winston).

Video Vignette 4: Addressing a Misalliance Rachel is a 35-year-old
single woman, a computer engineer, who has been treated successfully
with antidepressants for major depression, with resulting increased
energy, libido, and concentration. She is typically passive and
compliant in her interpersonal dealings and has had difficulty long-term
communicating directly what she wants in social and intimate
relationships. Rachel has had several serious long-term relationships
with men that demonstrate a pattern of her being too accommodating, with
a resultant loss of self-esteem and a buildup of resentment. Because she
is passive and dependent, she has often tolerated a significant lack of
reciprocity in her relationships, frequently reporting having been
"bossed around," yet she stayed in them even when she was no longer
happy. Rachel's current boyfriend of 8 months, another computer
engineer, is irritable, perfectionistic, and critical, frequently
blaming her when things don't go as planned. When her needs and desires
are frustrated, she becomes sullen, sarcastic, and full of
self-recrimination, which further lowers her self-esteem. The therapist
has been trying over several months to support Rachel in "finding her
voice" so that she might be better able to navigate getting her needs
served in the current relationship and "make it work." The therapist is
using a model of what he deems to be adult behavior in a committed
relationship. RACHEL: I don't know why I'm here \[sullen\]. THERAPIST:
Could you clarify what you mean? RACHEL: All we do is argue, and he
never owns up to anything. Just asks me questions, expects me to do
whatever he wants, and never tells me what he really thinks. I try to be
reasonable, but it's always his way, and it's always my fault. Now it
looks like it's over---the relationship's just over. THERAPIST: I still
don't understand. You've described this pattern to me many times before:
having a good time, followed by struggling with your boyfriend, and then
thinking that it was over. RACHEL: That's right.

THERAPIST: OK, but I'm unclear as to what you mean by your statement
that you don't know why you're here (attempts, through clarification and
confrontation, to get the patient to become more specific). RACHEL: What
good is this? I talk and talk here, and now another relationship is
blowing up because I can't sustain it. I try to do the right thing, and
it doesn't make any difference. I can't do it right enough. THERAPIST:
And? RACHEL: So, I don't know why I'm here. (Again, the patient lodges a
complaint about the treatment not giving her what she needs, despite her
doing what she believes she is asked.) THERAPIST: We look at these
patterns in your relationship so that you can learn ways to change them
or learn how to do things differently, which can improve your
relationship and your self-esteem (indirect attempt to strengthen the
therapeutic alliance by reiterating common goals). RACHEL: Big words.
THERAPIST: I thought I was being clear in talking to you about this, but
perhaps I'm missing something. RACHEL: \[frowns and shrugs her
shoulders\] THERAPIST: You've been working hard the past few months in
our work together so that you might be better able to get more of what
you want out of this relationship (praise for hard work in therapy).
RACHEL: See, you're just like him. I try to do things right, and it
still doesn't work out \[looks down, sullen\] (states that therapist
behaves similarly to boyfriend, with similar impact). THERAPIST: Are you
saying that you see me as having expectations of you here and that when
you try to do the right thing, it doesn't seem to work out, and you
still feel low and frustrated? (clarifies) RACHEL \[nods her head and
frowns\]: Yes. THERAPIST: I see. I've been supporting you in working on
this relationship, "doing the right thing," but I think you're stuck in
a process that has you feeling down, and not just with him but here,
too. And it's not good for you and it's not good for your self-esteem. I
can own up to that, and I want to be better able to assist you in our
work together. (Therapist "owns up" to supporting the patient's staying
in the relationship, which the patient feels diminishes her autonomy
because

the relationship with the boyfriend reduces her self-esteem.) If there
is a strategy that I'm using that is actually lowering your self-esteem,
I'll consider changing it for something that works better for you
(directly allies with the patient; demonstrates responsive, adult
behavior). RACHEL: You can do that? \[looks up at the therapist, alert\]
THERAPIST: Yes, of course. RACHEL: That's different from him (recognizes
a component of the real relationship with the therapist as contrasted
with transference or her boyfriend). THERAPIST: In the past I've
supported your attempts on working on this relationship with this man,
but you continue to have these powerful disputes where you end up

feeling

disempowered

and

blamed.

While

I

can

understand

your

disappointment and sadness in ending it, I do think that you are
correct. Staying with this man is damaging to your self-esteem. Here
I've been trying to help you to stay and figure out a way to work it out
because I thought I had your best interests in mind, but now I think
that you know better about your own life. I'm sorry that I didn't catch
on to this earlier. Where do we go from here? (At times, the therapist
may have to change his or her position, as people normally do when
talking with someone who is becoming angry or distant.) Rachel's talk
about the relationship blowing up is also a transferential statement
about her experience of the therapy and the therapist. Up to this point,
she expressed herself as helpless to reveal to him that the strategy was
not working and that she was feeling worse. When the therapist discloses
to Rachel that he has been using a model that sets up the expectation
that she "do the right thing," he sidesteps the transferential bind he
may have put himself in with respect to this patient. Rachel begins to
experience the therapist differently, such that the alliance is
strengthened and she feels that she has been heard.

Resistance Many therapists might say that the concept of resistance is
relevant only to the expressive element of therapy, in which uncovering
is essential. However, some of these therapists use the term resistance
broadly to signify any patient-produced obstacle to achieving the goals
of therapy. In this sense, resistance may be characterized as the nearly
universal out-of-

awareness fear of new ways and the tendency to cling to familiar
patterns even when they are maladaptive. Because supportive treatment
aims to support adaptive defenses and build self-esteem, the therapist's
strategy in relation to resistance is to increase the patient's
motivation for action by encouraging problem solving and new adaptive
skills. Another obstacle to treatment is a traitlike disposition to
avoid painful affects, which can interfere with treatment even when the
therapist makes every effort to mitigate discomfort or anxiety. In
examining the traitlike components of resistance, Beutler et al. (2002b)
presented evidence from several studies indicating that measures of
patient characteristics typically associated with trait
resistance---such as defensiveness, anger, impulsivity, and direct
avoidance---are negatively correlated with psychotherapy outcomes. These
findings have direct relevance for supportive psychotherapy: patients
with high levels of trait resistance tend to have better outcomes with
dynamic nondirective, self-directed, or relationshiporiented therapies
(e.g., supportive-expressive psychotherapies) than with structured
cognitive or behavioral treatments (Beutler et al. 2002b).

"Joining the Resistance" Supportive treatment aims to support defenses
unless they are maladaptive. Again, a primary principle in supportive
psychotherapy is to support the therapeutic alliance. When a patient is
resistant to looking at dysfunctional patterns, the fact that the
therapist reflects the patient's despair and hopelessness or empathizes
with his or her tough life or work situation might give the patient a
strong sense of being understood and thus increase his or her
willingness to work in therapy (Messer 2002). Supportive psychotherapy
can provide, without coercion, an active empathic environment and can
reinforce the patient's stated goals. In supportive-expressive
treatment, when a patient is struggling to recognize his or her own
feelings or impulses, the therapist can follow the patient's lead and
make empathic statements about how difficult and anxiety provoking it is
to reveal oneself (Messer 2002). PATIENT: Mom was usually pretty good
about getting to games on time, but Dad used to show up sometimes . . .
usually after the

fact. He was always really busy \[looks sad\], and we got along . . . OK
\[pause\]. Hey, you know why I was late today? The cabdriver on the way
here---the stupid guy couldn't drive worth a damn! What a joke. How'd he
get a license? THERAPIST: It seems that it's making you anxious to focus
on how you really feel toward your father. PATIENT: This is hard. I
don't think I can do this \[tearing up\]. What if I can't do this?
(increased anxiety, self-doubt) THERAPIST: Talking about this kind of
difficult stuff makes people anxious, but they get through it in
psychotherapy. I want you to know that your pursuing it and revealing it
here takes courage. I think you're clearly capable of doing it. I
wouldn't support your looking at your feelings toward your father if I
thought you weren't capable (empathy, normalization, accurate praise,
reassurance).

Reducing Anxiety to Facilitate Discussion Showing the patient a map
before exploring the territory reiterates that the engagement is
collaborative and centers on agreed-on goals. Anxiety is often
diminished when the patient becomes cognitively aware of what is being
offered for discussion. PATIENT: Sorry I'm late. I started out with
plenty of time, but some things came up, and before I knew it, it was 20
after. THERAPIST: Have you noticed that over the last few weeks, you've
come into the session about 20 minutes before our time is up? I feel bad
that you may not be getting what you are paying for. Could we talk about
it? (With other patients, the therapist might be uncertain if consistent
lateness is related to feelings about the therapy or the therapist or if
it is due to deficits in ego function or adaptive skills. In this case,
the therapist knows from earlier sessions that the patient's lateness is
related to the therapist.)

PATIENT: Sure, but I just had stuff to do, and I lost track of the time
(rationalizes, deflects, and plays the lateness off as a result of
making more important choices). THERAPIST: In psychotherapy, when
someone creates a pattern of somehow getting to the session with only a
little time left, it may mean that there is something the person is
wrestling with inside that is showing up in this behavior pattern.
People do well with looking at what's inside them, exploring it, though
sometimes it brings up uncomfortable emotions. I'm happy to explore it
with you if you are interested. It might be helpful (clarifies,
confronts, normalizes, offers guidance about the cost of exploring this
issue). PATIENT: It's not just here, doc. I'm late for everything
\[sheepish grin\] (generalizes away from the therapy situation but owns
the pattern). THERAPIST: So, as a bonus, if we can explore that pattern
here, maybe you can learn a skill or a principle that helps you to get
along better out there. Is that something you'd be interested in?
(supports motivation, enlists collaboration) PATIENT: Sure.

Reframing Resistance as Healthy Self-Assertion The therapist can address
opposition to his or her efforts by framing it as a healthy function of
the patient's need for control and self-assertion; the therapist may
reduce the resistance by becoming more accepting and authentic (Beutler
et al. 2002a). PATIENT: I didn't ask my mom to enroll me for the spring
semester like we talked about last time. I decided to put it off until
the fall. I'm just not ready to do that yet. Are you angry? THERAPIST:
It's good that you know your own mind and can make a definitive
decision. You must feel some relief about taking a stand. I'm not angry
because I don't get to make the decisions

about your life, only to look at the decisions together with you and try
to help you with how you make them.

Dealing With Distance and Withdrawal Patients frequently demonstrate
resistance in sessions through withdrawal and noninteraction. Because
the therapist's verbal responsiveness is a characteristic of supportive
psychotherapy, the therapist does not wait for things to unfold if the
patient is silent. Silence from the therapist supports resistance and
may increase the patient's anxiety. In supportive psychotherapy, when
the patient is silent or unresponsive, the therapist selects an issue
for attention. The issue may be directly related to the patient's lack
of verbal engagement, which the therapist might choose to address
indirectly. Alternatively, the therapist might switch to another topic
entirely. PATIENT: Hello again \[sits down\]. I don't really have much
to talk about today \[sits quietly, looking at the therapist blankly\].
THERAPIST 1 \[warmly\]: It's good to see you again. So, can we get back
to the topic you were discussing with me before I left on vacation? You
were describing how hard it was to follow through on asking for a
transfer at work and how those "Why bother?" thoughts were getting in
your way. (The therapist picks up the patient's topic from before the
therapist's absence, reconnecting with the patient and supporting the
patient's selfesteem by showing that the patient was important enough
for the therapist to remember the issue. This approach focuses
indirectly on the patient's distancing maneuvers and sidesteps what the
therapist assumes are the patient's negative emotions about the
therapist's absence and increased anxiety about revealing them.)
THERAPIST 2: Hello. It's good to see you again. Well, it's been 3 weeks
since our last session. Although I had someone covering for emergencies,
it's not the same as coming for therapy. PATIENT: That's right \[looks
at the therapist less blankly\] (engages a bit, reinforces the
therapist's coming in closer).

THERAPIST 2: Sometimes, when people say they don't have anything on
their mind or much to talk about, they actually do but aren't quite sure
whether to or how to say something. Patients often find themselves in
that situation when their therapists come back after a vacation
(clarifies the situation but generalizes away from the specifics of the
patient and the therapist before confronting the patient's denial and
withdrawal). The therapist must be alert to distancing negative
responses and must be able to anticipate and avoid a disruption in
treatment. Not addressing misalliance may lead to a treatment
disruption. The therapist must decide whether the situation requires
intervention through confrontation or whether indirect means will
suffice. The therapist must always evaluate the situation, through
introspection, to ensure he or she is not becoming involved in a
countertransference enactment (Robbins 2000).

Countertransference As aptly stated by Clever and Tulsky (2002), "Asking
patients to tell us what they want potentially opens an imagined
Pandora's box of outrageous requests, and it requires energy both to
negotiate this tactfully and to manage the countertransference such
negotiation produces in ourselves" (p. 893).

Defining Countertransference In considering countertransference, the
therapist must make a distinction between 1) emotional reactions to a
patient's behavior that are due to the therapist's issues and 2)
emotional reactions that are the therapist's response to the patient's
unconscious attempt to provoke a reaction, which might be a
manifestation of transference, coming from the patient's internal world
(Messer 2002). The first type of countertransference is what has been
described as the narrow or classical view of countertransference---
essentially, the therapist's transference to the patient (Gabbard 2001).
A broader definition of countertransference includes the real
relationship, consisting of reactions most people would have to the
patient, as

determined by moment-to-moment patient behavior in the therapeutic
relationship. On a related note, when the therapist is lacking in
expertise or when the type of therapy is not helpful for the patient or
problem, the therapist might mistakenly identify his or her bad feelings
about the patient and treatment as countertransference, or the therapist
might misperceive the problem as the patient's resistance. The therapist
makes an attribution that the patient is being resistant, but actually,
the therapist or treatment is not effective. Because we describe
supportive psychotherapy as a dynamically informed treatment, the second
or broader view of countertransference has a place in our discussion of
technical work with patients. This view is that emotional reactions of
the therapist to the patient represent useful information related to the
patient's inner world and unconscious processes (Gabbard 2001).
Currently, many psychoanalytic theorists from varying perspectives hold
a consensus view that countertransference is a transactional construct,
affected by what the therapist brings to the situation as well as by
what the patient projects (Gabbard 2001; Kiesler 2001). A discussion of
therapist transference is beyond the scope of this chapter, but it is
incumbent on the therapist to attempt to distinguish his or her own
feelings from those provoked by the patient or, in the case of
projective identification, those that arise in the patient. Supportive
psychotherapy aims to improve adaptive skills. Maladaptive behavior
patterns in the patient's real life frequently manifest as
countertransference elicitations in the therapy session. When the
therapist recognizes that his or her reactions to the patient are the
same as others' reactions, sharing this awareness with the patient may
be useful in framing practical interventions to assist the patient with
better interpersonal adaptation. The therapist must be aware, however,
that his or her intent to self-disclose feelings toward the patient
could represent the therapist's own needs, not the requirements of the
therapeutic situation. Such an awareness is more important in supportive
psychotherapy, in which the flow of dialogue is conversational, than in
expressive treatment, in which the therapist may at times abstain from
responding. Gelso et al. (1995, 2002) demonstrated that better
countertransference management correlated positively with better outcome
in brief therapy (consisting of 12 sessions).

The therapist in the following dialogue recognizes the patient's
maladaptive behavior pattern. PATIENT: Everyone always blows me off. I
try to be nice---you know, join in, tell stories and stuff---then I see
them look at each other, and they throw it in my face, and they make
excuses and leave. Like they're so cool. That Andy---he's a piece of
work, and I told him so. THERAPIST: It must be hard to try joining in
and be rejected like that (empathic). PATIENT: Stop talking down to me.
Jeez, you shrinks always act like you're Mother Teresa, but she didn't
take the money for herself, did she? (feels impugned, attacks by
questioning the therapist's motives) THERAPIST: Hmm. It sounds like how
you are being here with me is how you've described interacting with Andy
and Fred at work. I'm finding my temperature rising with your criticisms
of me, and I can't help but wonder if you get the guys at work to feel
the same way---except I won't act on my feelings the way that they do.
I'll continue to sit and talk with you; I won't make excuses and leave.
(Modulated confrontation and drawing of parallels. The therapist
restates her commitment to the process and offers disconfirmation of the
patient's expected rejection in spite of the pressure to reject the
patient.) PATIENT: Oh, sure! Now you're saying it's my fault you're
angry? (continues the verbal assault, feels criticized anyway)
THERAPIST: I think if we get into an argument, I won't be doing my job
of being helpful to you, and you'll keep feeling put down. No, what I'm
asking you to do is to see if there's a pattern here that we can work on
to help you to get along better with people, because you've told me you
would like that (clarifies; does not get pulled into acting out of
countertransference feeling but uses the countertransference knowledge
productively by recommitting to the work, focusing on the alliance in
spite of

heightened feelings, and reinforcing the patient's treatment goal). From
the vantage point of interpersonal communication theory, Kiesler (2001)
described effective feedback of countertransference feelings as applying
the principle that disclosing metaphors or fantasies has the least
threatening effect, compared with sharing direct feelings or tending
toward action. This principle is highly consistent with supportive
psychotherapy approaches, in which it is safer, more respectful, and
more protective of the therapeutic alliance to say, "I'm finding my
temperature rising" than to say, "I'm so angry, I feel like punching you
out." The therapist's modulated expression of countertransference
feeling not only offers disconfirmation of the patient's maladaptive
construal style but also models adult restraint and containment (but not
denial) of affect. The therapist who responds to the patient's hostility
in a complementarily hostile way is arguing. Besides being bad
supportive technique, a therapist's hostile response is predictive of
poor outcome (Henry et al. 1986, 1990).

Handling Devaluation Being devalued by a patient can be painful and is
sometimes a frequent experience for therapists working with patients
diagnosed with borderline or narcissistic psychopathology. The therapist
adaptively responds and encourages the patient to understand the
response as helpful and consistent with the goals of treatment rather
than as retaliatory or as a way for the therapist to remove himself or
herself as the object of the patient's aggression (Robbins 2000). The
therapist must bind the affects and be aware of countertransference
responses elicited by the attack, which may include anger over the
patient's display of narcissism. PATIENT: I needed that note from you,
and you screwed up! I left word on your voice mail that I needed it by
Monday \[vindictive tone\]. Figures. You could only get into medical
school at a state school. THERAPIST 1 \[feels guilty\]: I'm really
sorry. Next time I'll try to be more sensitive to your needs, but I was
out on Monday

(masochistic countertransference response to what was actually an
unreasonable demand, a mea culpa gratifying the patient's grandiose
self). THERAPIST 2 \[feels irritated\]: You're pretty quick to blame me
and make critical comments, but you take no responsibility at all for
what happened. You left the request over the weekend, and I was out on
Monday (accurate but critical rebuttal, which may leave the patient
feeling demeaned and angry). PATIENT: I've heard those excuses before! I
needed you. Now, how can I trust you? I knew I should have gone to that
Park Avenue shrink my mother told me about! He went to Harvard. He's
quoted in the newspaper all the time. THERAPIST 3: Sometimes I'm going
to disappoint you. It happens, even in the best relationships. It might
scare you or make you angry that I'm not perfectly attuned to your
needs, but fortunately, I don't need to be perfect to be helpful to you.
I'll bet that other psychiatrist doesn't need to be perfect either to be
effective (authentic but measured response; models healthy, adult
behavior that is neither retaliating nor capitulating; clarifies the
role of a "good-enough" therapist). The therapist must have appropriate
training and the ability to understand feelings of irritation,
frustration, and helplessness generated in response to a patient's
chronic criticism and devaluation. Without adequate peer support or
professional supervision, the therapist may become clinically
disenchanted or disempowered and become either bored or overly
confrontational (Rosenthal 2002). Distancing from empathic connection is
a common response by the therapist to a patient's projective
identifications (Kaufman 1992). Rather than identifying with the
patient's projections and either capitulating or counterattacking, the
therapist manages vulnerability and aggression in the context of being
devalued. Such management is in concordance with supportive principles
(Robbins 2000) and can allow the patient to establish an idealizing
transference. The idealizing transference can enable the patient to
experience safety in the relationship with the idealized therapist,

which can serve as a corrective emotional experience (Alexander and
French 1946). Certain patients, such as individuals who seek help but
chronically reject all help that is offered (see Chapter 5, "General
Framework of Supportive Psychotherapy"), will maintain a transference
position that is impermeable to therapist intervention and disclosure.
These patients' pathogenic beliefs regarding self and others are
confirmed by the therapist's repeated attempts to engage and problem
solve (Sampson and Weiss 1986).

Conclusion A robust therapeutic alliance is a strong predicator of
positive outcome in psychotherapy. In supportive psychotherapy, the
alliance is posited as the foundation for therapeutic change; therefore,
the clinician actively promotes and maintains the therapeutic alliance.
In supportive psychotherapy, as in expressive psychotherapy, the
clinician observes and tracks transference phenomena, but these
phenomena are generally not a topic of discussion or interpretation in
supportive psychotherapy unless the impact of negative transference is
likely to interrupt treatment. The therapist typically uses
clarification and confrontation in supportive treatment, but when
interpretations are made, they tend to be incomplete or inexact. Because
defenses are not confronted in supportive psychotherapy unless they are
maladaptive, the clinician can learn to manage resistance with
supportive techniques. The clinician must always be alert to the
potential role of countertransference so that it can be properly
managed.

Crisis Intervention

7

History and Theory Crisis intervention began during World War II out of
the necessity of treating soldiers exposed to battlefield conditions. In
World War I, soldiers with combat fatigue or "shell shock" were quickly
evacuated from the front lines, without treatment, despite observations
that early intervention might reduce psychiatric morbidity (Salmon
1919). These soldiers often regressed or even became chronically
impaired. In World War II, soldiers were treated at or near the front
lines with crisis intervention techniques and were quickly returned to
their combat units (Glass 1954). During the time of World War II,
Lindemann began working with survivors of the Cocoanut Grove nightclub
fire in Boston and their relatives. These individuals were experiencing
acute grief and were unable to cope with their bereavement. In his
pioneering article, Lindemann (1994) described and contrasted normal and
morbid grief. Survivors and their families were helped to do the
necessary grief work, which involved going through the mourning process
and experiencing the loss. One of Lindemann's colleagues, Gerald Caplan
(1961), began to work in the field of preventive psychiatry and helped
develop the theoretical basis for the community mental health movement.
Lindemann and Caplan were among the most important early theoreticians
of the crisis intervention approach. Parad and Parad (1990) define
crisis as an "upset in a steady state, a turning point leading to better
or worse, a disruption or breakdown in a person's or family's normal or
usual pattern of functioning" (pp. 3--4). A crisis occurs when an
individual encounters a situation that leads to a collapse in his or her
usual pattern of functioning, entering a state of psychological
disequilibrium. Generally, a crisis is precipitated by a hazardous event
or a stressor, such as a catastrophe or disaster (e.g., earthquake,
fire, war, terrorism), a relationship rupture or loss, sexual assault,
or abuse. A crisis may also result from a series of difficult events or
mishaps rather than from one major occurrence, and a crisis can be a
response to external and internal stress. During crises, individuals
perceive their lives, needs, security, relationships, and sense of
well-being to be at risk. Crises tend to be time limited, generally
lasting no more than a few months; the duration depends on the stressor
and on the individual's perception of and response to the stressor.
Crisis states can lead to personal growth rather than physical and
psychological deterioration (Caplan 1961). Crisis makes growth possible
because it assaults the individual's psychic structure and defenses,
throwing them into a state of flux, which can make the resilient
individual more open to treatment. Davanloo (1980) incorporated
production of a crisis into his short-term dynamic psychotherapy
approach, viewing crisis as a means of disrupting ingrained defenses in
order for patients to gain access to their inner lives and thereby
change maladaptive ways of feeling, thinking, and behaving. Crisis
intervention is a therapeutic process aimed at restoring homeostatic
balance and diminishing vulnerability to the stressor. The therapist
helps the individual to accomplish

homeostasis by mobilizing the individual's abilities and social network
and promoting adaptive coping mechanisms to reestablish equilibrium.
Crisis intervention is a short-term approach that focuses on solving the
immediate problem and includes the entire therapeutic repertoire for
helping patients deal with the challenges and threats of overwhelming
stress. An individual's reaction to stress is the result of a number of
factors, including age, health, personality issues, prior experience
with stressful events, emotional support, resources, belief systems, and
underlying biological or genetic strengths or vulnerabilities. Traumatic
events are common and varied and can be personal, such as the death of a
loved one, sexual assault, the experience of being robbed, or
involvement in a traffic accident. Other types of trauma, such as
natural disasters or terrorist attacks, may involve large numbers of
individuals, including persons not on the scene. The intensity and type
of traumatic event is important, as is an individual's coping ability.
At times, a series of traumatic events may produce a crisis that a
single event would not have provoked. For example, a series of losses
might result in a crisis that did not occur after the first few losses.
Losses include death; separation; illness; financial loss; and loss of
employment, function, or status. The distinction between crisis
intervention and psychotherapy is often blurred because the approaches
may overlap in technique and length of treatment. Crisis intervention is
generally expected to involve one to three contacts, whereas the
duration of brief psychotherapy can extend from a few visits to 20 or
more sessions. In this chapter, the term crisis intervention is also
used for crisis-related treatment lasting longer than just a few
sessions. This more inclusive form of crisis therapy is based on a
number of different treatments, including dynamic supportive,
cognitive-behavioral, humanistic, family, and systems approaches, as
well as the use of medication when indicated. Systems approaches can be
broad and can encompass actions such as working with and referral to
social service agencies, clergy, mobile crisis units, suicide hotlines,
and law enforcement agencies. In recent years, the focus of crisis
intervention has been on emergency management and prevention through the
use of various forms of debriefing.

Evaluation According to Caplan (1961), ego assessment is key in the
evaluation of an individual in a crisis situation. The evaluation
consists of 1) examining the individual's capacity to deal with stress,
maintain ego structure and equilibrium, and deal with reality, and 2)
assessing problem-solving and coping abilities. The evaluation of an
individual in a crisis situation should be thorough and systematic but
should also essentially be completed within the first session. A timely
evaluation is critical because it enables the therapist to develop a
case formulation and treatment plan and initiate treatment immediately.
Even the evaluation session itself should be therapeutic to assist the
patient in crisis. The evaluation should follow the process outlined in
Chapter 3, "Assessment, Case Formulation, and Goal Setting," but also
should focus on the traumatic situation, the precipitating event, and
any possible danger the patient might pose to himself or herself or to
others. The individual's experience of the trauma, including perceptions
and feelings, and whether the person was a victim of or a witness to the
traumatic event is important. The

therapist should assess 1) the individual's current affect, anxiety
level, and sense of hopefulness and 2) the way in which he or she
attempts to deal with the trauma. The following vignette illustrates the
evaluation process in a broad-based, supportive psychotherapy--crisis
intervention approach (see Video Vignette 5, Session 1, available at
www.appi.org/Winston). The vignette includes excerpts from four sessions
that began 6 months following the 2001 World Trade Center attack.

Video Vignette 5: Crisis Intervention

Session 1 William is a 44-year-old police officer with anxiety,
depressive feelings, an inability to work, and difficulty enjoying
anything about his life. He is tall, muscular, and physically imposing.
In his first session, William reveals that he recently had a traumatic
experience. THERAPIST: So what's troubling you? WILLIAM: I've just been
having all kinds of problems in my life. I can't work; I can't sleep; I
just don't enjoy anything anymore (responds with multiple complaints).
THERAPIST: So you're having trouble working and sleeping, and you're not
finding any enjoyment in your life. How long have you been having these
difficulties? (summarizes and attempts to find out when the patient's
difficulties began) WILLIAM: It's been going on for about 6 months, but
it's gotten worse over the last couple of months, I'd say. THERAPIST: I
see that your problems began 6 months ago. What was happening at that
time? (begins to focus on the beginning of the episode of illness)
WILLIAM: Well, 9/11 happened. I was sent down there right at the
beginning with three other policemen. It was terrible. I still can't
believe what happened (begins to talk about the traumatic events that
occurred on September 11, 2001). THERAPIST: Well, you know it is
important that we try to go into as much detail as we can (attempts to
get details of the traumatic event and its effect on the patient). I
know it might be difficult for you, but can you tell me what happened
when you were at the World Trade Center? (empathic) WILLIAM: We got down
there. I was told to wait outside, and the other guys went in. They
never came out . . . . I should have been there with them \[begins to
cry\] (is filled with emotion and perhaps feelings of guilt). THERAPIST:
I can see that this is very difficult for you (responds in an empathic
manner). WILLIAM: Yeah. I was told to stay outside and monitor traffic,
to make sure that no civilians got into the buildings. THERAPIST: So you
were outside, and they went in . . . and then what happened? WILLIAM:
Well, I was standing there just looking up, and I was stunned . . . . I
saw people jumping. THERAPIST: Oh my God! That must have been so
frightening (responds with emotion and in an empathic manner).

WILLIAM: Yeah . . . I saw a man and a woman . . . . They were holding
hands . . . . They were jumping \[begins to sob\] (gives further
information). THERAPIST: I'm so sorry you went through such a terrible
ordeal. What a horror! I'm very, very sorry (responds with emotion and
in an empathic manner). WILLIAM: That was only the first part of it.
Then all of a sudden, the buildings began to shake and then---I couldn't
believe it---one building started to come down, and I was buried. And
all of a sudden, I looked up, and I saw my wife and my son holding hands
and smiling and waving at me . . . . I thought I was dead. THERAPIST: So
you were buried, and you saw your wife and your son. You thought you
were dead. How did you get through that experience? (responds with a
clarification, tracking, and admiration, and continues exploring)
WILLIAM: At first I was completely paralyzed. I couldn't reason. My mind
was totally confused. I felt like a mummy. I didn't move right away.
THERAPIST: And then what happened? WILLIAM: I reached for my eyes, and I
started to pull the stuff out of my eyes and out of my ears, and I stood
up and I realized I was actually alive. I don't know how I got out. I
saw a woman, and she was on her knees, and she had blood coming out of
her forehead. I picked her up, and I took her to a rescue area. Then I
went back in and found another man, and I carried him out also. (Despite
his horrendous ordeal, the patient behaved in a heroic manner.)
THERAPIST: So you helped rescue two people! After everything you'd gone
through, you rescued two people! (praises and expresses admiration for
his heroic behavior) WILLIAM: Yes, but I . . . the guys I came with . .
. they never got out. I should have been there with them. I keep
thinking about it. (Despite his heroic behavior and the therapist's
praise and admiration, the patient indicates that he feels guilty about
not going in with the other policemen.) THERAPIST: You were a hero---and
yet you still believe that you should have been there with them. Losing
three fellow officers must have been very devastating for you (praises
the patient and begins to address the issue of his surviving while his
fellow officers all died). This vignette illustrates part of the process
of evaluating a patient who is in a crisis situation and has a traumatic
stress disorder. In the remainder of the evaluation, the therapist
explores William's guilt about staying behind while others went in, his
level of anxiety, and the extent of his depression. William's current
family situation is examined, as well as his history. The following
information emerges. William has been extremely anxious and tearful
following his traumatic experience. He has been pacing back and forth in
his home and thinking constantly about what happened to him on September
11, 2001. He has startle reactions to loud noises and has flashbacks
about the building collapsing, people jumping, and seeing his wife and
son. William has nightmares and thus avoids sleep. He can no longer
concentrate, has little energy, feels helpless, and no longer enjoys
anything in his life. He has been unable to return to work and tries to
avoid anything that might remind him of September 11. His previous
performance at work was quite good, and he was decorated on several
occasions for heroism. William grew up in a middle-class family and had
a good relationship with his mother. When he was 15 years old, his
father died. William's relationship with his father had been difficult
and filled with conflict, which resulted in mixed feelings toward his
father. These feelings did not resolve when his father was dying, and
they may have played a role in William's emphasis on bodybuilding and on
presenting a strong manly image. The therapist concludes that William
has posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Before the trauma, William was
functioning at a high level and had good coping skills despite
unresolved problems with his father. At present,

his coping skills are no longer adequate, but he has a supportive spouse
and appears to be motivated for psychotherapy. The treatment goals,
formulated with William, include amelioration of his symptoms and a
return to work. The treatment plan includes development of a supportive,
positive therapeutic relationship at the onset of treatment, followed by
work on symptom reduction with the use of exposure therapy, along with
cognitive restructuring. Medication for anxiety and depression, such as
a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, may also be indicated. As
treatment progresses, a major focus will be to help William return to
work as soon as possible.

Session 2 William has completed his first session of supportive
psychotherapy crisis intervention. In addition, treatment with a
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor has been started, with the dose
gradually being increased to a therapeutic level during the course of
treatment. The next two sessions are primarily directed at forming a
secure and positive therapeutic alliance through the use of supportive
interventions. Part of William's second session follows. WILLIAM: My
wife told me that I don't bother with her anymore, that I just ignore
her---but I don't feel like talking about anything, doing anything . . .
. I just don't feel like talking (begins with a complaint from his wife
rather than continuing to discuss the traumatic event---possibly a
defensive move). THERAPIST: You know last week at our first meeting, we
explored what happened to you on that terrible day of 9/11, and
something about your past life, and a bit concerning your relationship
with your wife and son, and maybe today we can go into your current
relationship with Cathy more in-depth (chooses to address the patient's
current issue with his wife to build a therapeutic relationship before
going back to the traumatic event, which he may not be ready for at the
current time; presents agenda). WILLIAM: Well, Cathy comes over to me
and tries to talk to me, to get me started talking, but I don't feel
like talking; it's still too difficult (indicates that he is
overwhelmed, which may have implications for his feelings about talking
to the therapist). THERAPIST: OK. So it's really hard for you to talk,
and I understand this. But perhaps there are some things that would be
easier for you to talk about (responds in an empathic manner and asks
the patient to focus on areas that are less painful, anxiety provoking,
and conflictual). WILLIAM: It is really hard to talk about 9/11 . . . .
I like to talk about my son. I guess some things around the house. I
like to do some gardening. THERAPIST: So you could talk to Cathy about
those things---about the house, your son, and so forth. Can you give me
an example of what you might feel comfortable talking with Cathy about?
(always look for concrete examples) The therapist has recognized that
William is having difficulty talking at home and is possibly having
difficulty talking with the therapist. However, because William is
talking spontaneously, the therapist has decided not to address the
therapeutic relationship and instead has begun to focus on concrete
areas that William can discuss with his wife. Focusing on concrete areas
helps to reduce anxiety, which is important in both supportive
psychotherapy and crisis intervention. WILLIAM: Cathy wants Billy to go
to sleep-away camp. I don't know---he's not much of an athlete, but he
does like to play the saxophone. I kind of think it would be better if
he just stayed home (indicates his wish to have his son at home with
him). THERAPIST: Could it be that you disagree with Cathy because you
would really like Billy to stay home with you? (clarification, expressed
tentatively) WILLIAM: I do like having him around (ignores his conflict
with his wife and focuses on his son).

THERAPIST: Yeah. So maybe I would be correct in saying that you want
Billy to be with you, but you find it difficult to speak to Cathy about
this directly? (using a supportive approach, brings the patient back to
his conflict with his wife; requests feedback) WILLIAM: That makes
sense. I just can't be clear about what it is that I want, because I
just really don't know (agrees but indicates that he becomes passive and
indecisive with his wife). THERAPIST: It sounds like you would like to
have Billy home this summer, but it's hard for you to be direct with
Cathy, so you hang back and yet get annoyed with her. Is this correct?
Do you agree with that? (interprets the patient's wish to have his son
home and his defensive posture of passivity and distraction accompanied
by annoyance with his wife; again employs the supportive technique of
asking for feedback so that the patient is not overwhelmed) The
therapist has asked for a specific example of William's difficulty in
communicating with his wife. Obtaining specific concrete examples from
patients is always preferable to leaving things on a general level. When
patients generalize, it is difficult to understand what they have in
mind. In addition, it is not helpful to patients to remain in a confused
or unclear state. Having understood that William wishes to have his son
at home, the therapist has been able to clarify this wish with William.
The therapist has used a number of supportive approaches. Instead of
addressing the transference, the therapist has continued to concentrate
on William's current life and his difficulty with his wife, Cathy. In
supportive psychotherapy, the transference generally is not addressed
unless it is negative. Instead, the therapist concentrates on current
issues in the patient's life and on the real relationship with the
therapist. Clarification is used as a supportive technique because it
does not place demands or expectations on the patient. In addition, the
therapist has been able to link William's avoidance and annoyance with
Cathy to his wish to keep Billy home for the summer and not have him go
off to camp as Cathy wishes. The pursuit of affect is generally avoided
in supportive psychotherapy and has been avoided in this session.
However, William's emotional experiences resulting from the World Trade
Center tragedy will need to be addressed when exposure techniques are
used later in therapy. The therapist has determined that a good
therapeutic relationship was established during the first three sessions
(session 3 is not shown). Therefore, exposure therapy within a
supportive framework can now be attempted to enable the patient to work
through his traumatic experience, as shown in the following sessions 4
and 5.

Session 4 THERAPIST: William, I thought that we might go back and
explore what happened to you on 9/11. If we can look at your experience
together, it should help you to better deal with it and move on with
your life. How do you feel about doing that now? (The therapist asks for
the patient's agreement to explore his traumatic experience. Asking for
agreement constitutes the supportive technique of agenda setting.)
WILLIAM: If it can help. I think I'm more ready. THERAPIST: It's good
that you feel ready and that we're able to proceed. Let's go back to
that day when you went to the World Trade Center. OK? (praises the
patient and continues to involve him as a partner in planning the
discussion) WILLIAM: OK. THERAPIST: You and your fellow officers were
sent to the World Trade Center about when? (begins a detailed
exploration of the patient's traumatic experience) WILLIAM: In the
morning, after the second plane hit, we drove up. Therapist: And as you
were driving up, what were you experiencing?

WILLIAM: The fires were just raging. We knew by then that it was an
attack. We met the sergeant, and he told me I should stay outside to
keep people out, as I said before. THERAPIST: What was it like for you,
remaining outside while the others went in? (is aware of the patient's
not wanting to remain behind and his guilt feelings about being the only
survivor from his group) WILLIAM: I wanted to go in with them.
THERAPIST: So how did you feel? (For the first time the therapist asks
about the patient's feelings. Exposure therapy relies on the patient's
experiencing and exploring feelings, in a somewhat controlled fashion,
during the session.) WILLIAM: Standing around, I felt useless. I was
annoyed. I didn't want to stay behind. THERAPIST: That's understandable,
but you were ordered to stay behind (absolution as a supportive
technique). The therapist has emphasized that William was ordered to
stay behind because during the evaluation session, William indicated
that he felt guilty and conflicted about staying outside. The therapist
is preparing the groundwork for addressing William's cognitive
distortion of this issue and his possible survivor guilt. The session
continues with a recounting of the traumatic events that followed.
WILLIAM: I was standing there in the street. Then all of a sudden, I saw
people jumping from the building. Some of them were on fire. THERAPIST:
That's horrible! What were you feeling? (asks William for his feelings
in an empathic manner to promote exploration and desensitization)
WILLIAM: It was hard to look . . .\[begins to sob\]. I couldn't believe
it. Then I saw a man and a woman jumping, and they were holding hands!
\[becomes visibly shaken and anxious\] THERAPIST: Who wouldn't be
devastated, shaken, and tearful? (clarifies in an empathic manner using
the supportive technique of normalizing) The therapist has been
obtaining a detailed account of William's traumatic experience and has
also been monitoring his level of anxiety to ensure that it remains
within manageable limits. If a patient's anxiety level gets too high,
the therapist can slow down the account and initiate anxiety-lowering
interventions, such as having the patient engage in progressive muscular
relaxation and deep breathing or meditation. In addition to these
techniques, which are generally used in exposure therapy, supportive
interventions such as reassurance can also be used. The session
continues with a detailed exploration of William's experiences of that
day, including the collapse of the buildings, his near burial in the
debris, his hallucination of his wife and son, and his belief that he
was dead. The therapist elicits these experiences in great detail and in
an empathic manner, with careful monitoring of William's anxiety level.
During the exploration of William's vision of his wife and son---the
vision in which he saw them holding hands and waving good-bye to
him---William becomes visibly shaken and anxious because at that time he
believed he was dead. The therapist stops the exploration and begins
anxiety-lowering techniques of meditation with deep breathing and the
use of a mantra.

Session 5 Session 5 begins with a discussion of the patient's anxiety
level during the interval between sessions. This information is
important because the aim in supportive therapy is to keep anxiety level
as low as possible. William indicates that he has not been experiencing
a significant amount of anxiety between sessions. THERAPIST: Do you
think you feel ready now to continue exploring what happened to you on
that day on 9/11? (checks to see if the patient is ready to continue
exposure therapy; again uses the supportive technique of agenda setting)

WILLIAM: Yeah . . . I can keep going. THERAPIST: You're very strong, and
you have a lot of resilience. So, let's pick up where we left off: after
you saw your wife and son. Is that OK? (offers praise---a supportive
intervention---and then resumes exploration of the patient's traumatic
experience) WILLIAM: Yeah, I began to realize that I wasn't actually
dead, and I started to push away all the stuff off me . . . out of my
face, ears, and eyes. It was all over me (continues without much
difficulty). THERAPIST: So as you began to realize you were not dead,
how did you feel? WILLIAM: I certainly felt some relief . . . . I
thought, thank God---thank God, I'm all right. Then I got up and I saw a
woman on her knees. She was bleeding from her scalp, blood was coming
down her face. All I thought to do was help her up and carry her out to
the rescue area. THERAPIST: Yeah. So despite your being battered and
even thinking you were dead just a few minutes earlier, you were still
able to pull a woman out of the rubble and rescue her. That's amazing!
(offers praise and expresses admiration---both useful supportive
interventions, provided that the praise and admiration are clearly
reality based and deserved) The therapist goes on to explore the details
of William's next few hours after he picked himself up from the rubble.
These details include rescuing a man, going to the hospital to have
lacerations sutured, and finding out that the three policemen who went
into the building had died. All these experiences are fully explored
during the next few sessions, until William can talk about his
experience without too much anxiety or overwhelming sadness. William's
treatment involves the use of exposure therapy in the context of a
supportive relationship. The therapist is able to take William through
his traumatic experience in a slow and detailed manner over the course
of several meetings. The therapist monitors William's anxiety level so
that he is not overwhelmed. If William begins to become overly aroused,
the therapist stops the exposure work and uses a number of supportive
techniques, such as praise, reassurance, and relaxation therapy along
with meditation. At the same time, a great deal of work is required to
restructure William's excessive feelings of guilt about being the only
survivor of his group of four policemen. The therapist challenges
William's self-blaming cognitions to help him reframe his idea that he
should have been inside the World Trade Center with his fellow officers
(cognitive restructuring). The therapist points out that William was
ordered to remain outside the building and helps him understand the
concept of survivor guilt when she states, "Many people who survive
tragedies as you did feel guilty." After 10 sessions, William gradually
improves and is able to return to work and to feel comfortable with his
wife and son. He still has episodes of anxiety and sadness, which he is
able to manage, and he continues taking medication. He has two follow-up
sessions, 1 month later and then 3 months later, to prevent relapse.

Treatment The therapeutic approaches used in crisis intervention are
primarily those of brief supportive psychotherapy, consisting of
maintenance of focus and a high therapist activity level; use of clearly
established goals, a time limit, and a number of supportive and
cognitive-behavioral interventions; and, most importantly, establishment
of a solid therapeutic alliance. A number of systematic approaches to
crisis intervention have been described (James and Gilliland 2001;
Puryear 1979; Roberts 2000). Systematic approaches to crisis
intervention include stress assessment, patient safety, establishment of
rapport and hopefulness, supportive interventions, and positive actions
and plans. The importance of assessment was discussed in the previous
section, "Evaluation." Patient safety is part of the assessment process
and should be monitored throughout therapy if the individual's safety is
in question (see the section "Suicide" later in this chapter).
Establishing rapport and promoting hopefulness are important in all
forms of psychotherapy and are major factors in fostering the
therapeutic alliance. The major elements of the alliance

(Gaston 1990) are the patient's affective bond with the therapist, the
patient's ability to work purposefully and collaboratively with the
therapist, the therapist's empathic understanding and involvement, and
the agreement of patient and therapist on the goals and tasks of
therapy. The use of supportive or empathic interventions helps promote
the alliance, making it possible to use exposure techniques to help work
through the patient's reaction to trauma. Positive actions and plans
provide the patient with structure and improve self-esteem and hope for
the future. Video Vignette 5 continues with sessions 2, 4, and 5 with
William, the police officer with PTSD resulting from the events of
September 11, 2001. These sessions illustrate the treatment process in a
broad-based supportive psychotherapy crisis intervention approach.

Treatment Approaches for PTSD In this chapter we have described the
treatment of PTSD using supportive psychotherapy combined with exposure
therapy and cognitive restructuring, along with the anxiety-reducing
techniques of progressive muscular relaxation and meditation. A number
of other treatment approaches have been used in PTSD with good results.
These include cognitive therapy (Foa et al. 2005); eye movement
desensitization and reprocessing (van der Kolk et al. 2007);
interpersonal therapy (Markowitz et al. 2015); mantram repetition
(Bormann et al. 2018); and the use of virtual reality for patients with
treatment-resistant PTSD, especially military veterans (van Gelderen et
al. 2018). Cusack et al. (2016) completed a systematic review and
meta-analysis assessing the efficacy and comparative effectiveness of a
number of these therapies and found that exposure therapy had the
greatest strength of evidence for effectiveness. Unfortunately, most
psychotherapy approaches do not combine different treatments to form an
integrated psychotherapy. The treatment of William's PTSD used an
integrated psychotherapy approach combining supportive psychotherapy,
exposure treatment, cognitive restructuring, and anxiety-reducing
techniques. Supportive psychotherapy easily lends itself to an
integrated, multifaceted psychotherapy.

Suicide The prediction of suicide is problematic because there is no
reliable way of determining suicidal risk in a given individual within a
given time frame (Chiles et al. 2019; Fawcett et al. 1993; Pokorny
1983). Two major problems occur when attempts are made to predict
suicide: 1) too many false-positive cases are identified and 2) many
instances of completed suicide are overlooked. Nevertheless, more than
90% of completed suicides occur in individuals with a recent major
psychiatric illness (Fawcett et al. 1993). The most common diagnoses are
major depression, chronic alcoholism and drug abuse, schizophrenia,
borderline personality disorder, bipolar disorder, and eating disorders.
Retrospective case review studies of completed suicides suggest
heightened suicide risk in the context of a recent traumatic loss, such
as a breakup in an important relationship, being fired from a job, or
losing status or a place of belonging (Joiner 2005). A careful and
thorough assessment of the suicidal patient is critical to determine the
diagnosis and the proper treatment approach. Crisis intervention
approaches, generally accompanied by the use of medication, often play
an important role in the treatment of suicidal individuals.

Assessment of Risk Suicidal thoughts and behaviors are so common that it
is essential to ask all patients about suicidal ideas and attempts. A
history of suicide attempts increases a person's risk for completing
suicide. Individuals who have well-defined plans to kill themselves are
at greater risk than individuals with vague or poorly formulated plans.
When a suicidal person has the means to end his or her life and has
great familiarity with the means (e.g., owns and uses a firearm), the
patient is at greater and often significant risk. The presence of strong
family support or a significant other can have a mitigating effect on
suicidal risk. Hopelessness, pessimism, aggression, impulsiveness, and
psychic anxiety are poor prognostic signs. Another factor to be
considered, as noted earlier, is the loss of a significant other through
separation, divorce, or death. Paradoxically, it was found that more
than half of patients who died by suicide had consulted clinicians
within 1 year before death and had denied suicidal thoughts or indicated
that they rarely occurred (Clark and Fawcett 1992). Often, these same
patients communicated directly or indirectly to a close friend or
relative that they were thinking of ending their lives. This information
suggests that physicians should routinely question close relatives and
friends of patients who may be at risk for suicide. Fawcett et
al. (1990, 1993) divided suicidal risk into acute and chronic
categories. Individuals who are at acute risk often have severe anxiety,
thoughts about negative events occurring, insomnia, anhedonia,
agitation, and alcohol abuse (Busch et al. 2003). Persons at more
chronic risk have more typical risk factors, such as suicidal ideation
and plans and a history of suicide attempts. The risk of suicide is
often greatest during the week after hospital admission and the month
after discharge and during the early period of recovery from a
psychiatric disorder (Hawton 1987). For a comprehensive review and
discussion of imminent suicide risk, see the book The Suicidal Crisis: A
Clinical Guide to the Assessment of Imminent Suicide Risk by Igor
Galynker (2017).

Treatment Suicidal thoughts represent a form of problem-solving by
patients in tremendous and unrelenting psychological pain. Acknowledging
the patient's pain, helping him or her to find ways to reduce the burden
of pain, and assisting the patient in identifying alternative solutions
to suicide are important tasks in establishing a therapeutic alliance
and implementing treatment during the suicidal crisis (Chiles et
al. 2019). The therapist should explore the patient's perspective and
life story along several considerations: the patient's belief in suicide
as a solution to a particular problem; the patient's past history of
suicidal behavior and its impact on others; the patient's ability to
tolerate significant pain; the patient's reasons for not committing
suicide, should this be possible; and the patient's perceptions of a
future that could be positive (Chiles et al. 2019). Therapists,
especially those who are very sensitive to the inner experiences of
their patients and those who are early in their training or clinical
practice, may feel overwhelmed by the suffering felt and expressed by
suicidal patients. To be effective in working in crisis settings with
suicidal patients, it is very important that therapists recognize their
own feelings

and ensure that they are able to respond in an open and constructive
manner that creates physical and emotional safety for the patient. Once
an individual has been determined to be acutely suicidal,
hospitalization may be indicated. If hospitalization is not feasible or
not absolutely necessary, the therapist should enlist the aid of
significant others who can spend time with the patient and not leave the
patient alone. The therapist needs to be available for contact either by
the patient or by the patient's family or friends and should provide
them with information regarding 24-hour hotlines and the nearest
emergency department. Medication is often necessary in the short term to
relieve the patient's anxiety, agitation, or depression. The frequency
of treatment sessions will vary depending on the patient's needs. Some
patients may need to be seen daily for ongoing support and structure.
Accordingly, it is important that the same clinician see the patient
throughout the period of crisis intervention. Important issues on which
to focus are patient hopelessness and pessimism. Supportive approaches
involving praise, reassurance, and cognitive restructuring are often
useful to help enhance self-esteem by counteracting negative or
distorted cognitions about the self. As always, establishment and
maintenance of a positive therapeutic alliance are essential.

Crisis Intervention Versus Psychotherapy As stated in the section
"History and Theory" at the beginning of this chapter, crisis
intervention theory is based on a number of psychological approaches,
including dynamic supportive psychotherapy, cognitive-behavioral
therapy, humanistic treatments, family therapy, and systems approaches.
Crisis intervention is time limited and is not focused on psychological
insight, personality issues, or psychiatric disorders. An individual
receiving crisis intervention is generally in transition or has lost his
or her equilibrium because of a traumatic experience that has disrupted
his or her life. Patients vary in their resilience and sources of
support. The objective of crisis intervention is to help the individual
deal with the stressful period, achieve stability, and return to his or
her precrisis level of functioning or, if the patient needs further
treatment, move on to the next level of care. Crisis intervention
differs from psychotherapy in a number of ways (outlined in Table 7--
1). Crisis treatment is given as soon as possible and in close proximity
to the stressor or traumatic event. It is time limited, and the
therapist is active, supportive, and directive. As in supportive
psychotherapy (as opposed to expressive psychotherapy), the focus is on
the here and now rather than on the past or on transference issues.
Table 7--1. Crisis intervention versus psychotherapy

Context Timing

Crisis intervention

Psychotherapy

Prevention Immediate; close temporal relationship to stressor or acute
decompensation

Reparation Delayed; distant from stressor or acute decompensation

Crisis intervention

Psychotherapy

Location

Close proximity to stressor or acute Safe, secure environment
decompensation; anywhere needed

Duration Provider's role

Typically one to three contacts Active, directive

Strategic foci

Conscious processes, environmental Conscious and unconscious sources
stressors or factors of pathogenesis

As long as needed or desired Guiding, collaborative, consultative

Temporal focus Here and now Patient Symptom reduction, reduction of
expectations impairment, directive support Goals

Present and past Symptom reduction, reduction of impairment, personal
growth, guidance, collaboration Stabilization, reduction of Symptom
reduction, reduction of impairment, a return to function impairment,
correction of or a shift to next level of care pathogenesis, personal
growth, personal reconstruction

Source. Aguilera et al. 1970; Artiss 1963; Everly and Mitchell 1998;
Koss and Shiang 1994; Salmon 1919; Sandoval 1985; Skaikeu 1990; Spiegel
and Classen 1995; Wilkinson and Vera 1985. Reprinted from Everly GS Jr,
Mitchell JT: Critical Incident Stress Management (CISM): A New Era and
Standard of Care in Crisis Intervention, 2nd Edition. Ellicott City, MD,
Chevron Publishing, 1999. Used with permission.

Table 7--2. Core components of critical incident stress management
Intervention

Timing

Activation

Goals

Precrisis preparation

Precrisis

Driven by Setting of crisis expectations, anticipation improved coping,
stress management

Demobilization and staff consultation (rescuers)

Shift Event driven disengagement

Recipients Individuals, groups, organizations

Presentation of Organizations, information, large groups consultation,
psychological decompression, stress management

Intervention

Timing

Crisis management Anytime briefing postcrisis (civilians, schools,
businesses)

Activation

Goals

Recipients

Event driven

Presentation of Organizations, information, large groups consultation,
psychological decompression, stress management Symptom Small groups
mitigation, possible closure, triage

Defusing

Postcrisis (within Usually 12 hours) symptom driven

Critical incident stress debriefing

Postcrisis (1--10 Usually Facilitation of Individuals, small days; mass
symptom psychological groups disasters: 3--4 driven; closure, weeks)
sometimes symptom event mitigation, driven triage Anytime, Symptom
Symptom Individuals anywhere driven mitigation, possible return to
function, referral if needed

Individual crisis intervention

Family crisis intervention

Anytime

Symptom or event driven

Fostering of Families support and communication

Community and Anytime organizational consultation

Symptom or event driven

Symptom mitigation, possible closure, referral if needed

Pastoral crisis intervention

Usually symptom driven

"Crisis of faith" Individuals, mitigation, use families, of spiritual
groups tools to assist in recovery

Anytime

Organizations

Intervention

Timing

Activation

Goals

Recipients

Follow-up and referral

Anytime

Usually symptom driven

Mental status Individuals, assessment, a families shift to higher level
of care if needed

Source. Adapted from Everly GS Jr, Mitchell JT: Critical Incident Stress
Management (CISM): A New Era and Standard of Care in Crisis
Intervention, 2nd Edition. Ellicott City, MD, Chevron Publishing, 1999.
Used with permission.

Critical Incident Stress Management Critical incident stress management
(CISM) was originally developed for use with emergency workers; however,
its scope has been expanded to include anyone exposed to severe trauma
(Everly and Mitchell 1999; Mitchell and Everly 2003). CISM is a
comprehensive and integrated crisis intervention approach for
individuals and groups. The components of CISM are summarized in Table
7--2 and include the following: precrisis preparation involving stress
management education and training for individuals and groups of
professional and emergency workers; briefings on disasters and terrorist
or other large-scale incidents for rescue workers and civilians;
defusing (i.e., immediate small-group discussion) to ensure assessment
and triage and to mitigate symptoms; critical incident stress debriefing
(CISD; Mitchell and Everly 1996) to reduce impairments from traumatic
stress, facilitate closure, and mitigate symptoms for individuals and
groups; individual or family crisis intervention; and follow-up and
referral for further assessment and treatment. A typical CISD approach
after a traumatic event involves a group of victims who undergo the
interventions, listed in Table 7--2, in a single 1- to 3-hour session.
The efficacy of a singlesession debriefing in preventing PTSD or other
disorders came into question in 2002. In a meta-analysis of
single-session debriefing within 1 month after trauma, van Emmerik et
al. (2002) found that CISD interventions do not improve natural recovery
from psychological trauma. However, single-session approaches of this
sort may help reduce immediate distress and facilitate referral of
patients for further treatment. Positive outcomes have been achieved
with cognitive-behavioral treatments that were administered within the
first month of the traumatic incident and that involved education,
exposure, and cognitive restructuring (Bryant et al. 1999; Foa 1997; Foa
et al. 1991).

Conclusion In this chapter, we provided a brief history and the
theoretical background of crisis intervention. Individuals exposed to
severe trauma can react in a number of ways, and some of these reactions
necessitate crisis intervention. A thorough evaluation of a patient
presenting in crisis is always necessary. Treatment approaches vary
depending on the needs of the patient but generally include supportive
interventions, exposure therapy, cognitive restructuring, and
anxiety-reducing techniques. A patient's suicidal thoughts represent a
form of problemsolving---a way of escaping tremendous and unrelenting
psychological pain. Therapists must

pay particular attention to establishing and maintaining a positive
therapeutic alliance. Acknowledging and lessening the patient's pain and
finding alternative solutions to suicide are important tasks in
establishing a therapeutic alliance and implementing treatment during a
suicidal crisis. The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, in New
York and Washington, D.C.; the 2010 Haiti earthquake; and the increased
number of terrorist attacks, tornadoes, hurricanes, and floods in recent
years, as well as battlefield injuries, have made both the general
public and mental health professionals more aware of these issues and
the need for crisis intervention services.

Applicability to Special Populations

8

Severe Mental Illness As originally conceived, supportive psychotherapy
was indicated for patients with severe mental illness, as well as for
other patients for whom expressive treatment was not indicated. The
original indication for supportive psychotherapy was treatment at the
extreme supportive end of the supportive-expressive psychotherapy
continuum described in Chapter 1, "Evolution of the Concept of
Supportive Psychotherapy." This form of supportive treatment was focused
primarily on improving deficient ego functions, reducing anxiety, and
preventing downward social drift due to loss of adaptive skills and
increasing isolation. In addition to offering the patient an
understanding, supportive relationship, this approach contained many of
the following techniques: advice, reassurance, exhortation, praise,
encouragement, lending ego, and environmental manipulation. Supporting
defenses was the default mode, confrontation was rare, and
interpretation did not occur. In current practice, even for patients who
are quite impaired because of severe mental illness, therapists should
strive for a balance between supportive and expressive elements in
supportive treatment. Depending on several factors---including the
degree of stabilization after acute exacerbation of illness, the
strength of the therapeutic alliance (see Chapter 6, "The Therapeutic
Relationship"), and the patient's treatment goals--- confrontation and,
at times, interpretation can be useful techniques in supportive
psychotherapy. Cognitive learning strategies, such as teaching, using
slogans, modeling, and giving anticipatory guidance, are commonly used.
The treatment components of psychoeducation and skills training, which
have been framed as independent interventions, are consistent with

the model of supportive treatment and are particularly useful in
supportive psychotherapy for chronic mental illness.

Schizophrenia Schizophrenia is the prototypical severe mental illness.
When treating a patient who has schizophrenia, the therapist provides
education about the illness, promotes medication compliance, facilitates
reality testing, encourages problem solving by the patient, and
reinforces adaptive behavior with praise (Lamberti and Herz 1995).
Gunderson et al. (1984) demonstrated that patients with schizophrenia
have better treatment retention and better outcome when given weekly
supportive treatment rather than more intensive expressive treatment.
Praise is a form of reinforcement that can support the patient's
selfesteem and motivation for adaptive change. As described in detail in
Chapter 4, "Techniques," praise is an important esteem-building
technique. However, praise builds self-esteem only when the praised
behavior is considered praiseworthy by the patient. Therefore, the
therapist must understand what the patient will find worthy of praise.
The therapist also must attempt to understand what the patient finds
rewarding so that these incentives can be enlisted to provide positive
feedback. Determining what the patient finds rewarding is especially
important in schizophrenia and at the left side of the psychopathology
continuum, where positive reinforcement is an important factor in
maintaining the therapeutic alliance and motivating engagement in
treatment. Positive reinforcement is helpful for patients with
schizophrenia because they commonly have neurocognitive impairments;
negative symptoms, such as apathy, anhedonia, and poor motivation; and
poor insight. A reinforcer can be a favorite food, activity, person, or
social event that increases the strength or frequency of the patient's
contingent behavior. Properly assessed and delivered reinforcers
increase patients' skill acquisition, achievement of goals, and
self-esteem (Lecomte et al. 2000). External rewards that patients value
may be helpful in engaging and maintaining these patients in treatment.
Rewards can include subway tokens, certificates of accomplishment, a
celebratory event, and gift

certificates. Administration of accurate praise, as described throughout
this book, is an effective and inexpensive reward.

Psychoeducation Typically, supportive psychotherapy for patients with
severe mental illness includes psychoeducation about the illness, its
trajectory, and its treatment. The literature suggests that educating
patients about schizophrenia or substance dependence reinforces
psychosocial rehabilitation (Goldman and Quinn 1988). Most patients
generally find learning new information to be supportive. When provided
in an empathic way, psychoeducation offers the patient a new cognitive
structure on which to base more realistic decision making.
Psychoeducation also gives the patient an explanation of or rationale
for symptoms and suffering; giving such explanations or rationales may
also bolster the patient's self-esteem. In addition, concrete
information about the illness arms the patient with practical knowledge
that can help improve his or her ability to cope with chronic
illness---an adaptive skill. For example, early in an exacerbation of
the manic phase of bipolar disorder, the patient frequently loses the
capacity to understand that his or her judgment is impaired by mania.
During a remission, the psychiatrist can teach the patient that sleeping
even 1 hour less than usual for 2 nights in a row may be an early sign
of relapse into mania. This information gives the patient an opportunity
to demonstrate some adaptive mastery over the illness and to act before
an exacerbation can impair judgment and destroy the chance to "step on
the brakes." For example, when the symptom of impaired sleep occurs and
the patient contacts the psychiatrist for a dose escalation of antimanic
medication, the patient will likely experience increased self-efficacy
and self-esteem. These positive effects will occur as a result of the
patient's sense of increased competence in anticipating potentially
damaging future events and will strengthen the therapeutic alliance.

Supporting Adaptive Skills To help patients who have impairments in
interpersonal functioning secondary to severe mental disorders such as
schizophrenia, the therapist can integrate behavioral skills training
and other cognitive-behavioral

techniques into supportive psychotherapy. The model of change in
supportive therapy is change through learning and through introjection
of or identification with an accepting, well-related therapist (Pinsker
et al. 1991). Training in social and independent living skills for
patients with severe mental illness is an approach grounded in learning
principles, wherein the therapist breaks down complex social repertoires
and models correct behavior for the patient, who repeatedly practices
the skills after learning them. After the steps are assembled, the
patient practices the complex interaction---first with the therapist,
then in the real world. The therapist uses supportive techniques, such
as behavioral goal setting, encouragement, modeling, shaping, and praise
(positive reinforcement), to teach interpersonal skills (Glynn et
al. 2002). This activity directly supports adaptive skills and builds
patients' self-esteem. Studies have demonstrated the utility of these
interventions in improving social competence (Heinssen et al. 2000;
Lauriello et al. 1999). Patients with schizophrenia have social skills
deficits, which may be a result of impaired information processing.
Skills training uses the problemsolving, repetitive, and practical
approach of supportive psychotherapy and is effective in improving basic
conversational skills, recreational skills, medication management, and
management of symptoms (Liberman et al. 1998; Smith et al. 1999). A
related cognitive-behavioral approach, relapse prevention, is discussed
in the subsection "Adaptive Skills and Relapse Prevention" later in this
chapter. At times, the clinician must balance his or her focus on
anxiety reduction as a major supportive strategy with the patient's
determination to work through a particular problem, which could increase
the patient's adaptive skills. For example, a patient might become
anxious on hearing certain information about schizophrenia from the
therapist. However, providing guidance about hearing the information and
reframing the content in an attempt to strengthen the patient's coping
skills may reduce the patient's anxiety. Having more extensive coping
strategies that use higherlevel defenses (e.g., rationalization) can
mean that the patient has a more flexible and adaptive approach to his
or her illness. At other times, when the patient signals that he or she
is experiencing too much anxiety to deal with a subject directly, it can
be useful for the therapist to attempt to "back into" discussion of the
difficult topic.

THERAPIST: So, I would like to talk to you about what you understand
about your illness. Is that OK with you? ("shows the map" before
exploring the territory) PATIENT: I guess. THERAPIST: If what I'm saying
doesn't make sense to you, please tell me, and I'll try to clarify it.
If it makes you more nervous, let me know, and we'll talk about
something else. OK? (offers anticipatory guidance about material to be
explored, gives patient permission to stop the exploration, sets a
collaborative tone, and indicates that the therapist is sensitive to the
patient's feelings) PATIENT: All right. THERAPIST: Has anyone discussed
with you what your diagnosis is? That means the medical name of the
illness that's bringing you into psychiatric treatment. PATIENT: Uh,
depression. I have depression. THERAPIST: That's what they told you?
PATIENT: I don't know . . . um, I have depression.(Patient has been told
previously that his diagnosis is schizophrenia. He is either being
evasive or using denial.) THERAPIST: Could you describe for me what the
word depression means to you? PATIENT: Yeah, I couldn't sleep, and I
don't do much. Don't feel like it. I used to do things. THERAPIST: Any
other problems, like in your thoughts or feelings? PATIENT: I have
depression (concrete, perseverative, nonelaborative answer). THERAPIST:
Are you sad a lot? People who are depressed are often sad. PATIENT: No,
not sad. I just don't feel much of anything. Tired. I don't know
(disclaims a low mood associated with depression). THERAPIST: OK. Now,
other than being tired, are there things you've been experiencing lately
that have caused you problems?

PATIENT: Huh? Like what? \[suspicious look\] THERAPIST: Well, you told
the other doctor back in your intake evaluation that you had been
thinking that somebody or maybe some group was trying to harm you, that
you saw evidence of that. Is that accurate? PATIENT: That was before. I
don't think about it now \[looks away\] (engages in distancing and
avoiding). THERAPIST: Can you tell me a little about what you were
thinking and experiencing then? (asks about patient's experience)
PATIENT: Scary, uh . . . don't want to talk about it. I don't think
about it now (focusing on persecutory delusion increases patient's
anxiety). THERAPIST: OK, I won't ask you about the details. So, now it's
not on your mind. You said it was before. Before when? I didn't
understand what you meant (moves away from past experience; asks for
clarification of patient's statement). PATIENT: You know, when I went on
the pills for depression, it got better. THERAPIST: Ah, so you don't
have those scary thoughts so much since you started taking the
medication? It's good you're taking it! (clarifies, connecting
medication and relief from delusional thinking; adds praise) PATIENT:
Yeah. That's true. THERAPIST: So, let me clarify: the medication you're
taking seems to have a good impact on scary thoughts and experiences. Is
that accurate? PATIENT: That's true \[eye contact, brightens a little\].
THERAPIST: So I guess it's a good idea to keep taking it? (ties what
patient experiences as beneficial to a motivating statement for
medication adherence) PATIENT: Yeah! And I talk to people better. They
don't seem so negative to me (validates therapist's position).

THERAPIST: So the medication helps you communicate better, too? Does
that mean you get along with people better than before? PATIENT: I keep
to myself pretty much. But I don't get into fights like I did (the
patient is more elaborative as anxiety is reduced in situ). THERAPIST:
You mean you got into physical fights? PATIENT: Only one time. Mostly
just yelling back at some of the people when I knew what they were up
to. THERAPIST: What were they up to? (asks for clarification) PATIENT:
They were trying to make me look bad---said bad things about me from
down the street \[looks away\]. Hmm, I don't think about it now (starts
to demonstrate increased anxiety, repeating his reflexive phrase).
THERAPIST: So that's better now, too? That's good. What else is better?
(goes along with the resistance; moves back to the present to reduce
anxiety) PATIENT: My walls are quiet. I sleep better. THERAPIST: How
were they noisy? PATIENT: The lady upstairs was making noise at night.
THERAPIST: What kind of noises? Like playing music too loud? Moving
furniture? PATIENT: No, uh, she would say ugly, ugly things to me. I
couldn't sleep; I'd have to stay up. THERAPIST: How would she talk to
you? PATIENT: I don't know---but it came from the wall. THERAPIST: So
you were hearing her voice telling you things you found unpleasant and
you couldn't sleep? And it's better now? (clarifies) PATIENT: Yes, I can
sleep again. THERAPIST: That must have been a terrible time for you. I'm
glad you're feeling better. What a relief that must be! (gives an
empathic response based on patient's statements) PATIENT: Uh-huh
\[smiles\].

THERAPIST: I'm going to summarize what you've told me the medication
does for you, so we're clear I have it right. It takes away scary
thoughts and experiences, takes away voices at night and helps you to
sleep, and lets you get along with people better. PATIENT: That's it.
THERAPIST: Sounds like good medicine! PATIENT: It works. THERAPIST: So
can we get back to that illness that gave you the scary thoughts and
experiences like voices, that kept you up, and that made it hard to get
along with people? (again "shows the map") PATIENT: OK. THERAPIST: The
medicine you are taking treats those symptoms of a disorder called
schizophrenia---and, as we've just talked about, treats them pretty
well: you're feeling a lot better than before. PATIENT: I don't have
that! My face didn't change. I don't attack people and drink their
blood. My face didn't change (becomes anxious and derails; reveals his
delusional fears). THERAPIST: I think maybe you're confusing an idea you
have about vampires---that maybe you saw on TV---with schizophrenia.
Vampires aren't real. Schizophrenia is, but it's a treatable mental
disorder that has exactly the symptoms you've already described to
me---symptoms that the medicine you take is good at controlling. You are
not some kind of soulless monster (reality tests, clarifies, confronts,
and reassures). PATIENT: What's going to happen to me? \[tears up\]
THERAPIST: We have better medicines and better therapies than ever
before, and I will be here and work with you so that you can improve the
quality of your life.

Family Psychoeducation When supportive treatment is used with
higher-functioning patients, environmental manipulation generally is not
employed. With more impaired patients, however, the therapist can
judiciously intervene in the patient's

environment to support continued adaptation and reduce anxiety and
stress. A clear example of this approach is family psychoeducation, in
which educating the family changes the patient's environment. Teaching
the family about the nature of the patient's disorder can help stabilize
the family members around the patient in a way that is more supportive
of the patient's recovery. Family stabilization is in contrast to the
family making the patient the focus of their disappointment, failed
expectations, criticism, disbelief, and ignorance. Such family reactions
are unlikely to help a patient better cope with chronic illness; some
family behaviors, such as high expressed emotion, are clearly associated
with exacerbation of illness (Vaughn and Leff 1976). Indeed, short-term
family intervention in families with high expressed emotion reduces
relapse rates among patients with schizophrenia (Bellack and Mueser
1993).

Personality Disorders For most therapists, the patients who are most
difficult to treat are not the sickest patients (i.e., those with
psychotic symptoms and profound impairment of ego functioning) but
rather the patients who are highly angry, demanding, suspicious, or
dependent (Horowitz and Marmar 1985). Patients with personality
disorders use pervasive, maladaptive interpersonal strategies, and their
behaviors are sometimes dangerous or frightening. Therefore, these
patients can provoke strong negative emotions in people--- including
psychiatrists, who may avoid treating patients with personality
disorders (Lewis and Appleby 1988). The treatability of this class of
disorders is contingent on several factors, including disorder severity;
the specific diagnosis; the patient's degree of involvement with
medical, social, and criminal justice systems; comorbidity; the
availability of appropriately trained staff; and the state of scientific
knowledge (Adshead 2001). Clearly, persons administering supportive
treatment to such patients must have adequate training or supervision to
deal with inevitable countertransference issues, as discussed in Chapter
6. Nonetheless, supportive psychotherapy is particularly suited to the
treatment of most personality disorders because this therapy focuses on
increasing self-esteem and adaptive skills while developing and
maintaining a strong therapeutic alliance. As described in Chapter 3,
"Assessment, Case Formulation, and

Goal Setting," the psychiatrist must conduct an assessment of the
patient that allows for a case formulation, including an explication of
ego functioning, adaptive skills, object relations, and defensive
operations. In certain clusters of personality disorders, patients
appear to make greater use of particular groups of maladaptive defenses
and defensive behaviors. For example, in the treatment of patients with
avoidant personality disorder, a major focus is on getting the patient
to develop skills to overcome passivity and fears of rejection. In
contrast, in the treatment of patients with narcissistic personality
disorder, the focus is on addressing and reducing uses of
externalization and criticism. The clinician decides at what point to
use more containing, anxiety-reducing supportive technique and when to
use more expressive technique. In particular, because clarification is
the expressive technique used most frequently in supportive
psychotherapy, within the supportive psychotherapy frame, clarification
can elucidate maladaptive constructs that contribute to the patient's
interpersonal problems and experienced loss of self-efficacy. Through
implementation of techniques focused on adaptive skills, patients may
develop a less rigid and more adaptive set of responses (Sachse and
Kramer 2018). Identifying comorbid mood and anxiety disorders is
important in patients with personality disorders. In contrast to earlier
concerns that medicating patients would deprive them of the motivation
for engagement in treatment, today it is recognized that judicious
pharmacological treatment of comorbid depression and anxiety disorders
generally acts synergistically with the patients' attempts to learn and
master new adaptive skills. In depressed patients, pharmacotherapy
reduces Cluster C personality pathology---in particular, harm avoidance,
which is associated with poor social function (Kool et al. 2003; Peselow
et al. 1994). When patients are less anxious or less depressed, they are
more willing to explore new strategies and may be better able to do so
(see Chapter 3 for an evaluation of a patient with major depressive
disorder). In a review of the effectiveness of psychotherapies for
personality disorder, Perry et al. (1999) found that all studies of
active psychotherapies reported positive outcomes at termination and
follow-up. In addition, patients receiving treatment have an accelerated
rate of recovery from personality disorders compared with the natural
course of the disorders.

Bateman and Fonagy (2000) conducted a systematic review of the evidence
for efficacy of psychotherapy in personality disorders. Although
psychotherapy was found to be effective, the evidence did not indicate
that one form of treatment was superior to another. Effective treatments
were found to have several factors in common, including encouragement of
a strong patient-therapist relationship that would allow the therapist
to take an active rather than passive stance. Rosenthal et al. (1999)
demonstrated lasting change in interpersonal functioning among patients
with Cluster C personality disorders who were treated with 40 sessions
of manual-based supportive psychotherapy. In patients with major
depressive and personality disorders (especially Cluster C personality
disorders), short-term (16-session) supportive psychotherapy in
combination with antidepressant treatment led to greater reduction in
personality pathology compared with antidepressant treatment alone (Kool
et al. 2003). Patients with problems of hostile dominance, such as
patients with antisocial personality disorder, tend to receive less
demonstrable benefit from supportive psychotherapy than do patients with
other personality disorders (Kool et al. 2003; Woody et al. 1985);
however, when patients with antisocial personality disorder have
comorbid depression, they may do well with supportive psychotherapy.
Gerstley et al. (1989) hypothesized that the benefit is related to the
patients' having some capacity to form a therapeutic alliance. In
supportive psychotherapy, it has been posited that when transference
interpretation does not occur, the character-transforming factor may be
the patient's capacity to form an identification with the more benign,
accepting attitude of the therapist (Appelbaum and Levy 2002; Pinsker et
al. 1991). For example, patients with borderline personality disorder
typically must contend with what in structural terms is thought of as a
rigid, archaic, and punitive superego. Identification with the therapist
may allow the patient to be more tolerant of hateful and shameful
aspects of the self. Holmes (1995) reported on borderline patients' use
of the commitment, concern, and attention to the supportive technique
during psychoanalytic treatment and suggested that the development of
secure attachments fostered more autonomous functioning. By discouraging
destructive behaviors, the therapist models more appropriate behavior
and demonstrates strength and concern for the patient (Appelbaum and
Levy 2002). As the

patient's injurious behaviors and level of emotional intensity diminish,
the patient can identify with the reflective function and mentalizing
ability of the therapist. This can help the patient make better sense of
his or her own subjective states and mental processes, as well as those
of others. Appelbaum and Levy (2002) pointed out that the supportive
therapist strives to establish an arousal level in the patient optimal
for learning, fostering a sense of self, and appreciating the
consequences of behavior. These factors help to address ego and adaptive
dysfunction in patients with borderline personality disorder. With such
patients, the therapist works to create a sense of safety so as to
reduce maladaptive defenses, which are typically linked to fears of
annihilation, abandonment, and humiliation. Creating a sense of safety
can help the patient begin to develop a more integrated sense of self
and other in the context of reduced anxiety. Nevertheless, this sense of
safety must be created without fostering regression, which can escalate
those behaviors that the therapist is trying to address and reduce.
Maladaptive or immature defenses, such as regression, denial, or
projection, are not supported. As in much of supportive psychotherapy,
the therapist tries to maintain a balance of supportive and expressive
techniques. An advance in the treatment of borderline personality
disorder was the development of dialectical behavior therapy (DBT),
which initially focused on reducing parasuicidal behavior (Linehan 1993;
Linehan et al. 1994). Although this practical, multicomponent approach
to therapy with borderline patients has been presented as an evolution
of cognitivebehavioral therapy, certain main components of the treatment
are decidedly supportive, in that they directly address ego function and
adaptive skills. The open and explicit collaboration between patient and
therapist on hereand-now issues in DBT is consistent with the style of
supportive therapy. In particular, the use of mindfulness exercises is a
direct measure that addresses both ego functioning and adaptive skill in
teaching patients to develop intrapsychic distance from overwhelming
emotional distress. In addition, DBT makes liberal use of slogans and
sayings that reframe patients' isolated experience into shared
experiential wisdom and that serve as feedback for validating both
subjective states and real responsibility (Palmer 2002). Interestingly,
a year-long clinical trial comparing DBT, transference-focused
psychotherapy, and supportive psychotherapy

demonstrated that those receiving supportive psychotherapy had
significant positive changes in depression, anxiety, global functioning,
and social adjustment. Compared with the DBT group, the supportive
psychotherapy group had significant reductions in anger, but supportive
psychotherapy was less effective in reducing suicidality, which is not
surprising given the specific focus of DBT on parasuicidal behavior
(Clarkin et al. 2007).

Substance Use Disorders Substance use disorders are among the most
common mental disorders (Hasin and Grant 2015). In the past, most
psychiatry residents did not treat patients presenting with substance
use disorders unless the patients presented with co-occurring
psychiatric disorders (see the section "CoOccurring Mental Illness and
Substance Use Disorders" later in this chapter). Generally, residents
learned about withdrawal syndromes and detoxification while working on
inpatient psychiatric units that admitted patients with psychiatric
disorders or substance-induced mental disorders. In contrast, current
residency training in psychiatry involves at least 1 month of full-time
clinical work with patients who have substance use disorders; thus,
residents must learn about basic psychotherapeutic and medication
management of these patients.

Pharmacotherapy There are relatively few pharmacotherapies that are
effective for substance use disorders, and these pharmacotherapies work
best in the context of psychosocial treatment. Therefore, psychotherapy
is an important intervention for substance use disorders. Some
medications approved for use in substance use disorders are maintenance
medications for opioid use disorder, such as methadone and buprenorphine
(Fudala et al. 2003; Kleber 2003); aversive medications for maintenance
of abstinence for alcohol use disorder, such as disulfiram (Fuller et
al. 1986); heavy drinking and craving reducers, such as naltrexone
(O'Malley et al. 1992; Volpicelli et al. 1992); or anticonvulsants such
as topiramate that both support abstinence and reduce episodes of
craving and heavy drinking (Blodgett et al. 2014).

To conduct psychotherapy with substance-using patients, the therapist
must understand the psychopharmacology of classes of drugs that are
commonly used nonmedically, typical presentations of intoxication and
withdrawal, and the natural course of drug effects. The therapist also
needs to be familiar with common or street knowledge about the drugs,
including slang names and prices (Rounsaville and Carroll 1998). A good
working knowledge of these drugs and the lifestyle of the patient who
uses them can help the therapist begin to build a therapeutic alliance
with the patient.

Treatment Principles In the past, individual expressive treatments were
the standard intervention for substance use disorders. Over time, it
became clear that use of uncovering psychotherapy as a sole mode of
treatment for substance use disorders was generally not effective. Other
treatment approaches, such as group therapies, pharmacotherapies (e.g.,
methadone maintenance), and therapeutic communities, became mainstays of
addiction treatment. Rounsaville and Carroll (1998) underscored the
rationale for supportive psychotherapy when they described the reasons
that expressive treatments, when offered as the sole ambulatory
treatment, are not well suited to the needs of patients with substance
use disorders. In expressive treatments, symptom control and development
of coping skills are often not the primary focus. Patients drop out
frequently because of a lack of focus on the patient's presenting
problem and because patients find the therapist's neutral, abstaining
stance anxiety provoking. Today, it is understood that interpretations
of addictive behaviors are not sufficient to stop the addictive process
and that increasing the patient's anxiety early in the treatment of a
substance use disorder is likely to trigger a relapse. Therefore, the
therapist should embark on a more uncovering type of treatment only when
the patient has established a concrete method for maintaining abstinence
or is being treated within a protected environment (Brill 1977;
Rosenthal and Westreich 1999). Supportive psychotherapy with patients
who have substance use disorder focuses on helping patients to develop
effective coping strategies to control or reduce substance use and stay
engaged in treatment. Other important components of treatment are
developing and maintaining a strong

therapeutic alliance and minimizing the risk of relapse by helping the
patient to both reduce and learn to manage anxiety and dysphoria.
Because supportive psychotherapy offers a broad and flexible foundation
for interventions with patients, work with addicted patients typically
includes use of newer, more evidence-based strategies, such as
motivational interviewing, relapse prevention, and psychoeducation.
General supportive principles are maintained during the course of
addiction treatment, even as patient and therapist embark on particular
cognitive and behavioral work, such as building cognitive skills. For a
patient with a substance use disorder, individual supportive
psychotherapy is often augmented and supported by the patient's
engagement in a 12-step program, group therapy for substance use
disorders, and other recovery-oriented therapeutic activities.

Motivational Interviewing If an individual is not interested in reducing
or stopping the use of substances when he or she meets the criteria for
a substance use disorder, the individual may have a diagnosis but is not
yet a patient. People who come into treatment for substance use
disorders typically have spent months to years without severe
consequences and have experienced drug use as fun or beneficial. People
generally show up for substance use treatment only when the consequences
of drug use have become threatening to their relationships, employment,
health, freedom, or life. When these people then show up for treatment,
most have beliefs about their drug use that were constructed when their
use appeared to be free of severe negative consequences. A common belief
is that drugs have played an essential role in the individual's ability
to cope (Rounsaville and Carroll 1998). In this context, unless the
patient sees the substance use as a problem and can conceptualize
getting along without drug use, setting appropriate treatment goals is
difficult. Rollnick and Miller (1995) described motivational
interviewing as a directive, patient-centered intervention that helps
patients to explore and resolve their ambivalence about changing. The
main principles of motivational interviewing include understanding the
patient's view accurately, avoiding or deescalating resistance, and
increasing the patient's

self-efficacy and perception of the discrepancy between actual and ideal
behavior (Miller and Rollnick 1991). Motivational interviewing is
explicitly empathic and does not involve a coercive therapist position
with respect to the patient's actions about reducing or stopping
substance use; the patient might experience such a position as demeaning
and damaging to selfesteem. A premise of motivational interviewing is
that patients can decide to make changes on the basis of their own
shifts in motivation. The techniques of motivational interviewing
include listening reflectively and eliciting motivational statements
from a patient, examining both sides of the patient's ambivalence, and
reducing resistance by monitoring patient readiness and not pushing for
change prematurely (Miller and Rollnick 1991). When the patient
experiences that the negative consequences of substance use outweigh the
positives ones, the so-called decisional balance is tipped in favor of
engagement in treatment. The respectful, collaborative, and empathic
style of both motivational interviewing and supportive psychotherapy
supports the development of a positive and healthy relationship that can
reinforce reduction or cessation of substance use (Miller and Rose
2010). The supportive technique of clarifying the patient's role
expectations and therapist's objectives and rationale early in treatment
is advisable because discrepancy between role expectations and
experiences in therapy may correlate negatively with alliance in
patients with substance use disorders (Frankl et al. 2014). PATIENT: OK,
so I'll come in every week and you'll tell me what I should work on
(patient demonstrates expectation of a passive role in therapy).
THERAPIST: Not exactly. It sounds like you're expecting to have a more
directed experience here, like in a classroom where the teacher lectures
you and maybe gives you homework assignments (uses metaphor to clarify
meaning of prior statement). PATIENT: What's wrong with that? Aren't you
are the addiction expert? (deflects and challenges) THERAPIST: Nothing
is wrong with that (doesn't argue).

PATIENT: I thought you'd figure out what's wrong with me and fix it
(restates the passive role expectation). THERAPIST: Well, actually,
we're both going to try to better understand your problems with
substances, and then we'll collaborate on setting your goals and helping
you meet them. There will be plenty of opportunity for me to give you
information sometimes, but mostly you'll be learning through your
community support services and online sites I recommend. I'll present my
clinical objectives to you so we can discuss them. But this is
important: if you're working actively with me and you feel responsible
to pursue the goals that make sense to you, you're more likely to have a
better outcome here (informs about approach; supports agency).
Substantial evidence supports motivational interviewing as an effective
intervention for substance use disorders---especially with regard to
promoting entry into and engagement in more intensive treatments for
substance use---even when the technique is used by clinicians who are
not specialists in substance use treatment (Dunn et al. 2001).
Therefore, motivational interviewing is a mainstay of supportive
treatment of substance use disorders.

Adaptive Skills and Relapse Prevention The main content of supportive
treatment of substance use disorders is the work of achieving and
maintaining abstinence from substances of abuse. Patients must learn new
strategies that assist them in coping with craving states, negative
emotions, general stress, and cues in the environment that serve as
high-risk triggers for substance use. Long ago, the proponents of
Alcoholics Anonymous identified exposure to the people, places, and
things associated with alcohol use as a primer to relapse. A commonly
heard maxim is that stopping the use of drugs is relatively easy, but
remaining drug-free is hard. The specific adaptive skills that must be
learned in addiction recovery are 1) identifying high-risk situations
and cues, 2) anticipating exposure to these situations and cues, and 3)
developing alternative strategies for coping when exposed to these
situations.

Relapse prevention involves a formal set of cognitive-behavioral
approaches to maintaining abstinence that are easily woven into
supportive treatment. In relapse prevention, a systematic effort is made
to identify the patient's specific relapse triggers and to devise and
have the patient practice alternative behaviors and coping skills to
deal with these triggers, such as refusal skills for when the patient is
offered the target substance (Marlatt and Gordon 1985). However,
identification of risky situations and development of coping skills to
address these situations can also be done in a less structured fashion
in supportive and supportive-expressive psychotherapy (Luborsky 1984).
In any case, anticipatory guidance, encouragement, and reassurance are
key supportive techniques that are used when identifying and rehearsing
skills to cope with an expected situation. The therapist works to
establish achievable intermediate goals, which help to reduce the risk
of failure and of further damage to the patient's selfesteem. When the
patient reports that he or she has successfully negotiated some element
of a high-risk situation, praise from the therapist related to the
patient's goals is meaningful and reinforces the improvement in adaptive
skills. The patient should already have experienced some increase in
selfesteem through an experience of competence in achieving a life
skill. If the patient tries but does not succeed, some praise is
indicated because the patient tried to implement the adaptive skill.
After some problem solving together, the therapist encourages the
patient to try the skill again and reassures him or her about doing so.
Thus, progress in executing new skills may be incremental, and the
therapist offers measured but increasingly intense praise and positive
feedback for each successive goal met. Because a dysphoric mood is a
frequently reported antecedent of relapse, the supportive treatment of
substance use disorders also must focus on building adaptive skills for
coping with negative or painful mood states (Marlatt and Gordon 1980).
Substance-using individuals often have a difficult time differentiating
mood states into specific affects, in part perhaps because they use the
drugs to self-medicate dysphoria rather than developing psychological
means to cope with the painful affects (Keller et al. 1995; Khantzian
1985). Therefore, therapists need to help patients with substance use
disorder begin to reduce alexithymia in distinguishing one feeling from
another. As Misch (2000) described, the ability to identify and

label feelings makes it easier to reflect on these feelings and
communicate about them to others. If the patient cannot notice and
discriminate feelings, he or she cannot make clear connections between
those feelings and the thoughts, behaviors, or events linked to drug
use. For example, if patients cannot recognize when they are irritable
and sad, they will not be able to connect either state to the automatic
thoughts that they generate in response (e.g., "I'm feeling irritated,
so I must get a bottle"). The ability to label feelings is essential for
developing appropriate adaptive skills to manage painful affects. As
patients begin to identify these feelings, they experience ---in spite
of increased awareness of negative affect---an increase in selfesteem
that comes from mastery of the internal environment. The affects begin
to be reframed as useful tools in identifying risky states that set up
patients for relapse.

Psychoeducation In the area of substance use disorders, education
efforts focus on teaching patients about different classes of abused
drugs, psychological and physical effects of drugs, dangers of chronic
abuse, the fact that drugs may be used to self-medicate, and a disease
model of addiction. Most cultures implicitly or explicitly operate out
of a moral model of substance abuse and addiction, which attributes the
irresponsible or criminal behavior of the addicted individual to his or
her bad character. In contrast, the unitary disease concept of
addiction, variously attributed to Alcoholics Anonymous (1976) or
Jellinek (1952), stresses that addiction is a chronic, relapsing, and
progressive illness. Furthermore, the advocates of the disease concept
thought it was a mistake to think of alcoholism as a symptom of another
disorder, such that if an underlying conflict were resolved in
expressive treatment, the patient would stop drinking (Rosenthal and
Westreich 1999). Jellinek's approach to alcoholism was not actually so
reductionistic; he in fact described several typologies, which differed
regarding onset, severity, pattern, and chronicity of use. Nonetheless,
the psychotherapeutic utility of this heuristic approach is that it
increases self-esteem by offering the patient a diagnosis rather than
blame, helps the patient to cope better with shame (given that most
patients presume that the moral model explains their own

behavior), and offers another framework in which to foster a therapeutic
alliance. The following vignette illustrates the use of psychoeducation
with a patient who uses substances nonmedically (see Video Vignette 6,
available at www.appi.org/Winston).

Video Vignette 6: Substance Use Disorder Kevin Waters is a 28-year-old
single man who studied structural engineering in college but is
currently unemployed, having been fired from his most recent of a string
of jobs over the last few years, since he began using cocaine. He
typically gets caught up in cocaine bingeing and fails to show up or
notify his place of employment, with predictable results. He was living
with his younger sister, her husband, and their 2-year-old daughter but
was told to leave when he returned after a 3-day cocaine binge. He comes
to the session full of regret and self-recrimination, a strong sense of
the moral failure he has been given as feedback from both employers and
family, and hopelessness. In other cases, when a patient has less
awareness of the negative consequences of his or her substance use, a
therapist might rely more strongly on motivational interviewing
techniques in the early phases (including nonjudgmental feedback to help
the patient connect cause and effect) to assist the patient in deciding
that his substance dependence is not worth what it costs in his life. In
this session, the therapist instead uses psychoeducation to address
Kevin's denial and uses a moral model to explain his addictive behavior.
Because the moral model is intrinsically disempowering, which decreases
self-esteem, the objective is that Kevin understand the disease concept
and recognize that the loss of control is an inherent quality of
substance dependence. Kevin may then feel more empowered to make
decisions that incorporate that reality rather than channeling his
energy into the self-blaming and unfruitful behavior that typically
precedes or sustains a relapse. KEVIN: I can't stop the crack. I got
thrown out of the house. I got no job, I got no money, I got no girl. I
got nothing, except crack. I've blown up my life \[sighs, looks at
therapist\]. Maybe they're right. Maybe I'm just no good \[looks down,
shakes head, tears up\] (attributes his drug-related losses and
maladaptive behavior to being a bad person). THERAPIST: I know that the
pain you're in right now makes you want to just blame yourself. And
you've got a lot of reasons to feel bad right now. But can I ask you

to consider your intentions for just a moment? It's important, but it
will take a bit of reflection (Empathically focuses patient away from
self-blame to cognition). KEVIN: OK. THERAPIST: If you knew then what
you know now---that your use results in the way your life is right now
and the way you feel now---would you have done it anyway?
(clarification) KEVIN: I don't think so. No, of course not. I wouldn't
have done this if I had known . . . . No. (takes rational position)
THERAPIST: So, what I'm saying to you is that your situation is
predictable. This is what happens to people who become addicted to
crack. Addiction is like a runaway train: Once you get on board, you
don't necessarily go where you want the train to go. You go where the
train takes you (generalizes to others who have the same well-described
problem; offers teaching metaphor). KEVIN: Yeah, but I'm the one who
keeps doing it. I'm the one who started this up. I'm the one who doesn't
stop. Like there's something's wrong with me! I'm stupid! (retreats to
moral model explanation; holds on to denial of loss of control)
THERAPIST: Well, I guess blaming yourself gives you some sense that
you're still in control of this situation and that it's OK, when clearly
it's not. KEVIN: I don't understand. THERAPIST: Well, let me put it this
way: If you were stupid and couldn't learn, then that would explain the
situation, but you're not stupid. You studied engineering successfully
in college. Right? (confronts distortion in self-description; builds
alliance through demonstrating knowledge of patient's personal history)
KEVIN: Yeah, OK. So, I'm not stupid-stupid, but I've done such stupid
stuff! \[scowls\] Maybe my sister is right; maybe I'm just weak and
selfish (acknowledges distortion but retreats to a different form of
self-blame). THERAPIST: So you just told me that if you knew then what
you know now, you would not have made the same choices, and that now
you're in a position where you can't stop. That's why we call it a
disease. Loss of control comes with the territory; it's part of the
disease. Drugs are powerful that way (confronts denial, which is
maladaptive for this patient, and offers a different explanation).
KEVIN: I understand what you're saying, but you might be saying this
just to make me feel better---and that's fine---but I've got the rest of
the world telling me I'm a waste of skin. I appreciate that, but . . .

THERAPIST: Let me show you something. These are the criteria for
substance dependence in DSM \[substance use disorder in DSM-5\]. What
you see here is that loss of control is one of the major symptoms.
Right? \[opens to criteria for substance use disorder and points to the
text while reading out loud\] "The substance is often taken in larger
amounts or over a longer period than was intended. There is a persistent
desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control substance use"
(American Psychiatric Association 2013a, p. 483) (uses props, if
necessary, to concretize the ideas and demonstrate expertise). KEVIN:
Huh. So I've tried so many times to just do only some, but I always
spend everything I have (recognizes own loss of control; becomes sad).
THERAPIST: So, maybe initially when you started, you made the mistake of
thinking that you could get away with just using, but that was a long
time ago. Things are a little different now. What you have now is called
a disorder. Addiction and alcoholism are things that run in families.
They are inherited. The risk is inherited, and drug problems are very
similar (supports patient's understanding with clarification,
normalizing, rationalizing, and new knowledge). KEVIN: My dad was an
alcoholic. So was my uncle. I think that's what killed my uncle
(confirms understanding that his problems are more than about just
willpower). THERAPIST: So, that's my point. It's not your fault---but
maybe now you understand that you and I must work together in order to
help you fight this disease (sides with the patient against the disease;
supports the need for collaboration). KEVIN: It just seems impossible.
Do you think I really can get help with this? (elicits reassurance)
THERAPIST: I know it seems that way now, particularly when you recognize
the loss of control, but this is a very common experience for people who
are in the early stages or in the beginnings of recovery. But those who
stay with treatments tend to have better outcomes than those who don't
stay with treatments (offers empathic reassurance based on expert
knowledge, normalizing). KEVIN: I hope you're right. THERAPIST: I know
right now it seems like there's a very long way to go. This is going to
be difficult, but addiction is a treatable illness, like many other
chronic illnesses. We don't have a cure for diabetes. We don't have a
cure for hypertension. But people are able to recover from the more
severe forms of the illness. Even with

the illness being out of control, they can go on to have better lives
(expert opinion, normalizing, and offering reassurance).

Co-occurring Mental Illness and Substance Use Disorders Prevalence and
Treatment About half of the population with severe mental disorders is
affected by substance use disorders (Regier et al. 1990). Clinical
samples of psychiatric patients often have higher than usual rates of
alcohol use disorders and other substance use disorders (Fernandez-Pol
et al. 1988; Fischer et al. 1975; Galanter et al. 1988; Richard et
al. 1985). In the National Comorbidity Survey, Kessler et al. (1994)
found that of the population who had psychosis or mania or who needed
hospitalization for a mental disorder in a 12-month period, almost 90%
met the criteria for three or more lifetime alcohol or drug use
disorders or mental disorders. Co-occurrence of substance use and other
mental disorders has a negative effect on the trajectory of and recovery
from both disorders (Rosenthal and Westreich 1999). Because patients
with substance use disorders and schizophrenia are difficult to engage
in treatment, supportive psychotherapy, with its focus on building and
maintaining a therapeutic alliance, is a good treatment approach for
this population (Carey et al. 1996; Lehman et al. 1993). Supportive
treatment for those with both disorders integrates the techniques that
are useful for each problem, as delineated in the sections "Severe
Mental Illness" and "Substance Use Disorders" earlier in this chapter.
Improving adaptive skills by increasing competence in basic
conversational and recreational skills, using medication and symptom
management, and using relapse prevention for negotiating situations
likely to trigger relapse to substance abuse are all generally needed to
treat cooccurring substance use disorders and other mental illnesses.
Implementing these interventions has a beneficial effect on treatment
retention and substance use in patients with psychotic illness and
substance use disorders (Ho et al. 1999). Multiple studies have shown
that psychosocial treatment

that integrates psychiatric and addiction treatment components leads to
better retention and better outcome among patients with severe mental
illness and substance use disorders (Drake et al. 2001; Hellerstein et
al. 1995). Additional factors that work in concert with individual
supportive treatments are support for patient involvement in 12-step
programs (especially programs that are less likely to reduce
self-esteem, such as "double trouble" or dual recovery groups) and
family psychoeducation. In addition to praise, support for access to
concrete services, socialization, recreation, and other opportunities
can serve as positive reinforcement for attendance and may support the
development of a therapeutic alliance and the engagement of patients in
treatment (Rosenthal et al. 2000).

Psychoeducation In the context of supportive treatment, patients with
substance use disorders and mental illness should be given information
about both classes of disorders. Like other supportive techniques,
psychoeducation must be formulated in the context of the therapist's
appraisal of the patient's capacity to make use of the information in a
way that supports ego function or adaptive skills. For example, when a
patient with a severe mental illness learns that he or she has another
chronic illness such as substance dependence, this knowledge can become
a factor in his or her demoralization (Rosenthal and Westreich 1999).
The therapist teaches about both the substance dependence and the other
mental illness: their symptoms, treatment, and natural history. Patients
are encouraged to discuss their own symptoms and their own history of
treatment responsiveness and to attempt to understand what role their
substance abuse may have played in either relieving or exacerbating
psychotic, mood, and anxiety symptoms. Most patients with co-occurring
substance use disorders and severe mental disorders who come into
contact with treatment systems are not motivated to stop the use of
substances. With these patients, motivational interviewing techniques
can be useful within the context of supportive psychotherapy (Ziedonis
and Fisher 1996; Ziedonis and Trudeau 1997). The process of recovery in
patients with comorbid substance use disorders and other mental
disorders is not linear, and exacerbation of both disorders is

episodic. Patients may cycle repeatedly through different phases of
treatment---engagement, active treatment, maintenance, relapse, and then
reengagement. When patients come back into contact with treating
clinicians after a relapse, they may be in an earlier motivational
stage; they may even be in denial that a substance abuse problem exists
(Prochaska and DiClemente 1984). Motivational techniques, which are
traditionally used at the beginning of therapy to engage patients with
substance use disorder in treatment, are thus used as a continuing
component of supportive treatment for patients with co-occurring
substance use disorders and severe mental illness. This approach is
needed because patients cycle between motivational levels, with the
various flare-ups of substance use disorders and other mental illness
over time (Rosenthal and Westreich 1999). The time frame of recovery
from substance use disorders is longer for patients with dual diagnoses
than for patients without comorbid severe mental disorders. If a patient
remains in treatment, however, reduction in severity of both disorders
is a realistic prospect (Drake et al. 1993; Hellerstein et al. 1995).

Conclusion Supportive psychotherapy provides a broad basic platform for
psychotherapeutic intervention; therefore, treatment strategies and
approaches such as motivational interviewing, psychoeducation, and
relapse prevention, which are typically associated with specific
clinical subpopulations, can be readily implemented in the context of
treatment with supportive psychotherapy. In patients with personality
disorders, supportive psychotherapy has beneficial impact and can serve
as a natural platform for integrating other treatment strategies (e.g.,
using dialectical behavior therapy for patients with borderline
personality disorder). In populations such as those with co-occurring
substance use and other mental disorders, the alliance-building
strategies of supportive psychotherapy plus motivational techniques can
be applied over time to help maintain the patient's engagement in
treatment through cycles of relapse and recovery.

Evaluating Competence and Outcome Research

9

The Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) defined
six areas of competence for medical trainees: 1) patient care, 2)
medical knowledge, 3) practice-based learning and improvement, 4)
interpersonal and communication skills, 5) professionalism, and 6)
systemsbased practice (Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical
Education 2014). Although outlining and describing areas of competence
are within grasp at the present time, the tasks of defining, evaluating,
and measuring competence of trainees are more complex. Development of
measurement tools and their application to specific areas of competence
is under way but still in an early stage. The ACGME suggested a number
of methods of measuring competence. These methods include various types
of written, oral, and clinical examinations; a combined assessment
approach of patient, family, supervisors, and others; record reviews;
portfolios and case logs; simulations, models, and use of standardized
patients; and evaluation of live or recorded performance (Accreditation
Council for Graduate Medical Education 2015). The Residency Review
Committee for Psychiatry chose five types of psychotherapy in which
residents in psychiatry must be certified as competent by their training
programs, but a few years later decreased this requirement to three
types: supportive, psychodynamic (or, in our terminology, expressive),
and cognitive-behavioral psychotherapies (Accreditation Council for
Graduate Medical Education 2014). In this chapter, we outline our
approach to evaluating competence of psychiatry trainees in one of these
three psychotherapies---namely, supportive psychotherapy. The definition
of competence is a major issue that needs to be addressed. An acceptable
definition of competent is "having requisite or adequate ability or
qualities" (Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary,

11th Edition). Epstein and Hundert (2002) defined professional
competence as "the habitual and judicious use of communication,
knowledge, technical skills, clinical reasoning, emotions, values, and
reflection in daily practice for the benefit of the individual and
community being served" (p. 226). In assessments of psychotherapy
trainees, supervisors should look for competence, not a high level of
expertise (Manring et al. 2003). When addressing a resident's
competence, it is necessary to define what will be assessed and the
method or methods of assessment. The evaluation process should be
educational and promote resident learning. Professional competence can
be conceptualized as a continuum of levels of ability or skill, from
beginner to competent to expert. A trainee would be expected to be
competent and thus be at the middle of this continuum.

Research Studies on the Teaching of Psychotherapy There are a few
relatively recent research studies on the teaching of psychotherapy.
Truong et al. (2015) identified and evaluated studies on teaching
psychotherapy to psychiatry residents and medical students. They found
nine studies, but only one trial was judged to be methodologically
rigorous. They called for additional well-designed studies to evaluate
the teaching of psychotherapy to trainees. Sudak and Goldberg (2012)
reported their findings of a survey of U.S. general psychiatry training
directors about the amount of didactic training and supervised clinical
experience and the number of patients treated in the models of
psychotherapy mandated by the Residency Review Committee for Psychiatry.
They found expressive psychotherapy training to be the most robust, with
the greatest variability, and training in cognitive-behavioral therapy
was found to have advanced significantly. Supportive psychotherapy was
the most widely practiced but received the least amount of didactic time
and supervision. Feinstein et al. (2015), at the University of Colorado,
opted to teach psychiatric residents about the common factors in
psychotherapy that positively affect psychotherapy outcomes. However,
they did not study how learning about common factors enables residents
to produce better

psychotherapy outcome results. Gastelum et al. (2013) proposed an
integrated approach for teaching psychodynamic psychotherapy to trainees
in which uncovering and supportive techniques are taught side by side
with specific guidelines for assessing when to use one set of
interventions or the other. Unfortunately, they did not describe or
propose a study to evaluate this approach. As can be gleaned from these
few studies, there are essentially no methodologically sound studies of
psychotherapy teaching. Therefore, in the next few pages we will
describe our approach to psychotherapy teaching and supervision, which
is based on the American Association of Directors of Psychiatric
Residency Training competencies for supportive psychotherapy. We believe
that our approach is in keeping with the teaching of the core clinical
principles of supportive psychotherapy, which is accepted at most
psychiatry teaching programs.

Psychotherapy Supervision Assessment of residents' competence in
psychotherapy is an ongoing process in many residency programs.
Evaluations of residents are performed by clinical supervisors during
the process of psychotherapy supervision and are formally discussed with
the residents one or more times a year. Clinical supervision, as well as
more formal seminars and classroom teaching, has long been a part of
psychotherapy training. Seminars and classroom approaches generally
consist of reading courses, in which psychotherapy theory and practice
are taught, and clinical case seminars, which focus on evaluation, case
formulation, diagnosis, and ongoing psychotherapy. Many training
programs in psychiatry have established traditions of intensive
individual supervision of residents, particularly in long-term
expressive (exploratory) psychotherapy. The process of supervision may
vary from one program to another but generally involves the
following: 1. Presentation of the case by the resident 2. Discussion of
the diagnosis, case formulation, goals, and treatment plan

3. Ongoing summary of sessions by the resident, using an informal
recalland-summary approach, process notes, video recordings, or a
combination of these approaches 4. Discussion of the psychotherapy
process, including resistance, dysfunctional thinking, defenses, affect,
and therapist interventions, as well as dynamics, genetics,
psychological structure, cognitivebehavioral issues, and the therapeutic
relationship (transference, countertransference, and the therapeutic
alliance) The supervisor has traditionally evaluated the resident's work
by noting how well the resident performs the tasks listed above, as well
as assessing other areas such as the ability to listen and relate to the
patient in an empathic manner. The evaluation process by the supervisor
is ongoing, but formal evaluations are generally performed once or twice
a year or more. The formal evaluations are based on material discussed
by the trainee through the use of process notes. Traditionally, the
entire process has been somewhat informal and rarely standardized. In
this chapter, we propose a standardized evaluation approach, one based
on the use of video recordings during an ongoing course of
psychotherapy.

Assessment Focus Assessment of competence in supportive psychotherapy
should be evaluated within the broader context of general psychotherapy.
The assessment should encompass skills of, attitudes toward, and
knowledge about general psychotherapy and the more specific approach of
supportive psychotherapy. General psychotherapy skills, as described by
the American Association of Directors of Psychiatric Residency Training
(AADPRT) Psychotherapy Task Force (2000), include establishing and
maintaining boundaries and the therapeutic alliance, listening,
addressing emotions, understanding, using supervision, dealing with
resistances and defenses, and applying intervention techniques. Beitman
and Yue (1999) described a similar set of skills, which they called core
psychotherapy skills. They included other skills, such as identifying
patterns and implementing

strategies for change. The AADPRT Psychotherapy Task Force also
developed psychotherapy competencies for the five psychotherapies
originally mandated by the Residency Review Committee for Psychiatry,
including supportive psychotherapy. Table 9--1 includes the complete
list of AADPRT competencies for supportive psychotherapy (Pinsker et
al. 2001). Table 9--1. American Association of Directors of Psychiatric
Residency Training competencies for supportive psychotherapy
Knowledge 1. The resident will demonstrate knowledge that the principal
objectives of supportive therapy are to maintain or improve the
patient's selfesteem, minimize or prevent recurrence of symptoms, and
maximize the patient's adaptive capacities. 2. The resident will
demonstrate understanding that the practice of supportive therapy is
commonly used in many therapeutic encounters. 3. The resident will
demonstrate knowledge that the patient-therapist relationship is of
paramount importance. 4. The resident will demonstrate knowledge of
indications and contraindications for supportive therapy. 5. The
resident will demonstrate understanding that continued education in
supportive therapy is necessary for further skill development. Skills 1.
The resident will be able to establish and maintain a therapeutic
alliance. 2. The resident will be able to establish treatment goals. 3.
The resident will be able to interact in a direct and nonthreatening
manner. 4. The resident will be able to be responsive to the patient and
give feedback and advice when appropriate.

5. The resident will demonstrate the ability to understand the patient
as a unique individual within his or her family and sociocultural
community. 6. The resident will be able to determine which interventions
are in the best interest of the patient and will exercise caution about
basing interventions on his or her own beliefs and values. 7. The
resident will be able to recognize and identify affects in the patient
and himself or herself. 8. The resident will be able to confront in a
collaborative manner behaviors that are dangerous or damaging to the
patient. 9. The resident will be able to provide reassurance to reduce
symptoms, improve morale and adaptation, and prevent relapse. 10. The
resident will be able to support, promote, and recognize the patient's
ability to achieve goals that will promote his or her wellbeing. 11. The
resident will be able to provide strategies to manage problems with
affect regulation, thought disorders, and impaired reality-testing. 12.
The resident will be able to provide education and advice about the
patient's psychiatric condition, treatment, and adaptation while being
sensitive to specific community systems of care and sociocultural
issues. 13. The resident will be able to demonstrate that in the care of
patients with chronic disorders, attention should be directed to
adaptive skills, relationships, morale, and potential sources of anxiety
or worry. 14. The resident will be able to assist the patient in
developing skills for self-assessment. 15. The resident will be able to
seek appropriate consultation and/or referral for specialized treatment.
Attitudes 1. The resident will be empathic, respectful, curious, open,
nonjudgmental, collaborative, and able to tolerate ambiguity and display
confidence in the efficacy of supportive therapy.

2. The resident will be sensitive to sociocultural, socioeconomic, and
educational issues that arise in the therapeutic relationship. 3. The
resident will be open to audiotaping, videotaping, or direct observation
of treatment sessions. Source. Pinsker et al. 2001.

The supportive psychotherapy competencies are divided into knowledge
about, skills of, and attitudes toward supportive psychotherapy. The
knowledge category encompasses knowledge about objectives, the
patienttherapist relationship, and indications and contraindications for
supportive psychotherapy. The skills section contains 15 items,
including the ability to maintain a therapeutic alliance, the ability to
use appropriate interventions, and the ability to establish treatment
goals. The attitudes section includes an empathic, respectful,
nonjudgmental approach and sensitivity to sociocultural, socioeconomic,
and educational issues.

Method Assessment of a trainee's competence in supportive psychotherapy
can be accomplished using a number of different methodologies, including
administration of written and/or oral examinations that test the
resident's knowledge base, use of simulated patients reading from
standardized scripts, the request that the resident respond to a patient
vignette using a supportive approach, and a supervisor's evaluation of a
resident performing supportive psychotherapy. A formal written
evaluation of the resident by the supervisor should be completed at
least twice a year. This evaluation should be educative and be based on
the supervisory work preceding the formal evaluation. The supervisor
should provide the resident with verbal feedback on a regular basis. We
have found that supervisor evaluations of ongoing, video-recorded
psychotherapy sessions are the best method of teaching and evaluating
residents. Video-recorded sessions enable the supervisor or resident
evaluator to observe the conduct of psychotherapy directly. The more
traditional method of summarizing a session or working from process
notes is less likely to convey what actually occurred in a psychotherapy
session, even under the best of circumstances. The availability of video
recordings

opens the process of psychotherapy to an outside observer and makes
evaluation of therapy more objective. Evaluation of video-recorded
supportive psychotherapy sessions should begin with the resident's
assessment of the patient and should continue throughout a patient's
psychotherapy. Each supervision session should begin with a brief
summary by the resident, followed by a review of the video recording.
Because an entire video recording is likely too lengthy for review in a
supervisory hour, the supervisor and resident must decide which segments
to review. The choice of video segments for viewing can be made on the
basis of the resident's summary, which may point to areas of difficulty
or significance. Having trainees view recordings of psychotherapy
sessions conducted by others essentially replaces a supervisory
experience and can be used to assess the trainee's knowledge level,
which cannot always be equated with skill. This procedure allows for
discussion of techniques and of the broad range of possible therapeutic
interventions. A number of questions have been raised about the
feasibility of using video recordings of psychotherapy for supervision.
Difficulties cited include the cost and maintenance of the equipment and
the ability of residents to operate the recording equipment. The cost of
video equipment has decreased in recent years, enabling many training
programs to offer video recording to residents. Video equipment has
become easy to operate, and residents are able to make good recordings.
Therefore, it seems feasible for residency programs to provide video
equipment for residency training in psychotherapy. In the event that
video equipment cannot be provided by the institution, it would not be
unreasonable to require each trainee to provide his or her own camera.
After all, training programs generally do not provide each resident with
textbooks. The main purpose of recording is not to have a high-quality
picture but rather an understandable audio that runs without attention
from the therapist for the entire session. Some residency programs may
not be ready to begin with evaluations involving video. The evaluation
form presented in the following subsection can be used to evaluate a
trainee reporting on psychotherapy sessions from process notes. Another
approach would be to present a video recording or written material from
a supportive psychotherapy session and ask the resident questions about
the treatment plan, case formulation, goals,

technique, alliance, and so on. In addition, the resident could be asked
to respond to the patient's complaints using a supportive psychotherapy
approach.

Assessment Instrument The AADPRT supportive psychotherapy competencies
provided the basis for our development of a rating form to be used as a
measure of a resident's competence in supportive psychotherapy. Our form
(Figure 9--1) does not include all the items on the AADPRT list of
competencies because it would not be practical or reasonable for
training programs to use lengthy evaluation forms for three different
psychotherapies. In addition, we modified or combined some items with
other items from the supportive psychotherapy and general psychotherapy
competencies.

Figure 9--1. Beth Israel resident evaluation form for competence in
supportive psychotherapy. The evaluation form covers three areas:
knowledge (general psychotherapy competencies), attitudes, and skills.
The rating is on a Likert scale of 0--5 (0 = can't say, 1 =
unsatisfactory, 2 = approaching competence, 3 = competent, 4 = competent
plus, 5 = expert). The advantages of this evaluation form are that it
can be scored and that it also includes space for the supervisor's
comments. The final score is calculated by dividing the number of
questions scored into the total score. An average score of 3 or better
suggests that the resident has demonstrated competence in supportive

psychotherapy. In addition, the supervisor should write some overall
comments about the resident, including the resident's strengths and
overall performance, the resident's ability to work in and use
supervision, and areas needing further work. The supervisor should
discuss the evaluation with the resident in a way that is supportive and
promotes the resident's education. Conferences in which supportive
psychotherapy supervisors discuss the supervisory and evaluation
processes are important because they help standardize the evaluation of
competence in supportive psychotherapy. One method of achieving
reliability would be to have groups of supervisors rate supportive
psychotherapy video recordings and then discuss their ratings.
Discussions would be directed at reaching a consensus in the evaluation
ratings. This approach has been used in psychotherapy research to
measure therapist adherence to manual-based forms of psychotherapy
(Waltz et al. 1993). Supervisors in the Beth Israel Medical Center
Psychotherapy Training Program rated 51 residents on their supportive
psychotherapy work using the Resident Evaluation for Competence in
Supportive Psychotherapy (Figure 9--1). The vast majority of residents
were rated as competent or better. More important, the form served as a
useful supportive psychotherapy evaluation guide for both residents and
supervisors, and the supervisors found the form to be useful and easy to
use.

Outcome Research In this section we report on a number of clinical
trials of supportive psychotherapy in the treatment of various
psychiatric disorders. We discuss some early uncontrolled studies and
more recent controlled trials that address the efficacy of supportive
psychotherapy.

Menninger Psychotherapy Research Project The psychotherapy research
project of the Menninger Foundation was an important early study
comparing supportive and expressive psychotherapy with psychoanalysis.
Wallerstein (1986, 1989) studied the treatment, clinical course, and
posttreatment follow-up of 42 inpatients at the Menninger Foundation.
Findings included the following: psychoanalysis

produced more limited outcomes than predicted, whereas psychotherapy
including supportive psychotherapy often achieved more than predicted;
all the treatments became more supportive during the course of therapy;
and supportive interventions accounted for more of the change in
outcome. This study took a naturalistic approach, without control
subjects or random assignment of subjects, but it was noteworthy in
calling attention to the possible efficacy of supportive psychotherapy.

Schizophrenia Studies In a National Institute of Mental Health study,
patients with schizophrenia were treated for 2 years with either
exploratory, insight-oriented psychotherapy three times a week or the
control therapy (called realityadaptive, supportive psychotherapy) once
a week. Results provided clear evidence of a better outcome for patients
treated with the supportive psychotherapy (Gunderson et al. 1984;
Stanton et al. 1984). All patients were maintained on their usual
medications throughout the study. In another study, patients with
schizophrenia were randomly assigned to supportive psychotherapy or
family treatment (Rea et al. 1991). Patients were treated for 9 months
and followed for 2 years. Supportive psychotherapy consisted of
medication case management, crisis intervention, and education about
schizophrenia, whereas family treatment involved problem-solving therapy
and communication skills training. Patients in supportive treatment had
significant improvement in coping style compared with patients in family
therapy. However, the two groups were not at comparable levels of coping
skills at initiation of treatment, and this fact was not considered in
the statistical analysis. Hogarty et al. (1997) stated that supportive
psychotherapy fares less well compared with other psychosocial
approaches, such as family psychoeducation, skills training, or role
therapy. Defining supportive psychotherapy as not including
psychoeducation, skills training, or role therapy approaches is
problematic, however, because most therapists practicing supportive
psychotherapy commonly employ these approaches. Other psychotherapy
approaches with patients who have schizophrenia include social skills
training, which may be enhanced with amplified skills training in the
community (Glynn et al. 2002; Liberman et al. 1998).

A study in Copenhagen (Rosenbaum et al. 2012) compared supportive
psychodynamic psychotherapy with treatment as usual, consisting of
psychoeducation: meetings with psychologists and social workers; group
meetings; and medical advice in patients with first-episode psychosis.
They found that the supportive psychotherapy group improved
significantly more than the treatment as usual group in social function
and general psychopathology. In another study of first-episode psychosis
using supportive psychodynamic psychotherapy, Harder et al. (2014) found
significant improvement on social functioning, overall symptoms, and
positive psychotic symptoms. The improvement found was not sustained at
5-year follow-up. This finding is not surprising because most patients
with psychotic disorders require long-term follow-up to prevent relapse.
In a randomized controlled trial for young people at ultra high risk of
psychosis treated with cognitive therapy plus risperidone, cognitive
therapy plus placebo, or supportive therapy plus placebo, McGorry et
al. (2013) found that all groups improved substantially, particularly in
terms of negative symptoms and overall functioning.

Depressive Disorder Studies In the National Institute of Mental Health
Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program, two
psychotherapies (cognitivebehavioral therapy and interpersonal therapy)
were compared with an antidepressant (imipramine)--clinical management
condition and a control condition consisting of drug placebo and
clinical management (Elkin 1994; Elkin et al. 1989; Imber et al. 1990).
The clinical management was a lowlevel supportive psychotherapy
approach. The two psychotherapies were found to be efficacious but not
significantly different from the placebo-- clinical management condition
on measures of depressive symptoms and overall functioning. Thompson and
Gallagher (1985) studied 30 outpatients ranging in age from 60 to 81
years. Patients were randomly assigned to a 16-week treatment with
cognitive therapy, behavior treatment, or supportive psychotherapy.
Improvement was similar across the three treatment conditions at
termination, but at 1-year follow-up, more of the patients in

supportive psychotherapy received a diagnosis of depression.
Unfortunately, the small number of patients in each treatment group and
the type of supportive psychotherapy used make these findings of limited
value. In a randomized clinical trial involving 100 adolescents with
depression, Renaud et al. (1998) compared cognitive, family, and
supportive psychotherapies and found that rapid responders to therapy
had better outcomes at 1-year follow-up and better scores on some
measures at 2-year follow-up. The investigators concluded that their
findings suggest that patients with milder forms of depression may
benefit from initial supportive psychotherapy or short trials of more
specialized types of psychotherapy. Maina et al. (2005) completed a
randomized controlled trial comparing brief dynamic therapy with
supportive psychotherapy in treating patients with minor depressive
disorders. Both therapies showed significant improvement in comparison
with nontreated control subjects, but brief dynamic therapy was more
effective at follow-up evaluation. In a meta-analysis involving patients
with major depression, de Maat et al. (2008) compared short-term
psychodynamic supportive psychotherapy with antidepressant treatment and
also with combined psychotherapy and medication. The results of the
meta-analysis indicated that combined therapy is more efficacious than
pharmacotherapy alone and that psychotherapy alone and pharmacotherapy
alone seem equally efficacious. Kocsis et al. (2009) compared a
cognitive-behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy with brief
supportive psychotherapy in their ability to augment antidepressant
nonresponse in patients with chronic depression. Although 37.5% of
subjects experienced partial response or remission, neither form of
adjunctive psychotherapy improved outcome compared with a flexible,
individualized pharmacotherapy regimen alone. In a study comparing
supportive psychotherapy and cognitivebehavioral therapy for the
treatment of depression following traumatic brain injury, Ashman et
al. (2014) found that both forms of psychotherapy were efficacious in
improving diagnoses of depression and anxiety and reducing depressive
symptoms. Schramm et al. (2017) found that a specific form of
cognitivebehavioral therapy for chronic depression had somewhat better
outcome results than a nonspecific supportive psychotherapy. However,
both forms

of psychotherapy produced good results, and the supportive psychotherapy
was not specific for depression.

Anxiety Disorder Studies Systematic hierarchical desensitization was
compared with supportive psychotherapy in a 26-week treatment trial
involving patients with various types of phobias (Klein et al. 1983).
Both treatments performed well, and no difference was found between the
two approaches. The authors speculated that for individuals with phobia,
psychotherapy serves as an instigator of corrective activity outside the
formal session by maintaining exposure in vivo. In another study,
patients with phobias and panic attacks received either imipramine plus
behavior therapy or imipramine plus supportive psychotherapy (Zitrin et
al. 1978). The majority of patients showed moderate to marked
improvement, and there was no difference between behavior therapy and
supportive psychotherapy in terms of improvement rates. In a study of
social anxiety disorder (phobia), Alström et al. (1984) found that
supportive psychotherapy and prolonged exposure therapy were equally
effective. Herbert et al. (2009) compared individual cognitivebehavioral
therapy, group cognitive-behavioral therapy, and an
educationalsupportive psychotherapy that did not contain specific
cognitive-behavioral therapy elements in treating patients with social
anxiety disorder. They found that all three treatments produced
significant reductions in symptoms and functional impairment, as well as
improved social skills, with no differences between treatments. In
another study of social anxiety disorder, Lipsitz et al. (2008) found
that supportive psychotherapy and interpersonal therapy produced
significant improvement from pretreatment to posttreatment, with neither
therapy being superior to the other. However, Shear et al. (2001)
reported that emotion-focused psychotherapy, a form of supportive
psychotherapy, has low efficacy for the treatment of panic disorder.
They compared emotion-focused psychotherapy with cognitive-behavioral
treatment, imipramine, or pill placebo in a study involving 112
subjects. For studies on posttraumatic stress disorder, see the section
on treatment approaches in Chapter 7, "Crisis Intervention."

Personality Disorder Studies In a study comparing supportive with
interpretive psychotherapy, Piper et al. (1998) found no outcome
differences between the two treatments. Patients presented with anxiety
or depressive disorders, and 60.4% of subjects had comorbid personality
disorder. Hellerstein et al. (1998) compared brief supportive
psychotherapy with short-term dynamic psychotherapy in treating patients
with primarily Cluster C and nototherwise-specified personality
disorders, as well as comorbid disorders such as depression or anxiety.
The authors reported similar efficacy on measures of symptomatology,
presenting complaints, and interpersonal functioning. These changes were
found not only at termination but also at 6-month follow-up. In a
substudy of the study by Hellerstein et al. (1998), the authors used the
Inventory of Interpersonal Problems mapped to an interpersonal
circumplex model and graphically demonstrated lasting positive change in
interpersonal functioning in the subjects treated with supportive
psychotherapy (Rosenthal et al. 1999; Winston et al. 2001). Clarkin et
al. (2007) compared transference-focused psychotherapy, dialectical
behavior therapy, and supportive psychotherapy in patients with
borderline personality disorder and found significant positive change in
multiple domains after one year of treatment. They suggested that these
structured treatments for borderline personality disorder are generally
equivalent with respect to broad positive change in these patients. In
another study of borderline personality patients, Jørgensen et
al. (2013) compared mentalization-based psychotherapy with supportive
psychotherapy and found significant positive changes in both treatment
groups on general functioning, depression, and social functioning.

Eating Disorder Studies An evaluation of the efficacy of family-based
treatment compared with supportive psychotherapy was undertaken by le
Grange et al. (2007) for adolescent bulimia nervosa. Family-based
treatment was found to have a clinical and statistical advantage over
supportive psychotherapy. Carter et al. (2011) examined the long-term
efficacy of cognitivebehavioral therapy, interpersonal therapy, and
specialist supportive clinical management in women with anorexia
nervosa, with a mean follow-up of

6.7 years. They found no significant differences on outcome measures
among the three psychotherapies at long-term follow-up, although
supportive psychotherapy was associated with a more rapid response than
interpersonal therapy.

Medical Disorder Studies Mumford et al. (1982) reviewed controlled
studies of supportive psychotherapy---including education about illness
and treatments, cognitive-behavioral techniques, and venting and
reassurance in a supportive relationship---in patients recovering from
myocardial infarctions and surgery. The authors found that compared with
patients receiving only typical medical care, patients receiving
psychological intervention had better experiences with pain and
increased patient compliance and speed of recovery, as well as fewer
complications and fewer days in the hospital.

Conclusion In this chapter, we have provided an overview of current
efforts to evaluate the competence of residents engaged in various
clinical tasks, and in particular supportive psychotherapy, as well as a
summary of outcome research in supportive psychotherapy. We have
presented a preliminary approach to evaluating psychiatry residents in
supportive psychotherapy using an adaptation of the AADPRT list of
supportive psychotherapy competencies. However, the process of
evaluating competence is in an early phase of development and will
require a great deal of reflection, planning, and study to achieve
reliable and valid measurement systems. The brief review of the efficacy
of supportive psychotherapy indicates that supportive treatment appears
to be useful across a broad spectrum of psychiatric and medical
disorders. However, more research is needed to clarify the indications
for supportive psychotherapy and how this treatment should be integrated
with other psychotherapy approaches and treatment with medication.

Questions for Self-Study

10

Items 1--7 Match each of the following items with the form of
psychotherapy with which it is most closely aligned. Each item may be
used once, more than once, or not at all. A. Supportive psychotherapy B.
Expressive psychotherapy C. Both supportive and expressive psychotherapy
D. Neither supportive nor expressive psychotherapy \_\_\_ 1. \_\_\_ 2.
\_\_\_ 3. \_\_\_ 4. \_\_\_ 5. \_\_\_ 6. \_\_\_ 7.

Aims to help a patient to cope with symptoms Aims to change a patient's
fundamental personality Therapist plays an active and direct role
Focuses on stability and adaptation The therapeutic relationship is
important to the treatment process Focuses on resolution of unconscious
conflict Its techniques are derived from a formal theory of mind

Items 8--10 Place each kind of therapeutic approach at the appropriate
spot on the supportive-expressive continuum.

\_\_\_ 8. Psychoanalysis \_\_\_ 9. Counseling \_\_\_ 10.
Supportive-expressive psychotherapy

Items 11--13 Identify the correct answer for each question. \_\_\_ 11.
Which factor or combination of factors has been identified as common to
most forms of effective psychotherapy? A. Atmosphere of warmth, hope,
caring, and authenticity B. Clear theoretical framework C. Explicit and
intense communication D. Frequent confrontation and limit setting E.
Primary focus on behavior change \_\_\_ 12. Which of the following
questions by a therapist is phrased in a manner that is least supportive
of the self-esteem of the patient? A. What concerns do you have about
your medication? B. What happened when you stopped taking your
medication? C. When did you stop taking your medication? D. When have
you found it helpful to take your medication? E. Why did you stop your
medication? \_\_\_13. Which of the following are techniques associated
with supportive psychotherapy? A. Advice, anticipatory guidance, naming
the problem B. Avoidance of discussions of practical issues C.
Cultivation of friendship between therapist and patient D. Frequent
interpretation of transference issues E. Repeated self-disclosure by the
therapist unrelated to patient needs

Items 14--16 Match each of the following descriptions with the concept
with which it is most closely aligned. Each item may be used once, more
than once, or not

at all. A. Advice B. Confrontation C. Education D. Reassurance E.
Reframing \_\_\_ 14. The therapist saying, "You really should do regular
exercise." \_\_\_ 15. The therapist saying, "Starting out slow with
exercise is OK." \_\_\_ 16. The therapist saying, "Exercise is important
to overall health and well-being."

Items 17--21 Match each of the following items with the form of
psychotherapy with which it is most closely aligned. Each item may be
used once, more than once, or not at all. A. Supportive psychotherapy B.
Expressive psychotherapy C. Both supportive and expressive psychotherapy
D. Neither supportive nor expressive psychotherapy \_\_\_ 17. Involves
active two-way communication between therapist and patient \_\_\_ 18.
Demonstrates respect for the patient as a person of worth and dignity
\_\_\_ 19. Involves cultivation of friendship between therapist and
patient \_\_\_ 20. Entails significant time and attention to the
termination process \_\_\_ 21. May include adjuvant medication treatment

Items 22--25

Match each of the following descriptions with the concept with which it
is most closely aligned. Each item may be used once, more than once, or
not at all. A. Advice B. Confrontation C. Education D. Reassurance E.
Praise \_\_\_ 22. The therapist saying, "Don't quit your tennis team.
Let's keep talking about it more before you decide." \_\_\_ 23. The
therapist saying, "Based on what we've discussed, my impression is that
your tennis partner will still want to remain friends if you make the
decision to quit your tennis team." \_\_\_ 24. The therapist saying, "It
seems like you can't handle the time demands of being on the tennis
team." \_\_\_ 25. The therapist saying, "Transitioning from being on the
tennis team ---spending less time on the courts and giving more time to
your studies and your relationship with your girlfriend---seems like a
really positive step forward in your life."

Items 26--35 Identify the correct answer for each question. \_\_\_ 26. A
47-year-old woman seeks treatment 3 weeks after the sudden death of her
husband of 22 years. She is often tearful, has difficulty sleeping, and
feels worried about her future and the impact of their father's death on
her teenage children. Which of the following is the most appropriate
care? A. Antidepressant medication B. Benzodiazepine medication C.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy focused on negative cognitions

D. Long-term psychoanalytically oriented psychotherapy E. Supportive
therapy focused on grief and day-to-day coping \_\_\_ 27. Which of the
following is necessary for supportive psychotherapy to be effective? A.
Abstinence from all substances B. Completion of a comprehensive medical
evaluation C. Compliance with medication treatment D. Willingness to
attend psychotherapy sessions E. Withdrawal from all other forms of
psychotherapy (e.g., couples therapy) \_\_\_ 28. Which of the following
patients is most likely to benefit from supportive psychotherapy? A. A
patient who has been found to be malingering B. A patient who has been
recently diagnosed with cancer C. A patient who is actively suicidal D.
A patient with factitious disorder E. A patient with signs of acute
alcohol withdrawal \_\_\_ 29. Establishing firm ground rules for
behaviors and expectations in therapy is especially important in
supportive therapy involving patients living with which of the following
personality disorders? A. Borderline B. Dependent C. Histrionic D.
Narcissistic E. Schizoid \_\_\_ 30. Which of the following is the most
accurate statement regarding sexual involvement between a therapist and
a patient in the context of supportive psychotherapy, according to the
American

Psychiatric Association Association?

and

the

American

Psychological

A. Always permitted B. Never permitted C. Not permitted while the
patient is actively engaged in therapy D. Permitted after the patient
terminates the therapy E. Permitted after the therapist terminates the
therapy \_\_\_ 31. Examples of supportive psychotherapy techniques
include which of the following? A. Advice B. Disclosure C. Homework D.
Reassurance E. All of the above \_\_\_ 32. Which of the following is the
most accurate statement regarding self-disclosure by the therapist in
the context of supportive psychotherapy? A. Always permitted B. Never
permitted C. Permitted when it serves to strengthen the therapeutic
relationship or advance therapeutic goals D. Permitted when the patient
appears to enjoy the therapist's personal story E. Permitted when the
patient consents to this part of the therapy \_\_\_ 33. Examples of
social skills that can be developed in the context of supportive
psychotherapy include A. Interviewing for a job B. Making conversation
and eye contact C. Recognizing social cues

D. Rehearsing strategies for handling difficult situations E. All of the
above \_\_\_ 34. Which of the following may interfere with the
effectiveness or slow down the process of supportive psychotherapy? A.
Addiction issues experienced by the patient B. Aggressive feelings
toward the therapist C. Negative transferential feelings experienced by
the patient D. Psychotic symptoms of the patient E. All of the above
\_\_\_ 35. Supportive psychotherapy is likely to be ineffective in the
context of which of the following conditions? A. Adjustment disorders B.
Chronic medical conditions C. Delirium D. Early dementia E. Substance
use disorders

Items 36--42 Match each of the following descriptions with the concept
with which it is most closely aligned. Each item may be used once, more
than once, or not at all. A. Supportive psychotherapy is
valuable/indicated B. Supportive psychotherapy may be valuable/indicated
C. Supportive psychotherapy is not valuable/indicated D. Supportive
psychotherapy is contraindicated \_\_\_ 36. Bereavement \_\_\_ 37.
Factitious disorder \_\_\_ 38. Psychosis

\_\_\_ 39. Depression \_\_\_ 40. "Baby blues" \_\_\_ 41. Locked-in
syndrome \_\_\_ 42. Severe intellectual disability

Items 43--45 Identify the correct answer for each question. \_\_\_ 43. A
64-year-old man with long-standing bipolar disorder is encouraged by his
family to speak with a therapist about the challenges he is facing as he
moves to a nursing home/residential treatment setting after a recent hip
replacement surgery. He has lived independently for many years but
accepts that the new living arrangement will be helpful to him. Which of
the following is the most accurate statement about the goals of
supportive psychotherapy treatment? A. The goals should align with the
issues that are most important to the facility staff B. The goals should
align with the issues that are most important to the family C. The goals
should align with the issues that are most important to the patient D.
The goals should align with the issues that are most important to the
patient's psychiatrist E. The goals should align with the issues that
are most important to the patient's surgeon \_\_\_ 44. A 28-year-old
woman recently learned that she had been adopted at birth and sought
psychotherapy to deal with her feelings of anger toward her biological
parents and estrangement from her adoptive parents. Which of the
following is the most accurate statement about the initial goals of the
supportive psychotherapy treatment?

A. Treatment should be fully directed toward eliminating the patient's
feelings of anger and estrangement B. Treatment should be fully directed
toward issues other than the patient's feelings of anger and
estrangement C. Treatment should fully focus on helping the patient cope
with feelings of anger and estrangement D. Treatment should fully
guarantee a reduction in feelings of anger and estrangement E. Treatment
should fully replace feelings of anger and estrangement with feelings of
joy and emotional connection \_\_\_ 45. An 18-year-old high school
graduate feels unsettled by the prospect of attending college across the
country in just a few months. Which of the following is the most
accurate statement about psychotherapy in this context? A. Engaging in
supportive psychotherapy for a few months is not likely to be beneficial
B. Engaging in supportive psychotherapy in one state and then moving to
another state is not likely to be beneficial C. Engaging in supportive
psychotherapy focused on issues of separation and adaptation to the new
college environment may be helpful D. Engaging in expressive
psychotherapy with the goal of personality change is recommended in this
situation E. Engaging in expressive psychotherapy with the goal of
delaying the transition to college out of state is recommended in this
situation

Items 46--50 Match each of the following descriptions with the concept
with which it is most closely aligned. Each item may be used once, more
than once, or not at all.

A. Supportive psychotherapy is valuable and is indicated as a first-line
treatment B. Supportive psychotherapy may be valuable and is indicated
as a firstline or adjuvant treatment C. Supportive psychotherapy is not
valuable and is not indicated as a firstline treatment D. Supportive
psychotherapy is not valuable and is not indicated as a firstline or
adjuvant treatment E. Supportive psychotherapy is contraindicated as a
first-line or adjuvant treatment \_\_\_ 46. An 18-year-old with
new-onset psychosis who is acutely suicidal \_\_\_ 47. A 45-year-old
with chronic schizoaffective disorder who is seeking employment \_\_\_
48. A 65-year-old experiencing grief and significant depressive symptoms
after the loss of a lifelong partner \_\_\_ 49. A 25-year old with
opioid dependence who requests substance abuse detoxification \_\_\_ 50.
A 35-year-old with symptoms of distress associated with gender dysphoria
who has been bullied at work

Items 51--55 Identify the correct answer for each question. \_\_\_ 51.
Supportive psychotherapy is conducted in which of the following
communication styles? A. Asymmetrical B. Conversational C. Formal D.
Oppositional E. Technical

\_\_\_ 52. Which of the following time frames is the focus of supportive
psychotherapy with a middle-age adult? A. Adolescence B. Childhood C.
Future D. Past 5 years E. Present \_\_\_ 53. For patients engaged in
supportive psychotherapy, ongoing goals of treatment should include
which of the following? A. Amelioration of symptoms B. Enhancement of
self-esteem C. Improvement of adaptation to life circumstances D.
Improvement of overall functioning E. All of the above \_\_\_ 54.
Positive prognostic features associated with decreased potential for
suicide include which of the following? A. Aggressivity B. Family
support C. Hopelessness D. Pessimism E. Recent psychiatric
hospitalization \_\_\_ 55. Supportive psychotherapy for acute
bereavement may include which of the following? A. Concrete assistance
with routine activities B. Diagnosis of underlying mental disorder
affecting grief C. Emotional support D. Opportunity to express feelings
of anger and loss E. All of the above

Items 56--59 Match each of the following descriptions with the concept
with which it is most closely aligned. Each item may be used once, more
than once, or not at all. A. Anticipatory guidance B. Confrontation C.
Expressions of empathy D. Praise E. Silence \_\_\_ 56. Therapeutic
relationship-building technique \_\_\_ 57. Esteem-building technique
\_\_\_ 58. Skill-building technique \_\_\_ 59. Behavioral pattern
recognition-building technique

Items 60--64 Match each of the following descriptions with the type of
psychosocial intervention or therapy with which it is most closely
aligned. Each item may be used once, more than once, or not at all. A.
Crisis intervention B. Supportive psychotherapy C. Both crisis
intervention and supportive psychotherapy D. Neither crisis intervention
nor supportive psychotherapy \_\_\_ 60. Typically provided as soon as
possible \_\_\_ 61. Focuses only on "here and now" issues \_\_\_ 62.
Uses silence as a primary technique \_\_\_ 63. Typically involves
one-to-one therapy \_\_\_ 64. Focuses only on unconscious processes

Items 65--68

Match each of the following descriptions with the psychotherapeutic
approach with which it is most closely aligned. Each item may be used
once, more than once, or not at all. A. Cognitive-behavioral approach B.
Dynamic approach C. Genetic approach D. Structural approach \_\_\_ 65.
Focuses on fixed aspects of an individual's personality \_\_\_ 66.
Focuses on early development experiences that influence the patient's
current situation \_\_\_ 67. Focuses on current conflicts and their
connection to primary or core psychological conflicts \_\_\_ 68. Focuses
on automatic thoughts and how they can be changed to improve current
life adaptation and behavior

Items 69--70 Identify the correct answer for each question. \_\_\_ 69.
In supportive psychotherapy, treatment goals should not A. Be defined
mutually by the therapist and patient B. Be documented in the patient's
health record C. Ever require adjuvant medication D. Evolve during the
course of therapy E. Remain fixed and unchangeable over time \_\_\_ 70.
Occasional lateness by a patient in supportive psychotherapy is handled
by the therapist using A. A collaborative, problem-solving approach B. A
confrontational approach C. An approach that focuses on addressing
financial implications D. An approach that focuses on therapy
termination

E. An approach that focuses on unconscious conflicts

Items 71--75 Match each of the following descriptions with the concept
with which it is most closely aligned. Each item may be used once, more
than once, or not at all. A. Likely to benefit: appropriate candidate
for supportive psychotherapy B. Uncertain: may or may not be appropriate
candidate for supportive psychotherapy C. Not likely to benefit: not
appropriate candidate for supportive psychotherapy \_\_\_ 71.
Individuals with impaired reality testing \_\_\_ 72. Individuals with
mild intellectual disability \_\_\_ 73. Individuals with psychotic
symptoms \_\_\_ 74. Individuals with alexithymia \_\_\_ 75. Individuals
with advanced dementia

Answers 1 C; 2 B; 3 A; 4 A; 5 C; 6 B; 7 C; 8 C; 9 A; 10 B; 11 A; 12 E;
13 A; 14 A; 15 D; 16 C; 17 A; 18 C; 19 D; 20 C; 21 C; 22 A; 23 D; 24 B;
25 E; 26 E; 27 D; 28 B; 29 A; 30 B; 31 E; 32 C; 33 E; 34 E; 35 C; 36 B;
37 C; 38 B; 39 B; 40 A; 41 C; 42 C; 43 C; 44 C; 45 C; 46 E; 47 B; 48 A;
49 B; 50 A; 51 B; 52 E; 53 E; 54 B; 55 E; 56 C; 57 D; 58 A; 59 B; 60 A;
61 A; 62 D; 63 C; 64 D; 65 D; 66 C; 67 B; 68 A; 69 E; 70 A; 71 B; 72 B;
73 B; 74 B; 75 C

References

Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education: The Psychiatry
Milestone Project: Assessment Tools. Chicago, IL, Accreditation Council
for Graduate Medical Education, 2014. Available at: August 29, 2019.
Accessed August 29, 2019. Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical
Education: The Psychiatry Milestone Project. Chicago, IL, Accreditation
Council for Graduate Medical Education, July 2015. Available at:
www.acgme.org/Portals/0/PDFs/Milestones/PsychiatryMilestones.pdf?ver=2015-11-06-120520753.
Accessed August 29, 2019. Adshead G: Murmurs of discontent: treatment
and treatability of personality disorder. Adv Psychiatr Treat
7:407--417, 2001 Aguilera DC, Messick J, Farrel LM: Crisis Intervention.
St. Louis, MO, Mosby, 1970 Alcoholics Anonymous: The Story of How Many
Thousands of Men and Women Have Recovered From Alcoholism, 3rd Edition.
New York, Alcoholics Anonymous World Service, 1976, p 12 Alexander F,
French TM: Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy. New York, Ronald Press, 1946
Alström JE, Nordlund CL, Persson G, et al: Effects of four treatment
methods on agoraphobic women not suitable for insight-oriented
psychotherapy. Acta Psychiatr Scand 70(1):1--17, 1984 6147066 Alter CL:
Palliative and supportive care of patients with pancreatic cancer. Semin
Oncol 23(2):229-- 240, 1996 8623059 AMA Council on Ethical and Judicial
Affairs: AMA Code of Medical Ethics' opinions on observing professional
boundaries and meeting professional responsibilities. AMA J Ethics
17(5):432--434, 2015 American Association of Directors of Psychiatric
Residency Training Psychotherapy Task Force: Psychotherapy Competencies.
Farmington, CT, American Association of Directors of Psychiatric
Residency Training, 2000 American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition. Washington DC,
American Psychiatric Association, 2013a American Psychiatric
Association: The Principles of Medical Ethics With Annotations
Especially Applicable to Psychiatry. Washington, DC, American
Psychiatric Association, 2013b. Available at:
www.psychiatry.org/File%20Library/Psychiatrists/Practice/Ethics/principles-medicalethics.pdf.
Accessed August 30, 2019. American Psychological Association: Ethical
Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct. Washington, DC,
American Psychological Association, 2017. Available at:
www.apa.org/ethics/code/index. Accessed August 30, 2019.

Appelbaum AH, Levy KN: Supportive psychotherapy for borderline patients:
a psychoanalytic research perspective. Am J Psychoanal 62(2):201--202,
2002 12085529 Arnow BA, Steidtmann D, Blasey C, et al: The relationship
between the therapeutic alliance and treatment outcome in two distinct
psychotherapies for chronic depression. J Consult Clin Psychol
81(4):627--638, 2013 23339536 Artiss KL: Human behavior under stress:
from combat to social psychiatry. Mil Med 128:1011--1015, 1963 14055063
Ashman T, Cantor JB, Tsaousides T, et al: Comparison of cognitive
behavioral therapy and supportive psychotherapy for the treatment of
depression following traumatic brain injury: a randomized controlled
trial. J Head Trauma Rehabil 29(6):467--478, 2014 25370439 Balsam RM,
Balsam A: Becoming a Psychotherapist: A Clinical Primer, 2nd Edition.
Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press, 1984 Bateman AW, Fonagy P:
Effectiveness of psychotherapeutic treatment of personality disorder. Br
J Psychiatry 177:138--143, 2000 11026953 Beck AT, Sokol L, Clark DA, et
al: A crossover study of focused cognitive therapy for panic disorder.
Am J Psychiatry 149(6):778--783, 1992 1590494 Beitman B, Yue D: Learning
Psychotherapy: A Time-Efficient, Research-Based, and OutcomeMeasured
Training Program. New York, WW Norton, 1999 Bellack AS, Mueser KT:
Psychosocial treatment for schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull 19(2):317--336,
1993 8322036 Bellak L: The schizophrenic syndrome: a further elaboration
of the unified theory of schizophrenia, in Schizophrenia: A Review of
the Syndrome. New York, Logos, 1958, pp 3--63 Beres D: Ego deviation and
the concept of schizophrenia, in The Psychoanalytic Study of the Child,
Vol 11. New York, International Universities Press, 1956, pp 164--235
Beutler LE, Moleiro C, Talebi H: Resistance in psychotherapy: what
conclusions are supported by research. J Clin Psychol 58(2):207--217,
2002a 11793333 Beutler LE, Moleiro CM, Talebi H: Resistance, in
Psychotherapy Relationships That Work: Therapist Contributions and
Responsiveness to Patients. Edited by Norcross JC. London, Oxford
University Press, 2002b, pp 129--143 Birmaher B, Brent DA, Kolko D, et
al: Clinical outcome after short-term psychotherapy for adolescents with
major depressive disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 57(1):29--36, 2000
10632230 Blodgett JC, Del Re AC, Maisel NC, Finney JW: A meta-analysis
of topiramate's effects for individuals with alcohol use disorders.
Alcohol Clin Exp Res 38(6):1481--1488, 2014 24796492 Bond M, Banon E,
Grenier M: Differential effects of interventions on the therapeutic
alliance with patients with personality disorders. J Psychother Pract
Res 7(4):301--318, 1998 9752641 Bordin E: The generalizability of the
psycho-analytic concept of the working alliance. Psychotherapy
16:252--260, 1979 Bormann JE, Thorp SR, Smith E, et al: Individual
treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder using mantram repetition: a
randomized clinical trial. Am J Psychiatry 175(10):979--988, 2018
29921143 Brenner AM: Teaching supportive psychotherapy in the
twenty-first century. Harv Rev Psychiatry 20(5):259--267, 2012 23030214
Brent DA, Holder D, Kolko D, et al: A clinical psychotherapy trial for
adolescent depression comparing cognitive, family, and supportive
therapy. Arch Gen Psychiatry 54(9):877--885, 1997 9294380

Brill L: The treatment of drug abuse: evolution of a perspective. Am J
Psychiatry 134(2):157--160, 1977 835736 Bronheim HE, Fulop G, Kunkel EJ,
et al; The Academy of Psychosomatic Medicine: The Academy of
Psychosomatic Medicine practice guidelines for psychiatric consultation
in the general medical setting. Psychosomatics 39(4):S8--S30, 1998
9691717 Bryant RA, Sackville T, Dang ST, et al: Treating acute stress
disorder: an evaluation of cognitive behavior therapy and supportive
counseling techniques. Am J Psychiatry 156(11):1780--1786, 1999 10553743
Buckley P: Supportive therapy: a neglected treatment. Psychiatr Ann
16:515--521, 1986 Busch KA, Fawcett J, Jacobs DG: Clinical correlates of
inpatient suicide. J Clin Psychiatry 64(1):14-- 19, 2003 12590618
Cailhol L, Rodgers R, Burnand Y, et al: Therapeutic alliance in
short-term supportive and psychodynamic psychotherapies: a necessary but
not sufficient condition for outcome? Psychiatry Res 170(2-3):229--233,
2009 19906442 Caplan G: An Approach to Community Mental Health. New
York, Grune & Stratton, 1961 Carey KB, Cocco KM, Simons JS: Concurrent
validity of clinicians' ratings of substance abuse among psychiatric
outpatients. Psychiatr Serv 47(8):842--847, 1996 8837156 Carter FA,
Jordan J, McIntosh VV, et al: The long-term efficacy of three
psychotherapies for anorexia nervosa: a randomized, controlled trial.
Int J Eat Disord 44(7):647--654, 2011 21997429 Chiles JA, Strosahl KD,
Roberts LW: Clinical Manual for the Assessment and Treatment of Suicidal
Patients, Second Edition. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric
Association Publishing, 2019. Clark DC, Fawcett J: A review of empirical
risk factors for the evaluation of the suicidal patient, in The
Assessment, Management, and Treatment of Suicide: Guidelines for
Practice. Edited by Bongar B. New York, Oxford University Press, 1992,
pp 16--48 Clarkin JF, Levy KN, Lenzenweger MF, Kernberg OF: Evaluating
three treatments for borderline personality disorder: a multiwave study.
Am J Psychiatry 164(6):922--928, 2007 17541052 Classen C, Butler LD,
Koopman C, et al: Supportive-expressive group therapy and distress in
patients with metastatic breast cancer: a randomized clinical
intervention trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry 58(5):494--501, 2001 11343530
Clever SL, Tulsky JA: Dreaded conversations: moving beyond discomfort in
patient-physician communication (editorial). J Gen Intern Med
17(11):884--885, 2002 12406362 Colby KM: A Primer for Psychotherapies.
New York, Ronald Press, 1951 Cusack K, Jonas DE, Forneris CA, et al:
Psychological treatments for adults with posttraumatic stress disorder:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Psychol Rev 43:128--141,
2016 26574151 Davanloo H: A method of short-term dynamic psychotherapy,
in Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy. Edited by Davanloo H. Northvale,
NJ, Jason Aronson, 1980, pp 43--71 de Jonghe F, Rijnierse P, Janssen R:
The role of support in psychoanalysis. J Am Psychoanal Assoc
40(2):475--499, 1992 1593081 de Maat S, Dekker J, Schoevers R, et al:
Short psychodynamic supportive psychotherapy, antidepressants, and their
combination in the treatment of major depression: a mega-analysis based
on three randomized clinical trials. Depress Anxiety 25(7):565--574,
2008 17557313 Dewald PA: The strategy of the therapeutic process, in
Psychotherapy: A Dynamic Approach. New York, Basic Books, 1964, pp
95--108 Dewald PA: Psychotherapy: A Dynamic Approach, 2nd Edition. New
York, Basic Books, 1971 Dewald PA: Principles of supportive
psychotherapy. Am J Psychother 48(4):505--518, 1994 7872414

deWinstanley PA, Bjork RA: Successful lecturing: presenting information
in ways that engage effective processing, in New Directions for Teaching
and Learning. Edited by Halpern D, Hakel M. San Francisco, CA,
Jossey-Bass, 2002, pp 19--31 Douglas CJ: Teaching supportive
psychotherapy to psychiatric residents. Am J Psychiatry 165(4):445--452,
2008 18381914 Drake RE, Sederer LI: Inpatient psychosocial treatment of
chronic schizophrenia: negative effects and current guidelines. Hosp
Community Psychiatry 37(9):897--901, 1986 3758971 Drake RE, McHugo GJ,
Noordsy DL: Treatment of alcoholism among schizophrenic outpatients:
4year outcomes. Am J Psychiatry 150(2):328--329, 1993 8422088 Drake RE,
Essock SM, Shaner A, et al: Implementing dual diagnosis services for
clients with severe mental illness. Psychiatr Serv 52(4):469--476, 2001
11274491 Driessen E, Smits N, Dekker JJ, et al: Differential efficacy of
cognitive behavioral therapy and psychodynamic therapy for major
depression: a study of prescriptive factors. Psychol Med 46(4):731--744,
2016 26750445 Dunn C, Deroo L, Rivara FP: The use of brief interventions
adapted from motivational interviewing across behavioral domains: a
systematic review. Addiction 96(12):1725--1742, 2001 11784466 Elkin I:
The NIMH Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program: where
we began and where we are, in Handbook of Psychotherapy and Behavioral
Change. Edited by Bergin AE, Garfield SL. New York, Wiley, 1994, pp
114--139 Elkin I, Shea MT, Watkins JT, et al: National Institute of
Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program:
general effectiveness of treatments. Arch Gen Psychiatry
46(11):971--982, discussion 983, 1989 2684085 Epstein RM, Hundert EM:
Defining and assessing professional competence. JAMA 287(2):226--235,
2002 11779266 Evans S, Fishman B, Spielman L, Haley A: Randomized trial
of cognitive behavior therapy versus supportive psychotherapy for
HIV-related peripheral neuropathic pain. Psychosomatics 44(1):44--50,
2003 12515837 Everly GS Jr, Mitchell JT: Assisting Individuals in
Crisis: A Workbook. Ellicott City, MD, International Critical Incident
Stress Foundation, 1998 Everly GS Jr, Mitchell JT: Critical Incident
Stress Management (CISM): A New Era and Standard of Care in Crisis
Intervention, 2nd Edition. Ellicott City, MD, Chevron Publishing, 1999
Fawcett J, Scheftner WA, Fogg L, et al: Time-related predictors of
suicide in major affective disorder. Am J Psychiatry 147(9):1189--1194,
1990 2104515 Fawcett J, Clark DC, Busch KA: Assessing and treating the
patient at risk for suicide. Psychiatr Ann 23:244--255, 1993 Feinstein
R, Heiman N, Yager J: Common factors affecting psychotherapy outcomes:
some implications for teaching psychotherapy. J Psychiatr Pract
21(3):180--189, 2015 25955260 Fernandez-Pol B, Bluestone H, Mizruchi MS:
Inner-city substance abuse patterns: a study of psychiatric inpatients.
Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 14(1):41--50, 1988 3265029 Fischer DE, Halikas
JA, Baker JW, Smith JB: Frequency and patterns of drug abuse in
psychiatric patients. Dis Nerv Syst 36(10):550--553, 1975 1164857 Foa
EB: Trauma and women: course, predictors, and treatment. J Clin
Psychiatry 58(suppl 9):25--28, 1997 9329448 Foa EB, Franklin ME:
Psychotherapies for obsessive compulsive disorder: a review, in
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, 2nd Edition. Edited by Maj M, Sartorius
N, Okasha A, et al. Chichester, UK, Wiley, 2002, pp 93--115

Foa EB, Rothbaum BO, Riggs DS, Murdock TB: Treatment of posttraumatic
stress disorder in rape victims: a comparison between
cognitive-behavioral procedures and counseling. J Consult Clin Psychol
59(5):715--723, 1991 1955605 Foa EB, Hembree EA, Cahill SP, et al:
Randomized trial of prolonged exposure for posttraumatic stress disorder
with and without cognitive restructuring: outcome at academic and
community clinics. J Consult Clin Psychol 73(5):953--964, 2005 16287395
Fonagy P, Target M: Theoretical models of psychodynamic psychotherapy,
in Textbook of Psychotherapeutic Treatments. Edited by Gabbard GO.
Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Publishing, 2009, pp 3--42 Frank
JB, Frank JD: Persuasion and Healing: A Comparison Study of
Psychotherapy, 3rd Edition. Baltimore, MD, Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1991 Frank JD: General psychotherapy: the restoration of morale,
in American Handbook of Psychiatry, Vol 5: Treatment, 2nd Edition.
Edited by Freedman DX, Dyrud JE. New York, Basic Books, 1975, pp
117--132 Frankl M, Philips B, Wennberg P: Psychotherapy role
expectations and experiences: discrepancy and therapeutic alliance among
patients with substance use disorders. Psychol Psychother 87(4):411--
424, 2014 24415529 Freud S: The ego and the id (1923/1961), in The
Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud,
Vol 19. Edited by Strachey J. London, Hogarth Press, 1961, pp 12--66
Freud S: Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926/1959), in The Standard
Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol 20.
Edited by Strachey J. London, Hogarth Press, 1959, pp 75--175 Friedman
RS, Lister P: The current status of psychodynamic formulation.
Psychiatry 50(2):126--141, 1987 3588773 Fudala PJ, Bridge TP, Herbert S,
et al; Buprenorphine/Naloxone Collaborative Study Group: Officebased
treatment of opiate addiction with a sublingual-tablet formulation of
buprenorphine and naloxone. N Engl J Med 349(10):949--958, 2003 12954743
Fuller RK, Branchey L, Brightwell DR, et al: Disulfiram treatment of
alcoholism: a Veterans Administration cooperative study. JAMA
256(11):1449--1455, 1986 3528541 Gabbard GO: A contemporary
psychoanalytic model of countertransference. J Clin Psychol
57(8):983--991, 2001 11449380 Gabbard GO: Long-Term Psychodynamic
Psychotherapy: A Basic Text, 3rd Edition. Washington, DC, American
Psychiatric Publishing, 2017 Galanter M, Castaneda R, Ferman J:
Substance abuse among general psychiatric patients: place of
presentation, diagnosis, and treatment. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse
14(2):211--235, 1988 3052039 Galynker G: The Suicidal Crisis: A Clinical
Guide to the Assessment of Imminent Suicide Risk. New York, Oxford
University Press, 2017 Gastelum E, Douglas CJ, Cabaniss DL: Teaching
psychodynamic psychotherapy to psychiatric residents: an integrated
approach. Psychodyn Psychiatry 41(1):127--140, 2013 23480164 Gaston L:
The concept of the alliance and its role in psychotherapy: theoretical
and empirical considerations. Psychotherapy 27:143--153, 1990 Gelso CJ,
Fassinger RE, Gomez MJ, et al: Countertransference reactions to lesbian
clients: the role of homophobia, counselor gender, and
countertransference management. J Couns Psychol 42:356-- 364, 1995 Gelso
CJ, Latts MG, Gomez MJ, Fassinger RE: Countertransference management and
therapy outcome: an initial evaluation. J Clin Psychol 58(7):861--867,
2002 12205726

Gerstley L, McLellan AT, Alterman AI, et al: Ability to form an alliance
with the therapist: a possible marker of prognosis for patients with
antisocial personality disorder. Am J Psychiatry 146(4):508--512, 1989
2929752 Gill MM, Muslin HL: Early interpretation of transference. J Am
Psychoanal Assoc 24(4):779--794, 1976 993562 Glass A: Psychotherapy in
the combat zone. Am J Psychiatry 110:725--731, 1954 Glover E: The
therapeutic effect of inexact interpretation: a contribution to the
theory of suggestion. Int J Psychoanal 12:397--411, 1931 Glynn SM,
Marder SR, Liberman RP, et al: Supplementing clinic-based skills
training with manualbased community support sessions: effects on social
adjustment of patients with schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry
159(5):829--837, 2002 11986138 Goldberg RL, Green SA: A learning-theory
perspective of brief psychodynamic psychotherapy. Am J Psychother
40(1):70--82, 1986 2870653 Goldman CR, Quinn FL: Effects of a patient
education program in the treatment of schizophrenia. Hosp Community
Psychiatry 39(3):282--286, 1988 3356434 Gorton GE: Psychodynamic
approaches to the patient. Psychiatr Serv 51(11):1408--1409, 2000
11058188 Greenberg J: The analyst's participation: a new look. J Am
Psychoanal Assoc 49(2):359--381, discussion 381--426, 2001 11508371
Greenson RR: The working alliance and the transference neurosis.
Psychoanal Q 34:155--181, 1965 14302976 Greenson RR: The Technique and
Practice of Psychoanalysis. New York, International Universities Press,
1967, pp 190--216 Gunderson JG, Frank AF, Katz HM, et al: Effects of
psychotherapy in schizophrenia, II: comparative outcome of two forms of
treatment. Schizophr Bull 10(4):564--598, 1984 6151246 Harder S, Koester
A, Valbak K, et al: Five year follow-up of supportive psychodynamic
psychotherapy in first-episode psychosis: long-term outcome in social
functioning. Psychiatry 77(2):155--168, 2014 24865198 Hartley DE, Strupp
HH: The therapeutic alliance: its relationship to outcome in brief
psychotherapy, in Empirical Studies of Psychoanalytical Theories, Vol 1.
Edited by Masling J. Hillsdale, NJ, Analytic Press, 1983, pp 1--27
Hartmann H: Ego Psychology and the Problem of Adaptation (1939/1958).
Translated by Rapaport D. New York, International Universities Press,
1958 Hasin DS, Grant BF: The National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol
and Related Conditions (NESARC) Waves 1 and 2: review and summary of
findings. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 50(11):1609--1640, 2015
26210739 Hawton K: Assessment of suicide risk. Br J Psychiatry
150:145--153, 1987 3307975 Heinssen RK, Liberman RP, Kopelowicz A:
Psychosocial skills training for schizophrenia: lessons from the
laboratory. Schizophr Bull 26(1):21--46, 2000 10755668 Hellerstein DJ,
Pinsker H, Rosenthal RN, Klee S: Supportive therapy as the treatment
model of choice. J Psychother Pract Res 3(4):300--306, 1994 22700197
Hellerstein DJ, Rosenthal RN, Miner CR: A prospective study of
integrated outpatient treatment for substance-abusing schizophrenia
patients. Am J Addict 4:33--42, 1995 Hellerstein DJ, Rosenthal RN,
Pinsker H, et al: A randomized prospective study comparing supportive
and dynamic therapies: outcome and alliance. J Psychother Pract Res
7(4):261--271, 1998 9752637

Hellerstein DJ, Kocsis JH, Chapman D, et al: Double-blind comparison of
sertraline, imipramine, and placebo in the treatment of dysthymia:
effects on personality. Am J Psychiatry 157(9):1436-- 1444, 2000
10964860 Henry WP, Schacht TE, Strupp HH: Structural analysis of social
behavior: application to a study of interpersonal process in
differential psychotherapeutic outcome. J Consult Clin Psychol
54(1):27--31, 1986 3958298 Henry WP, Schacht TE, Strupp HH: Patient and
therapist introject, interpersonal process, and differential
psychotherapy outcome. J Consult Clin Psychol 58(6):768--774, 1990
2292626 Herbert JD, Gaudiano BA, Rheingold AA, et al: Cognitive behavior
therapy for generalized social anxiety disorder in adolescents: a
randomized controlled trial. J Anxiety Disord 23(2):167--177, 2009
18653310 Ho AP, Tsuang JW, Liberman RP, et al: Achieving effective
treatment of patients with chronic psychotic illness and comorbid
substance dependence. Am J Psychiatry 156(11):1765--1770, 1999 10553741
Hogarty GE, Kornblith SJ, Greenwald D, et al: Three-year trials of
personal therapy among schizophrenic patients living with or independent
of family, I: description of study and effects on relapse rates. Am J
Psychiatry 154(11):1504--1513, 1997 9356557 Holmes J: Supportive
psychotherapy: the search for positive meanings. Br J Psychiatry
167(4):439-- 445, discussion 446--447, 1995 8829709 Horowitz M, Marmar
C: The therapeutic alliance with difficult patients, in Psychiatry
Update: The American Psychiatric Association Annual Review, Vol 4.
Edited by Hales RE, Frances AJ. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric
Press, 1985, pp 573--585 Horowitz MJ, Marmar C, Weiss DS, et al: Brief
psychotherapy of bereavement reactions: the relationship of process to
outcome. Arch Gen Psychiatry 41(5):438--448, 1984 6721669 Horvath AO,
Symonds BD: Relation between working alliance and outcome in
psychotherapy: a meta-analysis. J Couns Psychol 38:139--149, 1991
Horvath AO, Del Re AC, Flückiger C, Symonds D: Alliance in individual
psychotherapy. Psychotherapy (Chic) 48(1):9--16, 2011 21401269 Hunter J,
Leszcz M, McLachlan SA, et al: Psychological stress response in breast
cancer. Psychooncology 5:4--14, 1996 Imber SD, Pilkonis PA, Sotsky SM,
et al: Mode-specific effects among three treatments for depression. J
Consult Clin Psychol 58(3):352--359, 1990 2195085 James RK, Gilliland
BE: Crisis Intervention Strategies, 4th Edition. Belmont, CA,
Brooks/Cole Thomson Learning, 2001 Jellinek EM: Phases of alcohol
addiction. Q J Stud Alcohol 13(4):673--684, 1952 13014274 Joiner TE: Why
People Die by Suicide. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2005
Jørgensen CR, Freund C, Bøye R, et al: Outcome of mentalization-based
and supportive psychotherapy in patients with borderline personality
disorder: a randomized trial. Acta Psychiatr Scand 127(4):305--317, 2013
22897123 Kates J, Rockland LH: Supportive psychotherapy of the
schizophrenic patient. Am J Psychother 48(4):543--561, 1994 7872417
Kaufman ER: Countertransference and other mutually interactive aspects
of psychotherapy with substance abusers. Am J Addict 1:185--202, 1992
Kaufman E, Reoux J: Guidelines for the successful psychotherapy of
substance abusers. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 14(2):199--209, 1988 3177339

Keller DS, Carroll KM, Nick C, et al: Differential treatment response in
alexithymic cocaine abusers: findings from a randomized clinical trial
of psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy. Am J Addict 4:234--244, 1995
Kessler RC, McGonagle KA, Zhao S, et al: Lifetime and 12-month
prevalence of DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders in the United States:
results from the National Comorbidity Survey. Arch Gen Psychiatry
51(1):8--19, 1994 8279933 Khantzian EJ: The self-medication hypothesis
of addictive disorders: focus on heroin and cocaine dependence. Am J
Psychiatry 142(11):1259--1264, 1985 3904487 Kiesler DJ: Therapist
countertransference: in search of common themes and empirical referents.
J Clin Psychol 57(8):1053--1063, 2001 11449388 Kleber HD: Pharmacologic
treatments for heroin and cocaine dependence. Am J Addict 12(suppl
s2):S5--S18, 2003 12857659 Klein DF, Zitrin CM, Woerner MG, Ross DC:
Treatment of phobias, II: behavior therapy and supportive psychotherapy:
are there any specific ingredients? Arch Gen Psychiatry 40(2):139-- 145,
1983 6130751 Kocsis JH, Gelenberg AJ, Rothbaum BO, et al; REVAMP
Investigators: Cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy and
brief supportive psychotherapy for augmentation of antidepressant
nonresponse in chronic depression: the REVAMP trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry
66(11):1178--1188, 2009 19884606 Kool S, Dekker J, Duijsens IJ, et al:
Changes in personality pathology after pharmacotherapy and combined
therapy for depressed patients. J Pers Disord 17(1):60--72, 2003
12659547 Koss M, Shiang J: Research on brief psychotherapy, in Handbook
of Psychotherapy and Behavior Change. Edited by Bergin A, Garfield S.
New York, John Wiley, 1994, pp 664--700 Kozart MF: Understanding
efficacy in psychotherapy: an ethnomethodological perspective on the
therapeutic alliance. Am J Orthopsychiatry 72(2):217--231, 2002 15792061
Lamberti JS, Herz MI: Psychotherapy, social skills training, and
vocational rehabilitation in schizophrenia, in Contemporary Issues in
the Treatment of Schizophrenia. Edited by Shriqui CL, Nasrallah HA.
Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 1995, pp 713--734 Lauriello
J, Bustillo J, Keith SJ: A critical review of research on psychosocial
treatment of schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry 46(10):1409--1417, 1999
10578455 Lecomte T, Liberman RP, Wallace CJ: Identifying and using
reinforcers to enhance the treatment of persons with serious mental
illness. Psychiatr Serv 51(10):1312--1314, 2000 11013335 le Grange D,
Crosby RD, Rathouz PJ, Leventhal BL: A randomized controlled comparison
of familybased treatment and supportive psychotherapy for adolescent
bulimia nervosa. Arch Gen Psychiatry 64(9):1049--1056, 2007 17768270
Lehman AF, Herron JD, Schwartz RP, Myers CP: Rehabilitation for adults
with severe mental illness and substance use disorders: a clinical
trial. J Nerv Ment Dis 181(2):86--90, 1993 8426176 Lewis G, Appleby L:
Personality disorder: the patients psychiatrists dislike. Br J
Psychiatry 153:44-- 49, 1988 3224249 Liberman RP, Wallace CJ, Blackwell
G, et al: Skills training versus psychosocial occupational therapy for
persons with persistent schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry
155(8):1087--1091, 1998 9699698 Lindemann E: Symptomatology and
management of acute grief 1944. Am J Psychiatry 151(6 suppl):155--1608,
1994 8192191 Linehan MM: Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment of Borderline
Personality Disorder. New York, Guilford, 1993

Linehan MM, Tutek DA, Heard HL, Armstrong HE: Interpersonal outcome of
cognitive behavioral treatment for chronically suicidal borderline
patients. Am J Psychiatry 151(12):1771--1776, 1994 7977884 Lipsitz JD,
Gur M, Vermes D, et al: A randomized trial of interpersonal therapy
versus supportive therapy for social anxiety disorder. Depress Anxiety
25(6):542--553, 2008 17941096 Luborsky L: Principles of Psychoanalytic
Psychotherapy: A Manual for Supportive-Expressive Treatment. New York,
Basic Books, 1984 Luborsky L, Crits-Christoph P: Understanding
Transference: The Core Conflictual Relationship Theme Method. New York,
Basic Books, 1990 Luborsky L, Mark D: Short-term supportive-expressive
psychoanalytic psychotherapy, in Handbook of Short-Term Dynamic
Psychotherapy. Edited by Crits-Christoph P, Barber JP. New York, Basic
Books, 1991, pp 110--136 Lysaker PH, Kukla M, Belanger E, et al:
Individual psychotherapy and changes in self-experience in
schizophrenia: a qualitative comparison of patients in metacognitively
focused and supportive psychotherapy. Psychiatry 78(4):305--316, 2015
26745684 Maina G, Forner F, Bogetto F: Randomized controlled trial
comparing brief dynamic and supportive therapy with waiting list
condition in minor depressive disorders. Psychother Psychosom
74(1):43--50, 2005 15627856 Malan DH: Individual Psychotherapy and the
Science of Psychodynamics. London, Butterworth, 1979 Manring J, Beitman
BD, Dewan MJ: Evaluating competence in psychotherapy. Paper presented at
the Annual Meeting of the American Psychiatric Association, San
Francisco, CA, May 2003 Markowitz JC, Klerman GL, Clougherty KF, et al:
Individual psychotherapies for depressed HIVpositive patients. Am J
Psychiatry 152(10):1504--1509, 1995 7573591 Markowitz JC, Petkova E,
Neria Y, et al: Is exposure necessary? A randomized clinical trial of
interpersonal psychotherapy for PTSD. Am J Psychiatry 172(5):430--440,
2015 25677355 Marlatt GA, Gordon JR: Determinants of relapse:
implications for the maintenance of behavior change, in Behavioral
Medicine: Changing Health Lifestyles. Edited by Davidson PO, Davidson
SM. New York, Brunner/Mazel, 1980, pp 410--452 Marlatt GA, Gordon JR:
Relapse Prevention: Maintenance Strategies in the Treatment of Addictive
Behaviors. New York, Guilford, 1985 Massie MJ, Holland JC: Depression
and the cancer patient. J Clin Psychiatry 51(suppl):12--17, discussion
18--19, 1990 2195008 McGorry PD, Nelson B, Phillips LJ, et al:
Randomized controlled trial of interventions for young people at
ultra-high risk of psychosis: twelve-month outcome. J Clin Psychiatry
74(4):349--356, 2013 23218022 Menninger K: Theory of Psychoanalytic
Technique. London, Imago, 1958 Messer SB: A psychodynamic perspective on
resistance in psychotherapy: vive la résistance. J Clin Psychol
58(2):157--163, 2002 11793328 Mezirow J: On critical reflection. Adult
Educ Q 48:185--198, 1998 Miller WR, Rollnick S: Motivational
Interviewing: Preparing People to Change Addictive Behavior. New York,
Guilford, 1991 Miller WR, Rose GS: Motivational interviewing in
relational context. Am Psychol 65:298--299, 2010 Misch DA: Basic
strategies of dynamic supportive therapy. J Psychother Pract Res
9(4):173--189, 2000 11069130

Mitchell JT, Everly GS Jr: Critical Incident Stress Debriefing (CISD):
An Operations Manual for the Prevention of Traumatic Stress Among
Emergency Service and Disaster Workers, 2nd Edition. Ellicott City, MD,
Chevron, 1996 Mitchell JT, Everly GS Jr: Critical Incident Stress
Management (CISM): Basic Group Crisis Intervention, 3rd Edition.
Ellicott City, MD, International Critical Incident Stress Foundation,
2003 Mitchell SA: Relational Concepts in Psychoanalysis: An Integration.
Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1988 Mumford E, Schlesinger HJ,
Glass GV: The effect of psychological intervention on recovery from
surgery and heart attacks: an analysis of the literature. Am J Public
Health 72(2):141--151, 1982 7055315 Novalis PN, Rojcewicz J, Peele R:
Clinical Manual of Supportive Psychotherapy. Washington, DC, American
Psychiatric Association Publishing, 1993 Novalis PN, Singer V, Peele R:
Clinical Manual of Supportive Psychotherapy. Washington, DC, American
Psychiatric Association Publishing, 2020 Nunberg H: The synthetic
function of the ego. Int J Psychoanal 12:123--140, 1931 Okuyama T,
Akechi T, Mackenzie L, Furukawa TA: Psychotherapy for depression among
advanced, incurable cancer patients: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Cancer Treat Rev 56:16--27, 2017 28453966 O'Malley SS,
Jaffe AJ, Chang G, et al: Naltrexone and coping skills therapy for
alcohol dependence: a controlled study. Arch Gen Psychiatry
49(11):881--887, 1992 1444726 Othmer E, Othmer S: The Clinical Interview
Using DSM-IV, Vol 1. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 1994,
pp 87--97 Palmer RL: Dialectical behavior therapy for borderline
personality disorder. Adv Psychiatr Treat 8:10--16, 2002 Parad HJ, Parad
LG: Crisis Intervention, Book 2: The Practitioner's Sourcebook for Brief
Therapy. Milwaukee, WI, Family Service America, 1990 Parloff MB: Goals
in psychotherapy: mediating and ultimate, in Goals of Psychotherapy.
Edited by Mahrer AR. New York, Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1967, pp 5--19
Perry JC, Banon E, Ianni F: Effectiveness of psychotherapy for
personality disorders. Am J Psychiatry 156(9):1312--1321, 1999 10484939
Perry S, Cooper AM, Michels R: The psychodynamic formulation: its
purpose, structure, and clinical application. Am J Psychiatry
144(5):543--550, 1987 3578562 Persons JB: Cognitive Therapy in Practice:
A Case Formulation Approach. New York, WW Norton, 1989 Persons JB: Case
conceptualization in cognitive-behavior therapy, in Cognitive Therapies
in Action: Evolving Innovative Practice. Edited by Kuehlwein KT, Rosen
H. San Francisco, CA, JosseyBass, 1993, pp 33--53 Peselow ED, Sanfilipo
MP, Fieve RR, Gulbenkian G: Personality traits during depression and
after clinical recovery. Br J Psychiatry 164(3):349--354, 1994 8199788
Pine F: The interpretive moment: variations on classical themes. Bull
Menninger Clin 48(1):54--71, 1984 6692050 Pinsker H: A Primer of
Supportive Psychotherapy. Hillsdale, NJ, Analytic Press, 1997 Pinsker H,
Rosenthal RN: Beth Israel Medical Center Supportive Psychotherapy Manual
(Social and Behavioral Sciences Documents, Vol 18, No 2). New York, Beth
Israel Medical Center, 1988

Pinsker H, Rosenthal R, McCullough L: Dynamic supportive psychotherapy,
in Handbook of ShortTerm Dynamic Psychotherapy. Edited by
Crits-Christoph P, Barber JP. New York, Basic Books, 1991, pp 220--247
Pinsker H, Hellerstein DJ, Rosenthal RN, et al: Supportive therapy,
common factors and eclecticism. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of
the American Psychiatric Association, New York, May 1996 Pinsker H,
Mellman L, Beresin E, et al: AADPRT Supportive Therapy Competencies.
Lebanon, PA, American Association of Directors of Psychiatric Residency
Training, November 2001 Piper WE, Joyce AS, McCallum M, Azim HF:
Interpretive and supportive forms of psychotherapy and patient
personality variables. J Consult Clin Psychol 66(3):558--567, 1998
9642895 Pokorny AD: Prediction of suicide in psychiatric patients:
report of a prospective study. Arch Gen Psychiatry 40(3):249--257, 1983
6830404 Pollack J, Flegenheimer W, Winston A: Brief adaptive
psychotherapy, in Handbook of Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy. Edited
by Crits-Christoph P, Barber JP. New York, Basic Books, 1991, pp
199--219 Posner K, Brent D, Lucas C, et al: Columbia-Suicide Severity
Rating Scale (C-SSRS). New York, Columbia University/New York State
Psychiatric Institute, 2009 Prochaska JO, DiClemente CC: The
Transtheoretical Approach: Crossing Traditional Boundaries of Therapy.
Homewood, IL, Dow Jones-Irwin, 1984 Psychopathology Committee of the
Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry: Reexamination of therapist
self-disclosure. Psychiatr Serv 52(11):1489--1493, 2001 11684745 Puryear
DA: Helping People in Crisis. San Francisco, CA, Jossey-Bass, 1979
Quality Assurance Project: Treatment outlines for the management of the
somatoform disorders. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 19(4):397--407, 1985 3869006
Rea MM, Strachan AM, Goldstein MJ, et al: Changes in patient coping
style following individual and family treatment for schizophrenia. Br J
Psychiatry 158:642--647, 1991 1860018 Regier DA, Farmer ME, Rae DS, et
al: Comorbidity of mental disorders with alcohol and other drug abuse:
results from the Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) Study. JAMA
264(19):2511-- 2518, 1990 2232018 Renaud J, Brent DA, Baugher M, et al:
Rapid response to psychosocial treatment for adolescent depression: a
two-year follow-up. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry
37(11):1184--1190, 1998 9808930 Richard ML, Liskow BI, Perry PJ: Recent
psychostimulant use in hospitalized schizophrenics. J Clin Psychiatry
46(3):79--83, 1985 2857708 Robbins B: Under attack: devaluation and the
challenge of tolerating the transference. J Psychother Pract Res
9(3):136--141, 2000 10896738 Roberts AR: An overview of crisis theory
and crisis intervention, in Crisis Intervention Handbook. Edited by
Roberts AR. New York, Oxford University Press, 2000, pp 3--30 Roberts
LW: A Clinical Guide to Psychiatric Ethics. Arlington, VA, American
Psychiatric Association Publishing, 2016 Rockland LH: Supportive
Therapy: A Psychodynamic Approach. New York, Basic Books, 1989 Rollnick
S, Miller WR: What is motivational interviewing? Behav Cogn Psychother
23:325--334, 1995 Rosenbaum B, Harder S, Knudsen P, et al: Supportive
psychodynamic psychotherapy versus treatment as usual for first-episode
psychosis: two-year outcome. Psychiatry 75(4):331--341, 2012 23244011

Rosenthal RN: Group treatments for schizophrenic substance abusers, in
The Group Therapy of Substance Abuse. Edited by Brook DW, Spitz HI. New
York, Haworth Medical Press, 2002, pp 329--351 Rosenthal RN: Techniques
of individual supportive psychotherapy, in Textbook of Psychotherapeutic
Treatments. Edited by Gabbard GO. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric
Publishing, 2009, pp 417--445 Rosenthal RN, Westreich L: Treatment of
persons with dual diagnoses of substance use disorder and other
psychological problems, in Addictions: A Comprehensive Guidebook. Edited
by McCrady GA, Epstein EE. New York, Oxford University Press, 1999, pp
439--476 Rosenthal RN, Muran JC, Pinsker H, et al: Interpersonal change
in brief supportive psychotherapy. J Psychother Pract Res 8(1):55--63,
1999 9888107 Rosenthal RN, Miner CR, Sena P, et al: The therapeutic
alliance in group treatments for substance pabusers with schizophrenia.
Paper Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Psychiatric
Association, Chicago, IL, May 2000 Rosenzweig S: Some implicit common
factors in diverse methods of psychotherapy. Am J Orthopsychiatry
6:412--415, 1936 Rounsaville BJ, Carroll KM: Individual psychotherapy,
in Principles of Addiction Medicine. Edited by Graham AW, Schultz TK.
Chevy Chase, MD, American Society of Addiction Medicine, 1998, pp
631--652 Sachse R, Kramer U: Clarification-oriented psychotherapy of
dependent personality disorder. J Contemp Psychother 48:1--11, 2018
Safran JD, Muran JC: Negotiating the Therapeutic Alliance: A Relational
Treatment Guide. New York, Guilford, 2000, pp 6--12 Salmon TW: War
neuroses and their lesson. New York Medical Journal 59:993--994, 1919
Sampson H, Weiss J: Testing hypotheses: the approach of the Mount Zion
Psychotherapy Research Group, in The Psychotherapeutic Process: A
Research Handbook. Edited by Greenberg LS, Pinsof WM. New York,
Guilford, 1986, pp 591--613 Sandoval J: Crisis counseling:
conceptualizations and genetic principles. School Psych Rev 14:257--
265, 1985 Scaturo DJ: A tripartite learning conceptualization of
psychotherapy: the therapeutic alliance, technical interventions, and
relearning. Am J Psychother 64(1):1--27, 2010 20405762 Schramm E,
Kriston L, Zobel I, et al: Effect of disorder-specific vs nonspecific
psychotherapy for chronic depression: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA
Psychiatry 74(3):233--242, 2017 28146251 Sharf J, Primavera LH, Diener
MJ: Dropout and therapeutic alliance: a meta-analysis of adult
individual psychotherapy. Psychotherapy (Chic) 47(4):637--645, 2010
21198249 Shear MK, Houck P, Greeno C, Masters S: Emotion-focused
psychotherapy for patients with panic disorder. Am J Psychiatry
158(12):1993--1998, 2001 11729015 Sifneos PE: The prevalence of
'alexithymic' characteristics in psychosomatic patients. Psychother
Psychosom 22(2):255--262, 1973 4770536 Sifneos PE: Problems of
psychotherapy of patients with alexithymic characteristics and physical
disease. Psychother Psychosom 26(2):65--70, 1975 1202547 Simon JC:
Criteria for therapist self-disclosure. Am J Psychother 42(3):404--415,
1988 3177704 Skaikeu KA: Crisis Intervention. Boston, Allyn & Bacon,
1990 Smith TE, Hull JW, Goodman M, et al: The relative influences of
symptoms, insight, and neurocognition on social adjustment in
schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder. J Nerv Ment

Dis 187(2):102--108, 1999 10067950 Spiegel D, Classen C: Acute stress
disorders, in Treatments of Psychiatric Disorders, 2nd Edition. Edited
by Gabbard GO. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 1995, pp
1521--1536 Stanton AH, Gunderson JG, Knapp PH, et al: Effects of
psychotherapy in schizophrenia, I: design and implementation of a
controlled study. Schizophr Bull 10(4):520--563, 1984 6151245 Sudak DM,
Goldberg DA: Trends in psychotherapy training: a national survey of
psychiatry residency training. Acad Psychiatry 36(5):369--373, 2012
22983467 Thomas EM, Weiss SM: Nonpharmacological interventions with
chronic cancer pain in adults. Cancer Contr 7(2):157--164, 2000 10783820
Thompson LW, Gallagher D: Depression and its treatment. Aging (Milano)
348:14--18, 1985 Tompkins MA: Cognitive-behavioral case formulation: the
case of Jim. J Psychother Integration 6:97--105, 1996 Truong A, Wu P,
Diez-Barroso R, Coverdale J: What is the efficacy of teaching
psychotherapy to psychiatry residents and medical students? Acad
Psychiatry 39(5):575--579, 2015 25933647 Ursano RJ, Silberman EK:
Psychoanalysis, psychoanalytic psychotherapy, and supportive
psychotherapy, in The American Psychiatric Press Textbook of Psychiatry,
3rd Edition. Edited by Hales RE, Yudofsky SC, Talbott JA. Washington,
DC, 1999, pp 1157--1183 Vaillant GE: Adaptation to Life. Boston, MA,
Little, Brown, 1977 Vaillant GE (ed): Empirical Studies of Ego
Mechanisms of Defense. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 1986
van der Kolk BA, Spinazzola J, Blaustein ME, et al: A randomized
clinical trial of eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR),
fluoxetine, and pill placebo in the treatment of posttraumatic stress
disorder: treatment effects and long-term maintenance. J Clin Psychiatry
68(1):37--46, 2007 17284128 van Emmerik AAP, Kamphuis JH, Hulsbosch AM,
Emmelkamp PM: Single session debriefing after psychological trauma: a
meta-analysis. Lancet 360(9335):766--771, 2002 12241834 van Gelderen MJ,
Nijdam MJ, Vermetten E: An innovative framework for delivering
psychotherapy to patients with treatment-resistant posttraumatic stress
disorder: rationale for interactive motionassisted therapy. Front
Psychiatry 9:176, 2018 29780334 Vaughn CE, Leff JP: The influence of
family and social factors on the course of psychiatric illness: a
comparison of schizophrenic and depressed neurotic patients. Br J
Psychiatry 129:125--137, 1976 963348 Viederman M: A model for
interpretative supportive dynamic psychotherapy. Psychiatry 71(4):349--
358, 2008 19152284 Vinnars B, Barber JP, Norén K, et al: Manualized
supportive-expressive psychotherapy versus nonmanualized
community-delivered psychodynamic therapy for patients with personality
disorders: bridging efficacy and effectiveness. Am J Psychiatry
162(10):1933--1940, 2005 16199841 Volpicelli JR, Alterman AI, Hayashida
M, O'Brien CP: Naltrexone in the treatment of alcohol dependence. Arch
Gen Psychiatry 49(11):876--880, 1992 1345133 Wachtel P: Therapeutic
Communication: Principles and Effective Practice. New York, Guilford,
1993 Wallerstein RS: Forty-Two Lives in Treatment: A Study of
Psychoanalysis and Psychotherapy. New York, Guilford, 1986 Wallerstein
RS: The psychotherapy research project of the Menninger Foundation: an
overview. J Consult Clin Psychol 57(2):195--205, 1989 2708605

Walsh BT, Wilson GT, Loeb KL, et al: Medication and psychotherapy in the
treatment of bulimia nervosa. Am J Psychiatry 154(4):523--531, 1997
9090340 Waltz J, Addis ME, Koerner K, Jacobson NS: Testing the integrity
of a psychotherapy protocol: assessment of adherence and competence. J
Consult Clin Psychol 61(4):620--630, 1993 8370857 Werman DS: The
Practice of Supportive Psychotherapy. New York, Brunner/Mazel, 1984
Westerman MA, Foote JP, Winston A: Change in coordination across phases
of psychotherapy and outcome: two mechanisms for the role played by
patients' contribution to the alliance. J Consult Clin Psychol
63(4):672--675, 1995 7673546 Wilhelm S, Deckersbach T, Coffey BJ, et al:
Habit reversal versus supportive psychotherapy for Tourette's disorder:
a randomized controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry 160(6):1175--1177, 2003
12777279 Wilkinson CB, Vera E: Management and treatment of disaster
victims. Psychiatr Ann 15:174--184, 1985 Winnicott DW: The Maturational
Process and the Facilitating Environment: Studies in the Theory of
Emotional Development. London, Hogarth, 1965 Winston A, Winston B:
Handbook of Integrated Short-Term Psychotherapy. Washington, DC,
American Psychiatric Publishing, 2002 Winston A, Pinsker H, McCullough
L: A review of supportive psychotherapy. Hosp Community Psychiatry
37(11):1105--1114, 1986 3781499 Winston A, Rosenthal RN, Muran JC:
Supportive psychotherapy, in Handbook of Personality Disorders: Theory,
Research, and Treatment. Edited by Livesley WJ. New York, Guilford,
2001, pp 344--358 Woody GE, McLellan AT, Luborsky L, O'Brien CP:
Sociopathy and psychotherapy outcome. Arch Gen Psychiatry
42(11):1081--1086, 1985 4051686 Yrondi A, Rieu J, Massip C, et al:
Depressed patients' preferences for type of psychotherapy: a preliminary
study. Patient Prefer Adherence 9:1371--1374, 2015 26491265 Zetzel ER:
Current concepts of transference. Int J Psychoanal 37(4-5):369--376,
1956 13366506 Ziedonis D, Fisher W: Motivation-based assessment and
treatment of substance abuse in patients with schizophrenia. Dir
Psychiatry 16:1--7, 1996 Ziedonis DM, Trudeau K: Motivation to quit
using substances among individuals with schizophrenia: implications for
a motivation-based treatment model. Schizophr Bull 23(2):229--238, 1997
9165633 Zitrin CM, Klein DF, Woerner MG: Behavior therapy, supportive
psychotherapy, imipramine, and phobias. Arch Gen Psychiatry
35(3):307--316, 1978 31847

Index Page numbers printed in boldface type refer to tables or figures.
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME), 163--164,
166 Activities of daily living, 63 Acute bereavement, 92--93 Acute
crisis, 91 Adaptive behavior advice and, 62--63 definition of supportive
psychotherapy and, 9 supportive psychotherapy for severe mental illness
and, 143--147 supportive treatment for substance use disorders and,
154--155 techniques of supportive psychotherapy and, 54, 60, 62--64
Adjustment disorders, 92 Adolescents, and depression, 94 Affects, and
structural approach to case formulation, 44. See also Emotion(s)
Alcoholics Anonymous, 102, 154, 156 Alexithymia, 25, 93, 155 American
Association of Directors of Psychiatric Residency Training (AADPRT),
165, 166, 167-- 168, 170 Anger awareness-expanding interventions and, 70
unrecognized forms of, 25 Anorexia nervosa, 177 Anticipatory guidance,
64--65, 154 Antidepressants chronic depression and, 175 personality
disorders and, 149 Antisocial personality disorder, 149 Anxiety
reduction and prevention of, 65--69 resistance in therapeutic
relationship and, 114--115 schizophrenia and, 144 Anxiety disorders,
outcome research on supportive psychotherapy for, 175--176 Assessment.
See also Evaluation of competence in supportive psychotherapy, 166, 170
diagnosis and, 33--34 evaluation interview and, 34--35 patient history
and, 35--36

personality disorders and, 148 of suicidal patient, 134
supportive-expressive continuum and, 34, 35 therapeutic alliance and, 33
triangle of conflict and triangle of person, 36, 37 video vignette of,
36--41 Attacking questions, and self-esteem, 21 Automatic thoughts, and
depression, 40 Autonomous functions, and case formulation, 45 Awareness,
expansion of, 69--71 Beginning phase of treatment, 98--99. See also
Initiation Behavior. See Adaptive behavior; Maladaptive behavior;
Passive-aggressive behavior Beth Israel Medical Center Psychotherapy
Training Program, 170, 171--172 Bipolar disorder, 143 Borderline
personality disorder, 149--150, 176 Boundaries, professional, 101--104
Brief dynamic therapy, for depression, 174 Brief psychotherapy crisis
intervention and, 123 indications for, 101 Bulimia nervosa, 94. See also
Eating disorders Buprenorphine, 151 Cancer, and depression, 90 Case
formulation cognitive-behavioral approach to, 42, 48--49, 50--51
definition of, 41 DSM-5 and, 41 dynamic approach to, 42, 46--48, 50
genetic approach to, 42, 46, 50 personality disorders and, 148
structural approach to, 42--46, 49--50 Case illustrations. See also
Video vignettes of dynamic case formulation, 47--48 of psychodynamic
formulations, 24 of structural case formulation, 45--46 of
supportive-expressive continuum, 9--10 Change, concept of in literature
on psychotherapy, 29--30. See also Personality change Chronic pain, 92
Clarification as awareness-expanding intervention, 69 transference and,
14 Cognition, supportive psychotherapy and faulty forms of, 29
Cognitive-behavioral approach, to case formulation, 42, 48--49, 50--51
Cognitive-behavioral therapy depression following traumatic brain injury
and, 175 eating disorders and, 177

patterns of thought and maladaptive behaviors, 26 relapse prevention for
substance use disorders and, 154 supportive interventions and, 7
Cognitive therapy, for PTSD, 133 Communication. See Conversational
style; Interpersonal communication theory Community mental health
movement, and crisis intervention, 121 Competence, in supportive
psychotherapy assessment of, 163, 166, 170 definition of, 164 methods of
measuring, 163--164 psychotherapy supervision and, 165--166, 168, 170
Conflict, triangle of, 36, 37 Confrontation as awareness-expanding
technique, 69--70 transference and, 15 Conscience, and case formulation,
45 Contextual techniques, 53 Contraindications for supportive
psychotherapy, 94--95 Conversational style, in supportive psychotherapy,
16--19 Co-occurring mental disorders indications for supportive
psychotherapy and, 90 substance use disorders and, 159--161 Coping
skills anxiety reduction in schizophrenia patients and, 144 substance
use disorders and, 152 Core beliefs, and case formulation, 48--49 Core
conflictual relationship theme (CCRT), 47 Core psychotherapy skills, 166
Corrective emotional experience, and transference, 28 Counseling, and
supportive-expressive continuum, 6, 8 Countertransference, and
therapeutic relationship, 116--120 Crisis intervention critical incident
stress management and, 136, 140 definition of crisis, 121 evaluation
and, 123--126 history and theory of psychiatric care for, 121
indications for supportive psychotherapy and, 91--93 psychotherapy as
distinct from, 123, 135--136, 137--139 suicide and, 133--135 therapeutic
approaches to, 126--133 Critical incident stress management (CISM), 136,
140 Cultural context models of substance abuse and addiction, 156
provision of food or small gifts in office setting, 96 Debriefing, and
crisis intervention, 123, 136, 138, 140 Defenses approach to in
supportive psychotherapy, 22--23

case formulation and, 44 denial, 22 expressive approach to transference
and, 108 personality disorders and, 148 Delayed grief, and
schizophrenia, 70 Delirium, 94 Dementia, 94 Depression. See also Major
depression adaptive behavior and, 55 indications for supportive
psychotherapy for, 90 outcome research on supportive psychotherapy for,
174--175 video vignette illustrating assessment of, 37--41 video
vignette illustrating supportive-expressive treatment of, 77--88
Desensitization, and behavioral techniques in supportive psychotherapy,
29 Devaluation, and countertransference, 119--120 Diagnosis, and
assessment process, 33. See also Assessment; Case formulation
Dialectical behavior therapy, for personality disorders, 150, 176
Disease model, of addiction, 156 Disulfiram, 151 "Doorknob issues," and
conduct of sessions, 97 DSM-5, and case formulation, 41 Dynamic
approach, to case formulation, 42, 46--48, 50 Dysphoric mood, and
substance use disorders, 155 Early life experiences, and psychodynamic
theory, 26--27 Eating disorders, 177. See also Bulimia nervosa
Education. See also Psychoeducation modes of action in supportive
psychotherapy and, 28 psychotherapy supervision and, 165--166, 168
teaching of supportive psychotherapy, 10--12, 164--165 Ego functions
definition of supportive psychotherapy and, 8--9 structural approach to
case formulation and, 43 techniques of supportive psychotherapy and, 54
Emotion(s). See also Anger; Corrective emotional experience
awareness-expanding interventions and, 70 countertransference and, 117
psychodynamic therapy and unrecognized, 24--26 substance use disorders
and, 155 Emotion-focused psychotherapy, for panic disorder, 176
Encouragement, as technique, 60--61, 154 Evaluation, and crisis
intervention, 123--126. See also Assessment Exhortation, as form of
encouragement, 61 Exposure therapy PTSD and, 133 social anxiety disorder
and, 175 Expressive psychotherapy, 2, 5 substance use disorders and,
151--152

supportive-expressive continuum and, 6, 7, 9, 34 termination phase of
treatment and, 100--101 transference in, 106--109 Expressive stance, in
supportive psychotherapy, 23 Eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing, 133 Family. See also Interpersonal relationships
assessment of risk of suicide and, 134 psychoeducation on severe mental
illness for, 147 Family-based treatment, for eating disorders, 177
Fearfulness, and reassurance, 59 Food, and office arrangements, 96
Freud, Sigmund, 13, 45, 109 Friends, and friendship. See also
Interpersonal relationships assessment of suicide risk and, 134
professional boundaries and, 103 Genetic approach, to case evaluation,
42, 46, 50 Gifts, and therapist-patient relationship, 96 Goals of crisis
intervention, 137 definition of supportive psychotherapy and, 3 setting
of in supportive psychotherapy, 51--52 Grief. See also Acute bereavement
crisis intervention and grief work, 121 unrecognized emotions and, 25,
70 Ground rules of supportive psychotherapy, 95 Group therapy, for
substance use disorders, 152 Harm avoidance, and personality disorders,
148 Help-rejecting, as contraindication for supportive psychotherapy, 94
HIV-positive patients, and depression, 92 Holding environment, and
anxiety reduction, 66 Homeostasis, and crisis intervention, 122
Hospitalization, of suicidal patients, 135 Ideals, and case formulation,
45 Imipramine, 175, 176 Impulse control, and case formulation, 44
Initiation, of supportive psychotherapy, 95. See also Beginning phase
Integrated psychotherapy, for PTSD, 133 Interpersonal communication
theory, and countertransference, 118--119 Interpersonal relationships.
See also Family; Friends professional boundaries and, 103 therapeutic
alliance and, 55--56 Interpersonal therapy for eating disorders, 177 for
PTSD, 133

for social anxiety disorder, 176 Interpretation expressive approach to
transference and, 108--109 techniques of supportive psychotherapy and,
70--71 Interpretive psychotherapy, for personality disorders, 176
Interventions. See also Crisis intervention; Techniques specific
techniques, 53 transferences as guides to, 106 Inventory of
Interpersonal Problems, 176 Lateness, of patients for sessions, 96--97
Learning theory, 28--29 Lending ego, 64 Limit setting, and conduct of
sessions, 98 Long-term psychotherapy, indications for, 101 Loss, and
crisis intervention, 122 Major depression contraindications for
supportive psychotherapy and, 94 outcome research on supportive
psychotherapy for, 175 video vignette of misalliance and, 111--113
Maladaptive behavior countertransference and patterns of, 117--118
psychodynamically oriented therapy and, 26 Malingering, 94 Mania, 143
Maxims, and normalizing, 60 Medical illness. See also Cancer indications
for supportive psychotherapy and, 92 outcome research on supportive
psychotherapy for, 177 Medications. See also Self-medication personality
disorders and, 148 substance use disorders and, 151 suicidal patients
and, 135 Menninger psychotherapy research project, 27, 89, 172--173
Mental illness. See also Anxiety disorders; Bipolar disorder;
Co-occurring mental disorders; Depression; Personality disorders;
Posttraumatic stress disorder; Psychopathology; Psychotic disorders
indications for supportive psychotherapy and chronic, 93--94 supportive
psychotherapy for severe forms of, 141--142 Mentalization-based
psychotherapy, for personality disorders, 176 Methadone, 151 Middle
phase of treatment, 99--100 Mindfulness exercises, and dialectical
behavior therapy, 150 Morals, and case formulation, 45 Motivation and
goal setting in supportive psychotherapy, 51 Motivational interviewing
substance use disorders and, 152--154, 161

supportive conversational style and, 17 Myocardial infarction, 177
Naltrexone, 151 Naming of problems, and reduction of anxiety, 67
Narcissistic personality disorder, 148 National Comorbidity Survey, 159
National Institute of Mental Health, 173, 174 Negative transference, 108
Neurosis, 1--2 Normalizing, and reassurance, 59--60 Objectives, and
definition of supportive psychotherapy, 3 Object relations, and case
formulation, 43--44 Observation, and transference, 14
Obsessive-compulsive disorder, 94 Obstacles to treatment, and case
formulation, 49 Office arrangements, for supportive psychotherapy,
95--96 Open-ended questions, and conversational style, 18 Origins of
core beliefs, 49 personal story of patient and, 30--31 Outcome research,
and clinical trials of supportive psychotherapy, 172--177 Overpowering
statements, and patient's self-esteem, 20--21 Panic disorder, and panic
attacks, 94, 175, 176 Parents, as metaphor for supportive therapist, 31
Paroxetine, 38 Passive-aggressive behavior, 22 Patient. See also Safety;
Therapeutic alliance; Therapeutic relationship goal setting in
supportive psychotherapy and, 51--52 pattern of lateness to sessions,
96--97 video vignette of uncooperative, 71--77 Patient history, and
assessment process, 35--36 Person, triangle of, 36, 37 Personal growth,
and crisis states, 122 Personality change, and objectives of supportive
psychotherapy, 2, 51 Personality disorders, 147--150, 176--177
Pharmacotherapy. See Medications Phobia, 175 Positive reinforcement, and
schizophrenia, 142 POST (psychodynamically oriented supportive therapy),
3 Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and crisis intervention, 126,
133 Praise, as technique, 56--57, 142, 155 Prevalence, of co-occurring
mental illness and substance use disorder, 159 Preventive psychiatry,
and crisis intervention, 121 Problem list, and case formulation, 48
Prompts, and conversational style, 18

Psychoanalysis, and psychoanalytic theory case formulation approaches
and, 41 development of supportive psychotherapy and, 1--2 education of
psychotherapists and, 11 supportive-expressive continuum and, 6
Psychodynamic psychotherapy, 2, 3--4 Psychodynamic theory psychoanalysis
and development of, 2 supportive-expressive continuum and, 5--10
supportive psychotherapy and assumptions based on, 23--27
Psychoeducation. See also Education for family on severe mental illness,
147 substance use disorders and, 155--159, 160--161 supportive
psychotherapy for severe mental illness and, 143 Psychogenetics, 26--27
Psychological functions, and ego functions, 9 Psychopathology,
supportive psychotherapy and assessment of levels of, 34, 35
Psychopharmacology. See Medications Psychotherapy. See also Expressive
psychotherapy; Integrative psychotherapy; Interpretive psychotherapy;
Psychodynamic psychotherapy; Short-term dynamic psychotherapy;
Supportive psychotherapy; Transference-focused psychotherapy as distinct
from crisis intervention, 123, 135--136, 137--139 efficacy of for
personality disorders, 148--149 research studies on teaching of,
164--165 Psychotic disorders, supportive psychotherapy as adjuvant
treatment strategy for, 90. See also Schizophrenia Questions
conversational style and patient's responses to, 17--18 self-esteem of
patient and, 21 Rationalizing, and reduction of anxiety, 67--69 Reality
and reality testing, and case formulation, 42--43 Reassurance, as
technique, 58--60, 154 Reframing reduction of anxiety and, 67--69
resistance in therapeutic relationship and, 115 Rehabilitation, and
encouragement, 60--61 Rehearsal, and technique of anticipatory guidance,
64--65 Relapse prevention of as objective of supportive psychotherapy,
65 substance use disorders and risk of, 152, 154--155, 160 Research
clinical trials on outcome of supportive psychotherapy, 172--177 studies
on teaching of psychotherapy, 164--165 Resentment, and negative
emotions, 70 Residency Review Committee for Psychiatry (ACGME),
163--164, 166 Resident Evaluation for Competence in Supportive
Psychotherapy, 170, 171--172 Resistance

elements of psychodynamic psychotherapy and, 4 therapeutic relationship
and, 113--116 Respect, and patient's self-esteem, 21--22 Retelling, by
individuals with trauma history, 27 Rewards, and positive reinforcement,
142 Risk assessment, and crisis intervention, 134 Safety, of patient
borderline personality disorder and sense of, 150 crisis intervention
and, 127 Schizoaffective disorder, 71--77 Schizophrenia anticipatory
guidance and, 65 delayed grief and, 70 outcome research on supportive
psychotherapy and, 173--174 reassurance and, 58 substance use disorders
and, 159 supportive psychotherapy for severe mental illness and, 90,
142--147 Seating, and office arrangement, 95--96 Self-assertion,
reframing of resistance as, 115 Self-disclosure, of information by
therapist, 16, 102 Self-esteem adverse effects of anxiety on, 65
definition of supportive psychotherapy and, 8 development of as
technique, 19--22, 54, 56--61, 142 substance use disorders and, 155
suicidal patients and, 135 Self-help groups, and models of
self-disclosure of information, 102 Self-medication, and substance use
disorders, 155, 156 Setting the agenda, as tactic in supportive
psychotherapy, 22 Short-term dynamic psychotherapy crisis intervention
and, 122 for personality disorders, 176 Showing the map, as tactic, 22
Silence, and resistance in therapeutic relationship, 115 Skills
building. See Adaptive behavior; Problem solving; Social skills training
Social anxiety disorder, 175--176 Social skills training, and
schizophrenia, 144, 173. See also Interpersonal relationships
Somatization disorder, 92 Stances supportive-expressive continuum and,
5, 7 transference and expressive form of, 14 Stress, factors in
individual response to, 122 Structural approach, to case formulation,
42--46, 49--50 Substance use disorders, and supportive psychotherapy,
92, 150--161 Suicide, and suicidal ideation crisis intervention and,
133--135 dialectical behavior therapy and, 150

prediction of, 133 Superego functions, and case formulation, 43, 45
Supervision, and training in supportive psychotherapy, 165--166, 168,
170 Supportive-expressive continuum assessment process and, 34, 35
psychodynamic theory and, 5--10 Supportive-expressive treatment, video
vignette of, 77--88 Supportive psychotherapy. See also Assessment;
Competence; Crisis intervention; Education; Techniques; Therapeutic
relationship contraindications for, 94--95 conversational style and,
16--19 defenses and, 22--23 definition of, 1, 2--3, 8--10 direct
measures and, 13 history of development, 1--5 indications for, 89--94
initiation of treatment, 95 mode of action, 27--31 office arrangements
for, 95--96 outcome research on, 172--177 personality disorders and,
147--150 professional boundaries and, 101--104 psychodynamic theory and
assumptions in, 23--27 schizophrenia and, 142--147 self-esteem and,
19--22 session initiation and termination, 96--98 severe mental illness
and, 141--142 substance use disorders and, 150--161
supportive-expressive continuum and, 5--10 therapist-patient
relationship and, 13--14 timing and intensity of treatment sessions,
98--101 transference and, 14--16, 106--109 Supportive therapy, as
distinct from supportive psychotherapy, 8 Synthetic function, and case
formulation, 45 Systematic approaches, to crisis intervention, 123, 127
Systematic hierarchical desensitization, 175 Teaching, of adaptive
behavior, 62. See also Education Techniques, of supportive psychotherapy
anticipatory guidance, 64--65, 154 building of self-esteem, 54, 56--61
definition of, 3 expanding of awareness, 69--71 reduction and prevention
of anxiety, 65--69 skills building and adaptive behavior, 54, 60, 62--64
therapeutic alliance and, 53, 54, 55--56 video vignettes of, 71--88
Temporal framing, and initiation or termination of sessions, 96--98
Termination phase of treatment, 100--101

Therapeutic alliance. See also Therapeutic relationship assessment and
establishment of, 33 beginning phase of treatment and, 98 crisis
intervention and, 127 development of concept, 109--110 middle phase of
treatment and, 99 mode of action in supportive psychotherapy and, 28
recognition and repair of misalliance, 110--113 substance use disorders
and, 152 techniques of supportive psychotherapy and, 53, 54, 55--56
Therapeutic relationship. See also Therapeutic alliance; Transference
countertransference and, 116--120 general principles of, 105--106
resistance and, 113--116 underlying assumptions of supportive
psychotherapy and, 13--16 Thoughts, and thinking. See also Automatic
thoughts cognitive-behavioral therapy and patterns of, 26 as focus of
supportive psychotherapy, 25 structural approach to case formulation
and, 44--45 Time limitation, of crisis intervention, 136, 137
Topiramate, 151 Tourette's disorder, 94 Transference. See also
Therapeutic relationship advice and, 62 elements of psychodynamic
psychotherapy, 4 expressive stance and, 14 idealizing form of, 120 mode
of action in supportive psychotherapy and, 28 personality disorders and,
149 supportive and expressive approaches to, 106--109 underlying
assumptions in supportive psychotherapy and, 14--16 Transference cure,
27 Transference-focused psychotherapy, for personality disorders, 176
Trauma, and crisis intervention, 122 Traumatic brain injury, 90, 175
Treatment plan, and case formulation, 49 12-step programs, and substance
use disorders, 152, 160. See also Alcoholics Anonymous Venting, 102, 177
as curative technique, 29 early life experiences and, 27 Video
recording, of psychotherapy for supervision, 168--169 Video vignettes.
See also Case illustrations assessment and, 36--41 crisis intervention
and, 124--126, 127--133 substance use disorders and, 156--159 techniques
of supportive psychotherapy and, 71--88 therapeutic alliance and,
111--113

Virtual reality, and PTSD, 133 Withdrawal, and resistance in therapeutic
relationship, 115--116 Working alliance, 109


