Being Empathic A companion for counsellors and therapists Steve Vincent
Client-centred therapist Person-centred supervisor, trainer and academic

Forewords by Gay Leah Barfield and Veniamin Kolpachnikov

Radcliffe Publishing Oxford • Seattle

CRC Press Taylor & Francis Group 6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742 © 2005 by Steve Vincent CRC Press is an
imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business No claim to
original U.S. Government works Version Date: 20160525 International
Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-138-03047-3 (eBook - PDF) This book
contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded
sources. While all reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable
data and information, neither the author\[s\] nor the publisher can
accept any legal responsibility or liability for any errors or omissions
that may be made. The publishers wish to make clear that any views or
opinions expressed in this book by individual editors, authors or
contributors are personal to them and do not necessarily reflect the
views/opinions of the publishers. The information or guidance contained
in this book is intended for use by medical, scientific or health-care
professionals and is provided strictly as a supplement to the medical or
other professional's own judgement, their knowledge of the patient's
medical history, relevant manufacturer's instructions and the
appropriate best practice guidelines. Because of the rapid advances in
medical science, any information or advice on dosages, procedures or
diagnoses should be independently verified. The reader is strongly urged
to consult the relevant national drug formulary and the drug companies'
and device or material manufacturers' printed instructions, and their
websites, before administering or utilizing any of the drugs, devices or
materials mentioned in this book. This book does not indicate whether a
particular treatment is appropriate or suitable for a particular
individual. Ultimately it is the sole responsibility of the medical
professional to make his or her own professional judgements, so as to
advise and treat patients appropriately. The authors and publishers have
also attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced
in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to
publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material
has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify
in any future reprint. Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no
part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized
in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or
hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording,
or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written
permission from the publishers. For permission to photocopy or use
material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com
(http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center,
Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is
a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration
for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a
photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been
arranged. Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks
or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and
explanation without intent to infringe. Visit the Taylor & Francis Web
site at http://www.taylorandfrancis.com and the CRC Press Web site
http://www.crcpress.com

Contents Forewords

v

About the author

xi

Introduction: The shape of this book

1

Prelude Client-centred therapy: an overview Client-centred therapy: a
summary 1 Empathic understanding: origins and developments In the
beginning, there was the word Dictionary corner Then there was Carl
Rogers Objectivity Respect for the individual Self-understanding
Psychological knowledge Predictable process The capacity of the client
Client-centred therapeutic relationships Somewhere in between Internal
frame of reference External frame of reference Empathy A theory of
therapy: if-then Necessary and sufficient The actualising tendency
Congruence Unconditional positive regard Accurate Empathic understanding
Towards the end Experiencing From state to process Intuition Reciprocity
Gender Summary

7 7 11 15 15 15 15 17 18 18 18 19 20 21 22 22 23 24 24 24 25 27 29 30 33
34 36 39 40 40 40

2

45 45 47 49 52 53 58

Empathic understanding is not a technique Thou shalt not skill! You
don't know what you've got until you lose it Acceptance and agreement
Challenging and confrontation Diagnosis, evaluation and prognosis
Explaining, interpreting and normalising

iv

Contents

Encouragement, rescuing, support and responsibility Focusing, leading
and suggestion A brief journey into power Mirroring, paraphrasing,
reflecting and summarising Praise and reassurance Probing and
questioning Therapist self-disclosure Transference and
counter-transference Uh-huh Understanding about Quack of all trades,
master of none? Summary

62 66 68 70 73 75 77 82 85 85 86 88

3

Empathising in action: an inter-view Background to this inter-view
Empathy: an inter-view

89 89 90

4

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions For
what we are about to receive Empathy and contact Empathy and client
incongruence Empathy and therapist congruence Empathy and therapist
unconditional positive regard Empathy and Empathic understanding Empathy
and client perception of therapist unconditional positive regard and
Empathic understanding Summary

119 119 119 135 150 162 169 170 176

5

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process Therapist be, client do
Experiencing of the potential self The full experiencing of an
affectional relationship The liking of one's self The discovery that the
core of personality is positive Being one's organism, one's experience
Therapist be Congruence and process Congruence: Fay, an illustration
Unconditional positive regard and process Unconditional positive regard:
Fay, an illustration Empathic understanding and process Empathy: Fay, an
illustration Client do

179 179 187 188 190 191 193 196 197 199 200 203 204 210 211

6

Afterwords

219

Bibliography Index

223 227

Foreword Reading this important new book has helped me note how far
afield and adrift I have gone from practising as a person-centred
therapist who once held complete trust in the core principles as being
truly necessary and sufficient in themselves for therapy to be
successful. As a result it helped me to return 'home' again with more
trust in myself and the client. Let's see what a 'cornucopia' of
offerings are provided in this book, since this important exploration of
Carl Rogers' work is about so much more than empathy, covering in fact
nearly all the major constructs and concepts of Rogers' work during his
lifetime. Throughout this book, to support his subtle analyses of the
principle of empathy in particular, Steve Vincent uses original source
material faithfully, including impeccable research going as far back as
1937, to seek Carl's earliest conceptualisations. Steve has also
minutely delved the depths of the major 1959 theoretical and scientific
analysis by Carl of his own theory, using quotes from it throughout the
work, thus both enlarging upon and deepening our understanding of the
principles. If the reader were never to read these source works of
Carl's in their entirety, then this book would provide beautifully clear
explications of them. The quotes and extracts from Rogers are always to
the point, and explorations of the concepts rich and original, each
amplifying, yet not changing, Carl's meanings. Steve also reminds us of
some of Rogers' own seminal thinking that has perhaps been lost over the
years; for example, citing an early quote of Carl's that the 'process of
change' is rather an existential state of 'changingness', a unique
paradox that in itself helps both the practitioner and the client be
comfortable with an ongoing state of evolving and emergent ways of
being. While the audience for this book might best be considered to be
those in training as therapists, or students using the book as a
university text, it will also be most helpful for practitioners who want
to review and renew a deeper understanding of Rogers' approach after
practising for so long that they may have forgotten or put aside the
core principles. Potential clients, in seeking a safe haven for their
deep explorations, may also profit greatly from this book as a guide in
their search.

How does this book advance our thinking? The depth of Steve's intellect
is shown in his creative new contributions to the advancement of our
thinking and the refinement of our practices. As a contribution to the
literature, the author minutely dissects the complexity of the principle
and practice of empathy to a level rarely achieved elsewhere, and of
other concepts as well. In the latter case, for example, he makes very
clear for the learner/reader/practitioner the distinction between the
actualisation tendency and self-actualisation, and between actualisation
and the formative tendency, constructs that so often get misused,
confused and misunderstood. He also makes an important distinction
between, and provides a precise

vi

Foreword

definition of, resistance and avoidance, arguing that these concepts are
inconsistent with the person-centred approach (PCA). In addition, he
makes it clear that Carl was adamant about the disservice to
relationship emanating from the concept of transference. Steve also
objects to such a concept because it separates, not connects, people
rather than creating what I term a 'reciprocal multidirectional empathy'
that emerges in all directions as therapy evolves, without interference
from such conceptual frames of separation. There are many
non-traditional insights, emphases and ideas throughout this book, such
as the fresh notion that unconditional positive regard is the highest
level of 'confrontation' and congruence. The examples the author uses to
support his points are moving and precise, such as the young boy cutting
himself, who moves towards self-understanding with his therapist by
respecting and accepting all perspectives of his inner 'configurations'.
In the writing about the 'as i f quality of empathy, there is a fine
example of what the best of being objective means, and its relationship
to being empathic. There is a creative acronym (VALID) to help us
remember the state of clients when they enter therapy, and subtle
analyses of each 'condition' needed for successful therapy, be there 3,
6 or 12! Enumerating the five early premises with which Carl began to
articulate his approach from 1961 onwards is very helpful. The author
makes a brilliant 'circular' reverse summation, intertwined and
non-linear in nature, that shows the complete tapestry of person-centred
principles as they weave together as a whole cloth. I appreciate Steve's
idea of the community being defined as various configurations' of
self/selves, expressed through different voices. His clarification of
the use of that term by Dave Mearns, and sourced originally by Carl
himself, is quite eyeopening. In each chapter the author invites us to
ask ourselves intellectually profound questions with no simple answers,
helping us to dig deeper into even more fertile soil for thinking
through our values and beliefs. This book is thus a profusion of
possibilities for us all. I am particularly interested in language, and
in those parts of the book which focus on use of language the reader
discovers very original contributions and additions to the PCA dialogue.
Steve defines words such as perception, awareness, symbolisation, etc.,
with great precision, as Carl seemed to use them. I may disagree
somewhat with the author in his critique of there being too much
emphasis on the importance of language in skills training. He seems to
contradict himself on occasion, acknowledging the importance of the
right word for a client, and thus the therapist, yet in some instances
discounting the importance of words, thus presenting an internal
contradiction for the reader to resolve for themselves, or to live with
as a dual truth and find their own path very person-centred!

How is this book different from others on the same subject? This book
has a unique format and style, merging tradition with innovation and
whimsy. In the middle of the book, we are suddenly presented with a
personal dialogue with Steve and an interviewer, which changes the pace
and rhythm of the book entirely. In fact this interview encapsulates
what the book is all about.

Foreword

vii

The interview is both intellectually stimulating and very personal,
including the T voice so derided in academia, and which Carl himself
initiated for the first time in academic writing. It is a very thorough
interview, engaging and stylistically different from the rest of the
book. Steve reminds me here of Brian Thorne and Carl himself in how very
honest and forthcoming he is about himself. This gives a further order
of credibility to the rest of book. I was delighted with the wit,
humour, play on words, catchy headings, and the like which Steve uses
throughout the text, whether in his personal interview segment, or
within the theoretical analyses, making the latter sparkle, and more
human and understandable for the reader. Steve uses these lighter
devices while at the same time asking the reader to be intellectually
stretched by the demands of the book. For example, he has fun with
clever yet profound sub-titles, such as Thou shalt not skill', and at
the same time addresses the deeper issue of: once I am 'de-skilled', who
am I as a therapist? This is a very important idea, as if only through
emptying my self can I discover myself. No matter what the writing style
or rhythm, the nature of Steve's enquiry is evocative and thorough,
while he also takes strong and clear stands, such as objecting to some
current misunderstandings of the person-centred approach and certain
aspects of eclecticism popular today.

What might have been Carl's view of this book? While none of us can
speak for Carl, my guess is that he would be delighted to see how
profoundly Steve has dissected, in a loving, respectful and scientific
way, Carl's lifetime of evolutionary thinking, honouring his own
scientist in that sense. I trust that he would be particularly pleased
with how Steve has minutely parsed Carl's major 1959 work, of which he
himself often said he was most proud as a mathematical and scientific
conceptualisation. Steve shows both what a profound thinker Carl was, as
well as the profound thinker that Steve is. When compared with the
reductionistic, stereotypic depiction of Rogers' work in so many
previous texts outside the PCA community, this book is a breath of fresh
air.

The future I would like to end this foreword with a particular emphasis
on the values of love, spirituality and peace building, which, while not
elaborated upon in particular by Steve in this text, seem to permeate
this entire work and make it clear that, in fact, Carl's approach has
always expressed these values. Although through no intention of the
author, this book has thus deepened my own belief that this theory and
its core concepts, particularly empathy, are readily transferable to
other arenas beyond individual therapy, such as the larger social
conflicts and crises wounding our suffering planet. Unfortunately some
43 years later, with a world in turmoil, Carl's 1961 quote below is
still applicable. Perhaps it is our role to be the current catalysts to
such realisation of these principles both inside the therapy office and
for the larger public good. Our civilization does not yet have enough
faith in the social sciences to utilize their findings. (Rogers 1961:
p. 335)

viii

Foreword

In the closing years of his life, Carl made even more explicit his sense
of the importance of love in our work, and his ever-present concern for
the need for balance between the individual's self-concerns with an
acknowledgement of our inevitable connectedness to each other. In the
poignant quote below, published in 2002, he belies those critics who had
long discounted or misunderstood the place of relationship in his
philosophy by labelling it as narcissistic and hyperindividualistic. in
becoming more aware of self and others, in becoming more acceptant of
self and others, and in becoming more understanding of self and others,
people become more able to meaningfully live their lives, more . . .
able to love, able to receive love. (Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 258) In
this re-discovery of the richness of Rogers' approach that Steve has
created for us by writing this book, he has guided us with elegance,
insight, wisdom and compassion towards a deeper understanding of the
genius and profundity of Carl Rogers' work and principles. For that
reason, I look forward with enthusiasm and anticipation to his next
books on the other core conditions, genuineness and unconditional
positive regard. Gay Leah Barfield PhD, MFT Former Co-Director Carl
Rogers Institute for Peace December 2004

Foreword A step towards a better world Every human being strives to live
a life that brings them satisfaction and happiness. We search for ways
to live such a life in an outer world, and that is not an easy
enterprise. Each race imbues in its members the ways and means of being
that have been culturally and historically tested by the experience of
previous generations. This take place through childbearing in families,
through the process of education, through peer exchange of experiences,
and in many other ways. This process of providing culturally tested ways
of being in the world is of great value and provides the essence of each
person to become Human. Yet, it often imposes on a person ways and means
of being (norms, values, ideas and ways of acting) that are inconsistent
with the person's deepest and authentic strivings and intentions. The
person starts to live an imposed life. This may be convenient, yet it
does not bring deep satisfaction and happiness to that person, and the
World (society, culture) is denied the full potential of that person's
input, energy and creativity. Both the person and the World lose out. In
this book Steve Vincent deeply and carefully explores Empathy as a way
of facilitating personal growth and being. It considers the way a person
is able to become fully Themself in the World, bringing deep
satisfaction and happiness to that person, and their full potential of
energy, creativity and productivity to the World. (I am far from
believing that the way is not without troubles and difficulties, but I
do believe that this is the way for achieving dynamic harmony of the
Person, the World and the Person in the World!) At a personal and
professional level, Steve Vincent is a writer to trust on the subject of
empathy. Empathy for Steve, as I know him, is not just a technique for
professional psychological work. Empathy is for him a way of being with
people. This personal and professional commitment to empathy makes Steve
Vincent's exploration of empathy really deep and comprehensive. In a
very personal yet accurate way he presents the history of the
development of the concept and practice of empathy in psychotherapy.
What is evident is the deep impression and influence that Carl Rogers,
the founder of the Person-centered Approach and one of the most famous
and influential psychologists of the 20th century, had on Steve.
Throughout this book, the author - as scientist, professional
psychotherapist and inquiring person - carefully and accurately presents
his view on empathy in psychotherapy and interpersonal relationships. In
Chapter 4, I value highly the systematic and convincing analysis made by
Steve of the role and place of empathy in the process of facilitating
personal growth. And I find very sincere and touching the self-Inter:
View Steve makes in Chapter 3 as a way of exploring and expressing his
personal notions of empathy. The book is intended for professional
psychologists and psychotherapists who look for ways of deeper
understanding of, and ways of improving, their work with clients. The
book will be invaluable for psychology students and interns who

x

Foreword

work on the understanding of human nature and on the development of
their counseling style. But what is most valuable and inspiring for me
is the way the book brings all of us closer to being ourselves, to
enable one to be oneself with persons close to us - relatives, friends
or clients - and to make the World we live in better! Thank you, Steve,
for your exquisite work! Veniamin Kolpachnikov Assistant Professor
Department of Psychological Counselling Moscow City
Psychology-Pedagogical University Russia December 2004

About the author Steve Vincent, born in 1954, completed a sociology
degree at the University of Sheffield, during which he was Chair and
Trainer for Student Nightline. This was followed by a one-year full-time
postgraduate Diploma in Counselling at the University of Aston in
Birmingham. In 1999, at the University of East Anglia, he completed his
Masters Degree, On Becoming Person-Centred? (Vincent 1999a) which
involved researching the person-centred training of client-centred
therapists. Steve has worked as a youth counsellor in Liverpool
(1980-82) and as a student counsellor in Southampton (1982-95), where he
founded a person-centred training unit within a college of further
education. After 21 years in further education, he resigned in an
attempt to get a more person-centred life! He has been Membership
Secretary, Chair and Newsletter Editor for BAPCA (British Association
for the Person-Centred Approach) and is currently a BACP (British
Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy) accredited practitioner
as well as a Board member of CSP (Carl Rogers Center for Studies of the
Person, La Jolla, California). He now devotes most of his time to
offering client-centred therapy in several GP practices, being a partner
in a family and, from September 2002, a father for the first time. Carl
Rogers, in reply to a question about the best way to make an
organisation person-centred, said 'Start one' - so that's exactly what
Steve did, and Client-Centred Therapy, Person-Centred Approach Services
(CCTPCAS) was formed. It is now a project of CSP, and through it Steve
and others offer a variety of person-centred events and activities in
the UK. You can contact Steve Vincent at cctpcas@aol.com or visit the
CCTPCAS website at www.cctpcas.com, and you can find out more about CSP
at www. centerfortheperson.org.

Introduction: the shape of this book Prelude, substance and interlude
The primary purpose of this book is to provide a substantial text on
empathic understanding - a kind of 'All you ever wanted to know about
empathy, but were afraid you wouldn't find in one place' volume. As I
reflected upon the development of my own understanding of, capacity for,
experience and communication of empathy, two main factors stood out,
namely learning about client-centred therapy (with reference to Carl
Rogers in particular), and my own experiencing (which includes
reflecting upon that experiencing). I wanted to somehow combine these
two elements as both, it seemed to me, had validity and meaning.
Furthermore, they have cross-fertilised and nourished each other over
the years. However, it seems that writing in the first person and from
one's own experience is unacceptable to many publishers, who maintain
that there are 'academic standards to uphold, reputations to consider',
and so on. Yet mindful of Carl Rogers saying that what is most personal
is most meaningful, I was delighted when researching some of the
background for this book to come across the following: In the science of
man, we are going to try to include emotions and affect, etc. Yet we
operate on the absolute, unquestioned assumption that the best way of
doing so will be somehow to put that in cognitive and intellectual terms
. . . I can't but help wonder whether there may not some day be a new
conception of science which would involve communication of more than
intellectual symbols. . . . There may be ways of getting at knowledge
and communicating knowledge which question the whole damn underlying
assumption that science consists of nothing but symbols, all of which
must necessarily be intellectual. (Rogers 1989: p. 164) So, at one time,
I tried to blend the academic and the experiential into the ongoing
text. Up to a point this seemed to work well enough, yet beyond that
point it began to feel a little fuzzy, a little unclear. Next I decided
to leave all of my personal musings out altogether, yet this felt like
unwelcome censorship, whether undertaken by myself or by a would-be
publisher. Then, finally, I hit on the idea of 'interludes' -
interspersing the core journey, derived overwhelmingly from the work of
Carl Rogers, with sightseeing trips of my own, derived from my
experience. Several more personal (and hence meaningful, at least to me)
articles were earmarked for inclusion as interludes, among them On
Becoming More Whole? Necking in Glasgow (Vincent 1999b), A Training Trip
Through Empathy (Vincent 1999c), From Whole to Hole to Whole (Vincent
2000a), Failing or Fortunate? Striving for Revising (Vincent 2000b),
Setting Aside or Erupting? (Vincent 2001), Client-Centred Therapy:
Conditions, Process and Theory (Vincent 2002a), Empathy: an inter-view
(Vincent 2002b) and a few poems. It transpired that the inclusion of

2

Being empathic

these as interludes would have taken the word count of this book way
beyond the optimum publishing size, so while Empathising in action: an
inter-view has been retained as Chapter 3 of this book (in the belief
that it serves to bring together many of the emergent threads up to that
point and to pave the way for some of what follows, all in a less formal
fashion), all of the others are omitted (the omitted articles are
available via the CCTPCAS website at www.cctpcas.com). I have tried to
use gender-free terminology in my own writing. Quotes from Carl Rogers
(of which there are many) tend to be couched in masculine form, and
these are given verbatim. In his later years, Carl apologised for this,
writing, for example: I regret that in this paper, written some years
ago, I used 'he' as the generic term. I hope my feminine readers will
forgive me. I have learned better since. (Rogers 1986: pp. 2-3, 23)
Although some readers may care to skip my introductory comments, a
'prelude' is nevertheless provided in an attempt to offer a very basic
'level playing field' - a shared understanding from which the rest can
follow. I hope that it works for you.

Rogers; Carl; Carl Rogers; Rogers, Carl In writing this book, I
struggled somewhat in determining how to refer to Carl Ransom Rogers
(1902-1987). In various drafts I tried only using Carl, only using
Rogers, and using only Carl Rogers. Feedback from my 'critical friends'
was divided. Some liked the use of Carl, as it had a kind of familiar,
friendly, warm feeling to it. Others disliked this - for precisely the
same reason (together with an opinion that it didn't come across as
sufficiently 'academic'). This group tended to prefer the use of Rogers,
yet the first group felt this to be impersonal and cold, even
'needlessly academically conventional'. The use of Carl Rogers (or even
Carl R Rogers) all the time seemed even more formal, put the word count
up, and frankly became somewhat tedious, even boring, yet clearly some
critical friends preferred it this way. It seemed that whatever form of
address I chose, one-third would be happy and two-thirds unhappy.
Funnily enough, in all draft versions all 'proper' quoted references
were to Rogers, Carl - no problem there! (And most of the references in
this book are to Carl Rogers, Carl or Rogers - this is a book about
client-centred empathy as a Carl Rogers companion.) And what of my own
feelings and thoughts? Well, I settled on a mix of all three forms of
address. Often Carl somehow just 'felt right' and sometimes Rogers
seemed more apt, while at other times Carl Rogers seemed to fit best.
There were other times when there was little sense of 'rightness', so my
choice was either based on varying the text or was random. 'Maybe', I
ended up thinking, 'even if I certainly couldn't please all of the
readers all of the time, I could at least please some of the readers
some of the time'. And you know I really don't think that Carl would
have minded much one way or the other.

Introduction

3

Client-centred therapy/person-centred approach References throughout
this book are, in the main, to client-centred therapy. The term
person-centred is less frequently used. However, the words counselling
and therapy are used interchangeably (consistent with Carl Rogers who
also treated these words as being synonymous). Carl wrote and spoke many
times of the changes in terminology that were introduced over the
years - for example, as applications drawn from therapy became more and
more diverse: As client-centered therapy became applied in the field of
education, it wasn't therapy, so what was it? Student-centered
education? Gradually it became quite evident that we weren't talking
about therapy in these other fields, so what was it? That was when we
began to adopt the term person-centered, which still implies a lot of
reliance on the internal frame of reference, but it's not therapy.
(Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 253) Debates over what is client-centred
and what is person-centred (or indeed whether the two are one and the
same thing) abound, it seems. Although I have my own views, I'd like
Carl to have the last (or even the definitive) word on this. Just prior
to his death in February 1987, he wrote that wrangling over the
differences between these two terms was futile, as he, Carl Rogers, was
the same person, with access to the same personal resources, whether he
was meeting a client for one-to-one therapy or facilitating a large
group. Historically, the term person-centred approach arose from a need
to encompass the many diverse applications of the philosophy, theory and
practices that grew out of the learning gathered from client-centred,
one-to-one therapy - activities such as trainee-centred learning,
encounter groups, relationships (including parenting), conflict
transformation, and so on. Rogers conceded that a label for this
diversity could well be more open to loose use, misuse and
misunderstanding, yet he stated that nevertheless he 'would like a term
to describe what I do when I am endeavoring to be facilitative in a
group of persons who are not my clients', and that term was
person-centred (Rogers 1987a: p. 12). To me, this couldn't be more
clear. One-to-one counselling is client-centred therapy, whereas
non-client-work activities based on the principles that arose from
client-centred therapy constitute a person-centred approach. The
facilitative and/or therapeutic person may well be the same (or very
similar) in both, but the activity is different. Nonetheless, as the
bulk of Carl's writing about empathy is in the context of client-centred
therapy, that term takes precedence in this book.

Client-centred therapy: core/necessary and sufficient conditions What a
horrible word conditions is in some respects! The word 'respects' in
this context brings to mind the word respect in another context - that
is, linked with unconditional positive regard. How strange it seems to
have unconditional as part of a condition! Over the years, Carl Rogers
penned several versions of 'conditions' - for

4

Being empathic

therapy, for personality change, for trainee-centred learning, for
facilitative group leadership, and so on. In 1942, for example, there
were four conditions, namely objectivity, respect for the individual,
understanding of the self and psychological knowledge (see Chapter 1).
At other times, there have been four quite different necessary and
sufficient conditions, or five, or six - or there are what have become
known as the three core or therapist conditions, namely congruence,
unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding, although even
the wording of these changed over time. For instance, what was first
known as acceptance in the early days of client-centred therapy later
came to be known as unconditional positive regard. Some people
erroneously believe that Rogers planned to introduce a seventh condition
of intuition, or an eighth condition of spirituality. Their belief is
erroneous because Carl saw intuition as part of empathic understanding,
and a 'spiritual' (although he was wary of this word) or
'transcendental' connection as part of both unconditional positive
regard and empathy. And so on. No doubt the debates will continue. For
the purposes of this book, the central version referred to is Carl's
Conditions of the Therapeutic Process (Rogers 1959), otherwise known as
the six necessary and sufficient conditions for therapeutic personality
change, as described below. For therapy to occur it is necessary that
the following conditions exist. 1 Two persons are in contact. 2 The
first person, whom we shall term the client, is in a state of
incongruence, being vulnerable or anxious. 3 The second person, whom we
shall term the therapist, is congruent in the relationship. 4 The
therapist is experiencing unconditional positive regard toward the
client. 5 The therapist is experiencing an empathic understanding of the
client's internal frame of reference. 6 The client perceives, at least
to a minimal degree, conditions 4 and 5, the unconditional positive
regard of the therapist for him, and the empathic understanding of the
therapist (Rogers 1959: p. 213). At times, Carl referred to condition 1
as a pre-condition, leaving five 'main' conditions. At other times, he
wrote that conditions 1 and 2 could be considered as pre-conditions,
leaving four 'main' conditions, three of which had been termed 'core'
conditions, and so on. Academically or historically interesting as it
may be to wrangle over just how many 'conditions' there are (or indeed
over which is the 'correct' or 'definitive' version), what I would
personally prefer is to distil and preserve the essence of the spirit of
client-centred principles, attitudes and beliefs as I believe Carl
Rogers intended them.

Before the beginning . . . First and foremost, let us not forget
throughout this exploration that empathy, or empathic understanding, is
but one of the conditions for therapeutic personality change. When Carl
Rogers and his colleagues researched what seemed to be effective and
meaningful in therapeutic encounters, certain threads were identified as
integral parts of the whole experience. While it is possible (and
perhaps

Introduction

5

necessary) to examine each strand of this rich weave as a discrete
aspect of clientcentred therapy, it is helpful to remember that each
necessary and sufficient strand remains a part of a whole - to remember
to put back together the entire fabric once we have examined a weft,
weave or thread. Alternatively, while it might be desirable to carve up
the meal that is client-centred therapy into bitesized chunks, let us
not lose sight of the entire dish. In illustration of this point, Carl's
daughter Natalie wrote: I remember one discussion group, however, that
has stayed in my mind and heart. A large group of person-centered folks
(including Carl) were sitting in a circle. The topic turned to 'Is it
client-centered to do this, or client-centered to do that?'. There were
disagreements, and case samples focusing on the minutiae of what a
therapist said or did, with criticisms of this or that wording or
behavior. My guts were tight, my breathing tense. I looked across the
circle at Carl and his shoulders were slumped, his eyes focused on the
floor. My unspoken thoughts were: 'Is the person-centered approach going
to self-destruct by nitpicking every word a therapist says and losing
sight of the essence of the I-thou relationship? Are we focusing on the
precise verbalisations while losing the vision of being in tune with the
client? Do we really know how to be a companion with the client on her
road to selfdiscovery?'. I was angry and disappointed at the level of
the discussion. Then Carl spoke. He heaved a big sigh and said 'Boy, am
I glad that when I discovered this process I didn't have to figure out
"Is it clientcentered or not?" I was really just looking to see what
worked for the client.' My spirit rose and in my heart I said 'Right on,
Dad!'. (Rogers N 1997: p. 271) So perhaps we can keep in mind the
essence of all that constitutes a client-centred whole as we explore
that portion of it which is empathic understanding.

Prelude This brief overview is included for two main reasons - in part
to define some key concepts for readers new to client-centred therapy,
and in part because even the understanding of those familiar with
client-centred therapy often seems to vary (for example, those who have
stated that they are unaware of any difference between the actualising
tendency and self-actualising, or those who see no contradiction in
delivering skills training).

Client-centred therapy: an overview According to Carl Rogers, the most
well known of the founders of client-centred therapy, this approach to
counselling could be deemed to have begun in 1940: On December 11, 1940,
before an invited audience at the University of Minnesota, he delivered
a lecture entitled 'Newer Concepts in Psychotherapy', and he
subsequently came to consider the date of this event as the birthday of
client-centered therapy. (Thorne, cited in Rogers and Russell 2002:
p. 11) Not long before he died, Carl Rogers (writing in partnership with
Nat Raskin) stated that client-centred therapy (and the person-centred
approach) was: a clearly stated theory, accompanied by the introduction
of verbatim transcriptions of psychotherapy, \[that\] stimulated a vast
amount of research on a revolutionary hypothesis: that a self-directed
growth process would follow the provision and reception of a particular
kind of relationship characterised by genuineness, non-judgmental
caring, and empathy. (Rogers and Raskin 1989: p. 155) Rogers linked this
self-directed growth process with the idea of an organic actualising
tendency, believing that in parallel with a formative tendency, based on
syntropy (an innate universal drive to grow and become more complex, as
opposed to entropy, the decaying of matter), there is a fundamental and
integral characteristic of humans, given the right conditions, to be
constructive, cooperative, social, responsible beings. Talking about his
1942 publication Counseling and Psychotherapy, Rogers said: The central
theme was the notion that the potential for better health resided in the
client . . . So the counsellor endeavored to create an interpersonal
situation in which material could come into awareness. \[By 1950\] There
was a great deal of stress on both the philosophical and attitudinal
characteristics of the therapist, and a definite move away from
techniques with perhaps a bit of groping toward a close personal
relationship. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 24)

8

Being empathic

Rogers wrote and spoke of his growing disillusionment with both his
'traditional' working practices and his theoretical training. At one
stage he wrote: It is the client who knows what hurts, what directions
to go, what problems are crucial, what problems have been deeply buried.
It began to occur to me that unless I had a need to demonstrate my own
cleverness and learning, I would do better to rely on the client for the
direction of movement in the process. (Rogers 1961: p. 12) A consequence
of this dawning belief in the client being at the heart of therapy (the
client's internal frame of reference - how the client sees their own
world) was 'out with the old and in with the new' ways of being.
Counsellors aligned with such beliefs began to refrain from advising,
manipulating, directing, interpreting or teaching clients, as such
directive practices were increasingly seen as either at best irrelevant,
or at worst damaging with regard to clients accessing and utilising
their own capacities. The primary aim became as follows: That the client
should grow toward himself, not toward Freud, Jung, or Rogers, is the
fundamental understanding of nondirectiveness. To advise him how to
behave, what to do, what to think, or how to act is a violation of the
priority of his own phenomenal world. (Barton 1974: p. 180) Thus in its
origins what became known as client-centred therapy began as a reaction
against traditional therapist attitudes and behaviours: There is no
doubt that the term nondirective was in itself accurate, but it was a
term of rebellion. It was saying what we were against. We were opposed
to the highly directive kind of procedures being used. Then, as we
became more secure, I think, in the fact that this was a new way, a
legitimate way of proceeding, we began to recognize that it was centered
in the client's frame of reference - that what we were endeavoring to do
was to get within the client and release what was there. It was centered
in the client in a way that was quite specific and quite deep. That term
is often misunderstood. A lot of people say, 'I'm centered in the
client', meaning T pay a lot of attention to my client'. We meant
something deeper than that. Really this was built around the client's
internal frame of reference, his inner world. (Rogers and Russell 2002:
p. 253) Carl Rogers was a leading pioneer in developing a more
'humanistic' approach to psychotherapy. However, learning derived from
therapy began to be applied in increasingly diverse areas, and likewise
the terminology that was used to describe what was going on came to have
increasingly diverse interpretations, too. Rogers wrote: I smile as I
think of the various labels I have given to this theme during the course
of my career - nondirective counselling, client-centred therapy,
student-centred teaching, group-centred leadership. Because the fields
of application have grown in number and variety, the label
'person-centred approach' seems the most descriptive. (Rogers 1981:
pp. 114-15)

Prelude

9

Patterson (and Watkins) wrote that: Rogers uses two terms:
client-centered therapy and the person-centered approach. Later, in an
article entitled 'Client-Centered? PersonCentered?' Rogers states he
would like 'a term to describe what I do when I am endeavoring to be
facilitative in a group of persons who are not my clients.' That term is
person-centered. Client-centered is the term used with clients, in
therapy. (Patterson and Watkins 1996: p. xv) Perhaps the most
comprehensive presentation of what client-centred therapy is all about
(certainly according to Carl Rogers himself) was published in 1959. Carl
said: I worked harder on this theoretical formulation than on anything I
have written before or since. It is, in my estimation, the most
rigorously stated theory of the process of change in personality and
behavior which has yet been produced . . . I suspect these volumes are
in fact very little used. Certainly my chapter 'A Theory of Therapy,
Personality, and Interpersonal Relationships, as Developed in the
Client-Centered Framework' is the most thoroughly ignored of anything I
have written. This does not particularly distress me, because I believe
theories too often become dogma, but it has, over the years, perplexed
me. (Rogers and Evans 1975: pp. 135-6) Drawing from this and other
sources, we can try to achieve a brief overview of client-centred
attitudes, beliefs, processes and outcomes. What is it all about? Rogers
wrote: Psychotherapy deals primarily with the organization and the
functioning of the self. (Rogers 1951: p. 40) If 'dealing' with the self
is a fundamental aspect of therapy, perhaps it might be helpful to know
a little of what is meant by this. It is interesting that originally
Rogers was not too concerned with the 'self as: I certainly didn't start
psychological work being interested in anything as vague as the self. To
me, that seemed like old-fashioned introspectionism. I was really forced
to examine self and forced to define it for myself, because my clients
in therapy kept using that term in all kinds of significant ways.
(Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 15) In the client-centred personality theory
that developed as a consequence of researching and exploring the notion
of 'self,' it was stated that the forming of a self-concept (through
which experience is perceived) follows basic human needs in infancy for
positive regard from others (a need for love and affection, which when
experienced result in feelings of warmth, liking, respect, sympathy and
acceptance to and for the other person). This in turn generates needs
for positive self-regard (a good feeling towards the self that is no
longer dependent on the attitudes of others) - and all too often this
results in the actualising tendency

10

Being empathic

becoming thwarted by these conditions of worth (the positive or negative
valuing of experiencing based on the values of others rather than
whether the experiencing enhances or fails to enhance the person).
Rogers had thought about and researched how clients entering therapy
seemed to be, finally settling on the term incongruence as a
description: It seemed to me that psychological maladjustment is the
degree of discrepancy between the self as perceived and the experiences
that are going on within the organism. In psychological adjustment there
is a greater congruence between these two. (Rogers and Russell 2002:
p. 251) In other words, incongruence is a psychological process whereby
experiences that are not consistent with a person's self-concept, or
self-image, may be denied to awareness altogether - or the perception of
such an experience may be 'twisted' to such an extent that the
experience can be admitted to consciousness, but only in a distorted
fashion. Feelings or sensations accompany these psychological processes:
When the individual has no awareness of such incongruence in himself,
then he is merely vulnerable to the possibility of anxiety and
disorganization. . . . If the individual dimly perceives such an
incongruence in himself, then a tension state occurs which is known as
anxiety. (Rogers 1957a: p. 97) Clients are likely to be defensive if
their self-concept is threatened by experiencing, and they may feel low
self-esteem. Thus they bring both their incongruence (including
vulnerability, anxiety, tension, low self-esteem and psychological
defensiveness) and their potential to therapy, where they come into
contact with a person who holds genuineness, non-judgemental caring and
empathy as fundamental 'core' conditions of being a counsellor. These
therapist attitudes were renamed and modified over time, until
eventually the terms congruence, unconditional positive regard and
empathic understanding became the most generally accepted terminology.
It is these core conditions that Rogers believed were both necessary and
sufficient to 'interface' with the client's conditions of worth and to
facilitate constructive change: The goal of therapy is fostered by the
therapist through the providing of three conditions. . . . If they are
sufficient, then no other conditions are necessary. The only means of
influencing the client are through these conditions. Any other active
intervention by the therapist is inconsistent with the basic assumption
of the existence of the drive toward self-actualization. The three
conditions offered by the therapist frees the operation of this drive in
the client. The perception of these conditions by the client results in
client self-disclosure, self-exploration, self-directed and
self-discovery learning leading to changes in client perceptions and
attitudes that result in changes in behavior. These changes are elements
of the self-actualizing process. They are unique for each client (though
there are some common elements). (Patterson 2000: p. 183)

Prelude

I I

Thus six client-centred conditions, considered as both necessary and
sufficient, emerged as two people being in contact, the client being
incongruent, the therapist being congruently respectful and empathic,
and the client perceiving the therapist's unconditional positive regard
and empathic understanding (see Introduction, page 4). Although it is
not known for sure, it seems likely that either Carl Whitaker or a
colleague of his coined the term congruence, for in an interview in
1958, Rogers said T think I essentially picked up this idea from the
Atlanta group that's working with Carl Whitaker' (Kirschenbaum 1979:
p. 196). Carl Rogers defined congruence, or genuineness, as meaning: the
psychotherapist is what he is, when in the relationship with his client
he is genuine and without 'front' or facade, openly being the feelings
and attitudes which at that moment are flowing in him . . . the feelings
the therapist is experiencing are available to him, available to his
awareness, and he is able to live these feelings, be them, and able to
communicate them if appropriate. (Rogers 1961: p. 61) A client-centred
therapist attempts to experience unconditional positive regard for
clients. Stanley Standal (a student studying with Rogers) was somewhat
dissatisfied with the term 'acceptance' as being too open to different
interpretations, so he coined the term unconditional positive regard as
meaning a deep, respectful and genuine unconditional caring or 'prizing'
of clients - 'unconditional' in the sense that the caring is not
contaminated by evaluation or judgement of the client's feelings,
thoughts and behaviour as good or bad (Standal 1954). Therapists value
and warmly accept the client without placing stipulations on that
acceptance. The therapist expresses this quality of genuine regard
through empathy. Being empathic reflects an attitude of profound
interest in the client's world of meanings and feelings as the client is
willing to share this world. The therapist receives these communications
and conveys appreciation and understanding, with the effect of
encouraging the client to go further or deeper. An interaction occurs in
which \[the therapist\] is a warm, sensitive, respectful companion in
the typically difficult exploration of another's emotional world.
(Rogers and Raskin 1989: p. 157)

Client-centred therapy: a summary The acronym 'VALID' can be used to
characterise clients entering therapy, in that they are likely to be:
Vulnerable and Anxious, feeling Low self-esteem or worth, being in a
relative state of Incongruence and Defensive.

12

Being empathic

Ideally, it is hoped that upon commencing therapy, clients will engage
with a therapist who will be congruent and from whom they will receive
unconditional positive regard for them and empathic understanding of
them. These therapist conditions interact with the client's conditions
(of worth), thereby generating a therapeutic process within which change
and growth can occur, primarily through clients 'rediscovering' the
potential of their actualising tendency. However, as has so often been
commented upon: Rogers has elaborated on most of these points many
times. Yet there appear to be many who call themselves client-centered
who seem to be unaware of their implications for practice. Such
therapists appear to have little faith in the actualizing tendency in
their clients. (Patterson 2000: p. 183) Client-centredness is 'borne on
the therapist's shoulders' (Barton 1974: p. 185), for if a therapeutic
encounter is to be client-centred in nature, it is up to the therapist
to initiate and maintain it: If I can provide a certain type of
relationship, the other person will discover within himself the capacity
to use that relationship for growth, and change and personal development
will occur. (Rogers 1961: p. 33) This process of growth flows through
many stages or phases: With all his ambivalences, the client wants to
grow, wants to mature, wants to face his problems and work them through.
Accept and clarify his initial expressions of feeling, and a fuller,
deeper expression of feelings will follow. Accept and clarify these and
insight will spontaneously occur. Accept and clarify these insights, and
the client will begin to take positive actions in his life, based on
this insight. Accept and clarify the meaning the client sees in his
positive actions, and at some point, when he feels enough
self-acceptance, self-understanding, and confidence in his ability to
continue to deal with his own problems, he will end the relationship.
(Kirschenbaum 1979: p. 128) Client-centred theory is, as Rogers put it,
of the 'if-then' variety, the first if being the therapist core
conditions. If a therapist holds a belief and trust in the inner
capacities of clients and is authentically respectful and understanding
in contact with incongruent clients, then a therapeutic process will
naturally follow. If a therapeutic relationship exists, characterised by
a genuine counsellor accepting and empathically understanding clients as
they unfold through this process, then predictable outcomes follow: The
conditions we have chosen to establish predict such behavioral
consequences as these: that the client will become self-directing, less
rigid, more open to the evidence of his senses, better organized and
integrated, more similar to the ideal which he has chosen for himself. .
. . We have set the conditions which predict various classes of
behavior - self-directing behaviors, sensitivity to realities within and
without, flexible adaptiveness - which are by their very nature

Prelude

13

unpredictable in their specifics . . . scientific progress has been made
in identifying those conditions in an interpersonal relationship which,
if they exist in B, are followed in A by greater maturity in behavior,
less dependence on others, an increase in expressiveness as a person, an
increase in variability, flexibility, and effectiveness of adaptation,
an increase in self-responsibility and self-direction . . . (Rogers and
Evans 1975: pp. lxxvi-vii) In other words, while the outcomes of therapy
are predictable, what can be predicted is the unpredictable, because
clients grow towards actualising the unique and rich, complex and
ever-changing individual potential that resides within all human beings.

Chapter I

Empathic understanding: origins and developments In the beginning, there
was the word Dictionary corner . . . . . . and the word was empathy. The
Concise Oxford Dictionary defines empathy as the: Power of identifying
oneself mentally with (and so fully comprehending) a person or object of
contemplation. Derived initially from the Greek 'empiateia' (meaning
'passionate affection') and later from the German language, current
usage of the word empathy comes from the German words ein meaning 'in'
and fuhlung meaning 'feeling' (from the Greek pathos, literally meaning
'suffering', also related to the Greek penthos, meaning 'grief'). Thus
we could elaborate by saying that empathy means the power of projecting
your own personality into, fully comprehending and being in-feeling with
another - possibly with their suffering or grief. The Concise Oxford
Dictionary also refers us to the word sympathy, which is defined as a
'(capacity for) being simultaneously affected with the same feeling as
another; tendency to share or state of sharing another person's emotion
or sensation or condition; mental participation with another in his
trouble or with another's trouble; compassion or approval (for);
agreement (with) in opinion or desire', and the word sympathetic is
defined as 'touches the feelings by association, etc.'. The meaning of
the prefix sym is derived from 'alike' or 'as'. Comparing empathy and
sympathy might be helpful. Despite the italicising of 'with' in the
definitions of sympathy, most common usage of the word would seem to be
about feeling sympathy for or towards another, rather than 'projecting'
into the feelings of another. Empathy might be likened to insight into
the feelings of another (This is how you f e e l . . . ' ) , as compared
with a sympathetic associating with or feeling alike (T know just how
you feel. . .'), or indeed questioning ('How do you feel . . .?'). In
the definitions of sympathy appear the words 'approval for' and
'agreement with', which again might help us to differentiate. Empathy is
not to do with agreement or approval, but rather it is to do with
insight into the feelings of another - without judgement.

Then there was Carl Rogers Just one of several possible ways into an
exploration of empathy is to chart the history of this therapeutic
condition with reference to developments in

16

Being empathic

client-centred thinking and practice. To this end, 'snapshots' have been
selected from near the beginning, somewhere around the middle, and near
the end of the career of Carl Ransom Rogers (1902-1987). So what follows
is selective, for while researching this chapter it became abundantly
clear that charting the historical development of empathy in the
writings of Rogers could not be undertaken adequately without
significant reference to other contextual elements - and especially to
what were to become known as the core conditions (of congruence,
unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding), and indeed to
all six of the necessary and sufficient conditions for therapeutic
personality change. Nevertheless, the snapshot references that follow
were chosen with a primary focus on empathy - after all, this is a book
about empathy! Later in his life (in 1986), Carl Rogers was asked (by
David Russell) to recall his first ever experience of empathy. Carl had
vivid memories of being interviewed for a sexual issues survey by Dr
Gilbert Van Tassel Hamilton. Rogers said that up until that moment in
the 1930s: I think I had learned how to go more deeply into social
interchange with friends, but as far as being really, thoroughly, deeply
listened to, I don't know that that had been a part of my experience.
(Rogers and Russell 2002: pp. 97-8) Through being interviewed by Dr
Hamilton, Carl Rogers realised all kinds of things about the
self-expression of 'hidden' subject matter and how risky it can be to
both say things and be heard. He also learned, through 'being on the
receiving end', something about how someone might really listen to
another person. Way back in 1942, Carl Rogers wrote in his book
Counseling and Psychotherapy that the four necessary qualifications to
practise counselling were objectivity, respect for the individual, an
understanding of the self and psychological knowledge (Rogers 1942:
pp. 253-6). Objectivity? Students of client-centred therapy, especially
those more familiar with modern thinking and practice, might feel
somewhat surprised that the very first condition identified by Carl
Rogers was objectivity, as it has a somewhat cold, dispassionate,
disengaged feel to it. However, even in the early days of Carl's work we
can see the origins of what was to come. For instance, he wrote: There
are certain personal qualities which should be present if the individual
is to develop into a good counselor, but there is no reason to believe
that these are any more rare than the qualities which would be necessary
for a good artist or a first-class aviation pilot. This is definitely
true if we are talking of the client-centered type of counseling.
(Rogers 1942: p. 253) Here, then, is a message of hope for the would-be
therapist. Even in 1942 Carl Rogers was saying that being a person was a
primary requisite for counsellors - that therapists are not a 'class
apart' from others. However, Rogers did write somewhat scathingly of
'directive' counsellors, stating that even in recorded interviews
directive counsellors opined with some assurance on issues as diverse as
the

Empathic understanding: origins and developments

17

philosophy of life, racial prejudice, history, parents, marriage,
vocational choice, discipline and: in fact, all the puzzling personal
questions which a perplexed individual can face. The directive
counselor, to be sure, has need of more omnipotent qualities . . .
obviously a generous portion of supernatural wisdom is required of the
individual who takes such an attitude toward counseling. (Rogers 1942:
p. 253) Rogers proposed a more modest aim for client-centred
counselling, namely, to free individuals in order that they might
utilise their own capacities and resolve issues for themselves. Within
this context, he believed that a prerequisite for counsellors was that
they would be 'sensitive to human relationships', and he wrote of
awareness and 'social sensitivity' - sensing and being alert to subtle
differences - and of these qualities combining to form a solid and
natural foundation for the would-be therapist. Objectivity Having
presented social sensitivity as a pre-condition, objectivity as the
first condition:

Rogers then identified

It is generally conceded that to be helpful as a therapist the clinical
worker needs to have an objective attitude. This has been variously
described as 'controlled identification', as 'constructive composure',
and as 'an emotionally detached attitude'. (Rogers 1939: p. 281) This,
as stated above, was back in 1939 - and it would seem to bear little
relation to what we now understand as empathic understanding. Yet the
seeds of what was to grow into the fifth necessary and sufficient
condition for client-centred therapy were evident. Perhaps just as Carl
remarked upon the actualising tendency being akin to tuber tendrils
seeking the light in a darkened environment, so an analogy might be
drawn from the words that followed, when he quoted himself: The term as
used in clinical practice is defined somewhat differently.... There is
included in the concept a capacity for sympathy which will not be
overdone, a genuinely receptive and interested attitude, a deep
understanding which will find it impossible to pass moral judgments or
be shocked and horrified. (Rogers 1939: p. 283) So in a sense, although
Rogers used the word 'objectivity', he seemed to be somehow refining or
redefining its everyday definition, stressing that this objectivity was
neither a 'cold and impersonal detachment' nor 'deeply sympathetic and
sentimental'. He also stated that the client-centred counsellor does not
become so immersed in the world of the client as to be unable to enable
that client. There is, he wrote:

18

Being empathic

a degree of sympathetic 'identification' . . . sufficient to bring about
an understanding of the feelings and problems . . . but an
identification which is 'controlled', because understood, by the
therapist. (Rogers 1939: p. 283) Might we be able to see herein the
origins of what Rogers later described as the 'as if' quality of
empathic understanding - entering a client's world of feelings and
meanings as if it were your own, yet without ever losing the as if
quality? Just as empathic understanding is now seen as the fifth of the
six necessary and sufficient conditions, so in 1942 objectivity was set
within the context of other conditions, which were respect for the
individual, self-understanding and psychological knowledge.

Respect for the individual Carl wrote that respect for the individual
meant a 'deep-seated respect' for the integrity of the client. The
zealous, reforming therapist, who seeks to mould clients in the image of
the counsellor, would be unable to establish a growthpromoting
relationship with clients. Acceptance of clients as they are, and
permitting clients the freedom to discover their own personal solutions,
were seen as the key factors in respecting the individual. Here we can
see the beginnings of what would later become known as unconditional
positive regard.

Self-understanding An understanding of the self included self-knowledge
in terms of 'emotional patterns, and . . . limitations and
shortcomings', for: Thoroughly to understand and be objective . . . the
therapist must have some insight into his own personality. (Rogers 1939:
p. 283) Carl Rogers wrote of the necessity of personal insight in order
to achieve an awareness of inner warps and biases due to personal
feelings and prejudices, stressing the importance of supervision and
counselling for therapists (the therapy being provided by the
therapist's supervisor if necessary!). So here we can see the origins of
what became known as congruence. It is perhaps interesting to note at
this point that in 1942 Rogers placed objectivity first, whereas in
later years empathic understanding became the last of the three
therapist conditions. Yet even in these early days, there was a sense in
which respect and selfunderstanding (later to become unconditional
positive regard and congruence) were seen as necessary precursors to
objectivity.

Psychological knowledge Finally, Rogers wrote of psychological
knowledge, stating that:

Empathic understanding: origins and developments

19

the therapist can scarcely expect to do satisfactory work without a
thorough basis of knowledge of human behavior and of its physical,
social and psychological determinants. (Rogers 1939: p. 284) Carl
believed that many might expect psychological knowledge to be the first
condition - yet stunning intellect was no guarantor of effective
therapy: The essential qualifications of the psychotherapist lie
primarily . . . in the realm of attitudes, emotions and insight, rather
than in the realm of intellectual equipment. (Rogers 1939: p. 284) Even
earlier than this (in Family magazine in 1937), Carl had written of
nonforcing, non-critical, accepting 'workers' who gave clients the
fullest opportunity to grow. Just four years on from the publication of
his book entitled Counseling and Psychotherapy, marked developments
could be found. In 1946 in his article entitled 'Significant aspects of
client-centered therapy', Carl Rogers was still writing of
'non-directive' therapy and 'counselor techniques and procedures', and
although he did acknowledge the influences of Freud, Rank, Taft and
Allen, he also dismissed eclectic approaches as being 'not so fruitful'.
He was able to state that, derived from practical clinical experience,
there had been for him a movement away from guiding and directing and
towards new ways of being (often seen as 'heretic' by other approaches
to therapy) that seemed more helpful in terms of bringing about a
meaningful therapeutic process. He identified three distinctive elements
of what was beginning to be termed client-centred counselling, namely a
predictable process, a trust in the capacity of clients, and the
therapist/client relationship. Predictable process Carl Rogers stated
that if a relationship founded on certain characteristics is initiated,
then a predictable chain of events unfolds. At this time, he identified
six elements (or 'conditions') necessary to bring about an experience
within which the growth forces within clients are most likely to be
tapped. These were that the counsellor: 1 holds a belief that
individuals are responsible for themselves and is willing for people to
keep self-responsibility 2 trusts in the growth forces within
individuals, rather than in counsellor expertise and knowledge 3 creates
a warm and permissive atmosphere within which clients are free to
explore (or withhold) anything they wish to 4 sets limits only on
behaviours, not on feelings or attitudes (deemed mostly relevant to
working with children) 5 uses only procedures and techniques that convey
deep understanding (such as 'sensitive reflection and clarification'),
and does not express approval or disapproval 6 remains committed to
working within the above five principles, in that the

20

Being empathic

counsellor does not question, probe, blame, interpret, advise, suggest,
persuade or reassure. Rogers maintained that whether the therapeutic
process is relatively shallow or relatively deep, client-centred
characteristics are fundamentally the same.

The capacity of the client What made the therapeutic process predictable
for Rogers was the discovery that: within the client reside constructive
forces whose strength and uniformity have been either entirely
unrecognized or grossly underestimated. (Rogers 1946: p. 417) Carl had
come to believe that clients, due to their tendencies to actualise, are
capable of many things - such as beneficial emotional release at their
own time and pace, effective self-exploration (even of denied feelings
and attitudes), looking after their psychological selves, exploring the
connections between self and non-self, and being strong and resourceful
enough to come up with steps towards a positive journey through life. If
the counsellor initiates a client-centred relationship, then all of
these things become more likely. In stating that the more deeply the
therapist trusts in the constructive forces within individuals the more
deeply these tendencies are connected with, Rogers placed this emerging
clientcentred approach at an 'opposite pole' - both theoretically and
practically - to the 'omnipotent counsellor with supernatural wisdom'.
Rogers said that he now knew: that the client knows the areas of concern
which he is ready to explore; that the client is the best judge as to
the most desirable frequency of interviews; that the client can lead the
way more efficiently than the therapist into deeper concerns; that the
client will protect himself from panic by ceasing to explore an area
which is becoming too painful; that the client can and will uncover all
of the repressed elements which it is necessary to uncover in order to
build a comfortable adjustment; that the client can achieve for himself
far truer and more sensitive and accurate insights than can possibly be
given to him; that the client is capable of translating these insights
into constructive behavior which weigh his own needs and desires
realistically against the demands of society; that the client knows when
therapy is completed and he is ready to cope with life independently.
Only one condition is necessary for all these forces to be released, and
that is the proper psychological atmosphere between client and
therapist. (Rogers 1946: pp. 418-19) How different 'the client will
protect himself from panic by ceasing to explore an area which is
becoming too painful' feels to identifying resistance that must be
overcome by the therapist, or avoidance that the analyst must circumvent
in some way! The therapist can empathise, understand, accept, be with
and, as a consequence, move through such phases alongside the client,
rather than challen-

Empathic understanding: origins and developments

21

ging, overcoming or circumventing. Another issue arising from this trust
in the capacity of the client might be to question how 'the client knows
when therapy is completed' fits with the introduction of time-limited
therapy, which many believe to be driven by economic rather than
therapeutic considerations. (Incidentally, figures from several sources
indicate that where therapy is not time-limited, the average number of
sessions per client is no more than six. This raises the question of why
many service providers insist that client time must be managed, when
philosophically, therapeutically and economically there would seem to be
evidence that clients do indeed know best what is beneficial.)
(e.g. Budman and Gurman 1988; Tolman 1990; Mellor-Clark et al 2001.)
Client-centred therapy is so named because of the trust in and primary
reliance upon the internal resources of the client, and Rogers believed
that: There is no other aspect of client-centered therapy which comes
under such vigorous attack. It seems to be genuinely disturbing to many
professional people to entertain the thought that this client upon whom
they have been exercising their professional skill actually knows more
about his inner psychological self than they can possibly know, and that
he possesses constructive strengths which make the constructive push by
the therapist seem puny indeed by comparison. The willingness fully to
accept this strength of the client, with all the re-orientation of
therapeutic procedure which it implies, is one of the ways in which
client-centered therapy differs most sharply from other therapeutic
approaches. (Rogers 1946: p. 419)

Client-centred therapeutic relationships Unlike therapies in which the
counsellor uses skills, techniques and expertise upon clients, in
client-centred work the fundamental starting point is the creation of an
atmosphere within which clients may choose to grow. Carl identified some
of the characteristics of such a relationship. For instance, clients
would experience it as safe, warm, understanding and accepting. He also
stated that 'the sense of communication' was a very important factor, in
that not only could clients communicate anything they wished to, but
also such communications would be understood rather than evaluated in
any way. The therapy session really does belong to the client. Rogers
quoted a Minister in counselling training as saying that one of the
difficulties (trainee) therapists may face is when clients believe that
the counsellor ought to be able to offer guidance - and the therapist
values clientcentred theory yet wonders whether it is enough, whether it
goes far enough in actual practice. How can one leave a person
struggling and helpless when one could help them by showing them the way
out? The Minister posed some fundamental questions: Do you believe that
all people truly have a creative potential in them? That each person is
a unique individual and that he alone can work out his own
individuality? Or do you really believe that some persons are of
'negative value' and others are weak and must be led and taught by
'wiser, stronger' people?

22

Being empathic

In other methods you can shape tools, pick them up for use when you
will. But when genuine acceptance and permissiveness are your tools it
requires nothing less than the whole complete personality. And to grow
oneself is the most demanding of all. (Rogers, 1946: p. 420) Rogers
wrote that the use of the term 'client-centred' arose through therapy
being more effective the more the therapist strives to understand
clients as clients experience themselves. By 1946, Carl Rogers had
realised that traces of 'subtle directiveness' were still to be found,
and thus there was an increasing emphasis on the therapist discarding
the need to diagnose (together with a personal need to display
'diagnostic shrewdness'), professional evaluations and prognoses, and
the need to guide the client in order to be helpful. Rather, the
client-centred therapist would strive to provide understanding of the
way the client seems to himself at this moment, and the client would
have the capacity to 'do the rest'. Rogers wrote: Client-centered
counseling, if it is to be effective, cannot be a trick or a tool. It is
not a subtle way of guiding the client while pretending to let him guide
himself. To be effective, it must be genuine. (Rogers 1946: p. 420) An
authentically client-centred therapeutic relationship creates a
'psychological atmosphere which releases, frees, and utilises deep
strengths in the client'.

Somewhere in between Sigmund Koch invited Carl to contribute to his
series of books entitled Psychology: a study of a science, and Carl had
been wondering whether his developmental learning and growth might be
drawn together into a consistent and understandable framework. We have
already heard that he put a great deal of effort into this piece of work
(see Prelude), and recalled: As one young psychologist with a background
in mathematics said to me recently, 'It is so precise! I could restate
it in mathematical terms.' I must confess this is close to my opinion.
(Rogers and Evans 1981: pp. 135-6) Yet Carl was puzzled and it is
puzzling: his most rigorous piece of hard work being the most thoroughly
ignored. Let us ignore it no longer! Rogers gave us many important and
fundamental definitions within his 1959 chapter, several of which
follow. Given that the very term client-centred arose from the primary
focus on the internal frame of reference of the person seeking help, let
us begin there.

Internal frame of reference This is all of the realm of experience which
is available to the awareness of the individual at a given moment. It
includes the full range of sensations, perceptions, meanings, and
memories which are

Empathic understanding: origins and developments

23

available to consciousness. The internal frame of reference is the
subjective world of the individual. Only he knows it fully. It can never
be known to another except through empathic inference, and then can
never be perfectly known. (Rogers 1959: p. 210) The only way that I can
internally validate my own experience is to focus further on my
experiencing - to question, probe, examine, explore and reflect upon
myself. If I attempt to check out my feelings with others, I observe
myself as an object and thus am viewing myself from external reference
points. As we shall see by and by, Rogers was to define the process of
empathising as 'perceptionchecking', and the origins of this can be seen
here: Knowledge which has any 'certainty', in the social sense, involves
the use of empathic inference as a means of checking, but the direction
of that empathy differs. When the experience of empathic understanding
is used as a source of knowledge, one checks one's empathic inferences
with the subject, thus verifying or disproving the inferences and
hypotheses implicit in such empathy. It is this way of knowing which we
have found so fruitful in therapy. (Rogers 1959: pp. 211-12)

External frame of reference To perceive another person (or object)
without empathising is to operate from an external frame of reference.
Viewing objects in this way is common. Rarely, for instance, do we
experience empathy for the chairs we sit upon, or the clothes we wear,
or the pavements we walk along, or for the pen or word-processing
equipment we use to write with! It could be said that none of these
objects have any awareness of their own experiencing with which it would
be possible to empathise. However, if people are viewed in the same way
as objects (as, sadly, they so often seem to be, both from within and
from outside the 'caring professions'), then human beings too become
like inanimate objects. An example comes to mind. A trainee counsellor
on a client-centred course who was on placement with a bereavement
service had been taught by that agency that there were five stages of
grieving which clients needed to go through (and within a limited time
frame, too). Counsellors were encouraged to identify the stage a client
was in and attempt to move them on to the next stage, then the next, and
so on. No attention at all was paid to fully receiving clients in the
moment, and little attention was given to the inner world of client
experiencing little respect was shown for the capacity of clients to
creatively discover their own constructive processes. Clients became
objectified (in effect, a group of people had been pathologised) - they
had to fit a model and both the therapist and the bereaved client needed
to work in a way and at a pace dictated by that model. Furthermore, the
model was somewhat white and Eurocentric, and if the bereaved client was
not 'sorted' by having moved (or more accurately, by having been moved
by the counsellor) through all five stages within the set time limit,
their grieving was deemed to be 'abnormal' and subject to possible
psychiatric referral.

24

Being empathic

Empathy The state of empathy, or being empathic, is to perceive the
internal frame of reference of another with accuracy, and with the
emotional components and meanings which pertain thereto, as if one were
the other person, but without ever losing the 'as if condition. Thus it
means to sense the hurt or the pleasure of another as he senses it, and
to perceive the causes thereof as he perceives them, but without ever
losing the recognition that it is as if I were hurt or pleased, etc. If
this 'as if' quality is lost, then the state is one of identification.
(Rogers 1959: pp. 210-11)

A theory of therapy: if-then Carl Rogers described the theory of
client-centred therapy as being of the if-then variety, even 'reverting'
to theoretical logic: B = (f)A

C = (f)A

B + C = (f)A

C = (/)B

In the above formula, (f) represents is a function of A denotes
conditions of the therapeutic process, B denotes the process of therapy
and C denotes outcomes in personality and behaviour. In other words, if
(A) two persons are in contact, one (the client) being incongruent and
the other (the therapist) being congruent, respectful and empathic, and
the client perceives the therapist's unconditional positive regard and
empathic understanding at least to a minimal degree, then as a
consequence there will be (B), a therapeutic process. Also, if (A) then
there will as another consequence be predictable outcomes in terms of
personal growth. Thus both therapeutic process (B) and personal growth
(C) are functions of the six necessary and sufficient conditions.
Likewise, predictable outcomes in terms of personality change (C) are a
consequence of (A), the necessary and sufficient conditions. Rogers
restated this by saying that the necessary and sufficient conditions are
independent variables, and client-centred therapeutic process depends
upon their existence. Thus (B) is a dependent variable. Once (B)
(therapeutic process) exists, then it becomes the independent variable,
and (C) (outcomes) are dependent variables. We can note, too, the idea
that the greater the degree of the existence of the necessary and
sufficient conditions, the more profound the process and outcomes are
likely to be.

Necessary and sufficient Carl Rogers believed that client-centred
therapy differed markedly from conventional therapies, in that not only
had necessary conditions been identified, but also these conditions were
deemed to be sufficient. He wrote that irrespective of the particular
characteristics of clients: It has been our experience to date that
although the therapeutic relationship is used differently by different
clients, it is not necessary or helpful to manipulate the relationship
in specific ways for specific kinds of clients. To do this damages, it
seems to us, the most helpful

Empathic understanding: origins and developments

25

and significant aspect of the experience, that it is a genuine
relationship between two persons, each of whom is endeavoring, to the
best of his ability, to be himself in the interaction. (Rogers 1959:
pp. 213-14) Having defined conditions that were both necessary and
sufficient, Carl then wondered which of the therapist conditions was the
more important. He comes to the conclusion that: For therapy to occur
the wholeness of the therapist in the relationship is primary, but a
part of the congruence of the therapist must be the experience of
unconditional positive regard and the experience of empathic
understanding. (Rogers 1959: p. 215) This cannot be over-emphasised. It
is simply not enough for the therapist to be congruent. Client-centred
congruence has little meaning or value unless unconditional positive
regard and empathic understanding are fundamentally embedded aspects
that permeate the therapist's way of being, and that are therefore
authentically experienced by the therapist and may be perceived as
genuine by clients. However, to live by such profound attitudinal values
towards others in a sustained way might not be possible or even
desirable (the therapist has needs, wishes and rights, too). So Rogers
also considered it important to note that client-centred theory focuses
upon conditions within the therapeutic relationship, pointing out that
if it were to be necessary for the client-centred therapist to be
congruent at all times, there would be no client-centred therapists!
Thus it is that imperfect human beings can be of therapeutic assistance
to other imperfect human beings. (Rogers 1959: p. 215)

The actualising tendency Carl Rogers also referred to the fundamental
place in client-centred therapy of the actualising tendency, which he
defined as: the inherent tendency of the organism to develop all its
capacities in ways which serve to maintain or enhance the organism.
(Rogers 1959: p. 196) Carl believed that certain therapeutic
consequences of a belief in the actualising tendency were inescapable,
as: It means that psychotherapy is the releasing of an already existing
capacity in a potentially competent individual, not the expert
manipulation of a more or less passive personality. Philosophically it
means that the individual has the capacity to guide, regulate and
control himself, providing only that certain definable conditions exist.
(Rogers 1959: p. 221) The belief that human beings are, by their inner
natures, constructive and trustworthy was passionately held by Carl, who
stated that:

26

Being empathic

For me this is an inescapable conclusion from a quarter-century of
experience in psychotherapy. (Rogers, 1957b: p. 299) Rogers believed
that there was no need to devise therapies based on control or
socialisation, for when free from defensiveness, humans can be trusted
to be positive, forward-moving, constructive, social beings who display
deep needs for affiliation and communication with others. Humans have
innate needs to like, love, respect and care for others beneath their
sometimes more superficial hostile or aggressive behaviours. Indeed,
such 'negative' actions are often the result of a squashing or thwarting
of our fundamental natures. Carl wrote: I have little sympathy with the
rather prevalent concept that man is basically irrational, and that his
impulses, if not controlled, will lead to destruction of others and
self. Man's behavior is exquisitely rational, moving with subtle and
ordered complexity toward the goals his organism is endeavoring to
achieve. The tragedy for most of us is that our defenses keep us from
being aware of this rationality, so that consciously we are moving in
one direction, while organismically we are moving in another. (Rogers
1957b: p. 300) In other words, the internal barriers created by our
incongruence serve to thwart our ability to be fully functioning
individuals. By 1967, the research of Carl Rogers and his colleagues (in
this instance, Eugene Gendlin, Donald Kiesler and Charles Truax) was
focused on such questions as 'What do we as therapists do that actually
leads to constructive change in our clients or patients?'. It had
already been ascertained that only a small fraction of the events
occurring in counselling sessions actually had any really significant
therapeutic impact, so what were these key factors? Likewise, it had
also become clear that therapeutic relationships differ from therapist
to therapist, and that an individual therapist will be different with
different clients, and that an individual therapist will differ over
time with the same client. Thus a therapist might adopt different
language styles (from 'restricted' to 'elaborate') with different
clients, and might move from gentle, tentative communications in early
sessions with a client to more confident, understanding communications
in later sessions with that same client. This would seem to give strong
support to the client-centred belief that attitudes rather than
behaviours are most relevant to the process of therapy. Rogers pointed
out that many writers from many orientations (psychoanalysts Ferenczi,
Alexander, Schafer, Halpern and Lesser, and eclectic writers Strunk,
Raush and Bordin, Strupp, Hobbs, Fox and Gordin) as well as
client-centred authors (Dymond, Jourard, Truax, and Rogers himself) had
stressed the importance of: the therapist's ability to understand
sensitively and accurately the inner experiences of the client or
patient, . . . the maturity of the therapist and his integration or
genuineness within the relationship . . . \[and\] warmth and his
acceptance of the individual with whom \[the

Empathic understanding: origins and developments

27

therapist\] is working . . . Cutting across parochial viewpoints, they
can be considered as elements common to a wide variety of therapies.
(Rogers 1967: p. 98) Thus we were again reminded of what became known as
the three 'core' or therapist conditions for client-centred therapy.
Rogers emphasised that all three of these common elements were
'logically intertwined'. For instance, while empathic understanding is
essential, it is a prior requirement that acceptance and prizing be
present if a therapist is to be 'deeply sensitive to the moment-tomoment
"being" of another person'. While unconditional positive regard is
necessary for empathy, neither have much meaning unless they are
authentic.

Congruence Rogers pointed out that we are unlikely to reveal our inner
selves to people who 'put up a front' or play a role (e.g. a
professional façade) or feign understanding in other words, we are not
likely to go too far or too deep with incongruent (inauthentic or phony)
people. We are more likely to share with therapists who are being, not
denying (or distorting) who they are, and where a striving to be
respectful and empathic is deeply embedded within that way of being. In
an attempt to circumvent misunderstanding, Carl also clarified some of
the things that being congruent does not mean. For instance, it does not
mean that therapists overtly express all of their feelings (thereby
over-burdening clients), nor does it mean an impulsive blurting out of
feelings without thought, nor does it mean total therapist
self-disclosure. Congruence does mean that the therapist does not deny
any experienced feelings, and that there is a willingness to
transparently be any persistent feelings that arise within the
relationship, and to communicate them within the relationship if
appropriate. When might it be appropriate to share such feelings? For
Carl, this would seem to be either if the feeling persists over time or
if the feeling gets in the way of deeply hearing a client. When it is
appropriate to share such feelings, Rogers stated that it was important
for the therapist to own them (rather than 'project' them on to the
client). The client-centred therapist being in touch with inner
experiencing is ongoing, and this can be communicated, too. Thus the
discomfort in or anxiety about sharing the feeling can accompany the
feeling itself. This, stated Rogers, enables the relationship to grow
and become more real. Thus if a therapist feels boredom and communicates
this to a client (owning the feeling and their apprehension about
sharing the feeling), it emerges that the therapist experiences distance
from the client and would like to connect more deeply. The boredom - a
barrier - dissipates and a new sensitivity emerges. It may be that the
therapist becomes more able to deeply hear the client again - even to
hear the client's shock or hurt at what has been said. Both client and
therapist will be more genuine as a consequence of the therapist daring
to be real. Carl Rogers said that there had been a gradual shift between
1950 and the mid to late 1960s, and that client-centred counsellors had
come to feel increasingly free about being 'whole persons' in the
therapeutic encounter. Carl said that his 'trial ground' for being more
fully himself (for reasons that he did not fully understand) was working
with groups, within which:

28

Being empathic

I express anger, and affection, and annoyance and all kinds of things,
as well as being very responsive to hurt. Hurt arouses in me feelings of
really wanting to be empathic so that a lot of the therapeutic attitudes
that Tve stressed, I think, are very real parts of me, and of many
therapists, and so they need expression as well, but other feelings,
too, have equal validity. (Rogers 1969, in Frick 1989: p. 102) It may be
that therapists struggle more with the communication of feelings that
are experienced, anticipated or heard as being negative. Ideally, it
might possibly be said that the therapist would only experience positive
attitudes - yet if this is not the case, Rogers believed that it is
harmful to clients if such feelings are hidden. He considered that every
therapist has negative attitudes from time to time, but that it is
preferable for them to be expressed, and for the counsellor to be real,
not false. In my relationships with persons I have found that it does
not help, in the long run, to act as though I were something that I am
not. It does not help to act calm and pleasant when actually I am angry
and critical. It does not help to act as though I know the answers when
I do not. It does not help to act as though I were a loving person if
actually, at the moment, I am hostile. It does not help for me to act as
though I were full of assurance, if actually I am frightened and unsure.
(Rogers 1961: p. 16) Why might it be appropriate or reasonable for
therapists to share persistent feelings that arise within the
therapeutic relationship with their clients? According to Carl Rogers,
it is because: It is not an easy thing for the client, or for any human
being, to trust his most deeply shrouded feelings to another person. It
is even more difficult for a disturbed person to share his deepest and
most troubling feelings with a therapist. The genuineness, or
congruence, of the therapist is one of the elements in the relationship
which makes this risk of sharing easier and less fraught with dangers.
(Rogers 1967: p. 102) Carl Rogers gave some possible indicators of
therapist incongruence. They included defensiveness (which might be
apparent through inconsistencies between therapist words and paraverbal
or non-verbal communicating), or making 'textbook responses' that are
intended to sound good rather than being expressions of authentic,
respectful empathy. Rogers identified voice qualities and manner of
expression as the most usual indicators of congruence, saying that it
was fortunate that we are all pretty adept at distinguishing between the
authentic and the phony. Carl did become increasingly concerned about
the frequent misunderstanding of the notion of therapist self-expression
within the concept of congruence, writing that: it does not mean that
the therapist burdens his client with overt expression of all his
feelings. Nor does it mean that the therapist discloses his total self
to his client. It does mean, however, that the

Empathic understanding: origins and developments

29

therapist denies to himself none of the feelings he is experiencing and
that he is willing to experience transparently any persistent feelings
that exist in the relationship and to let these be known to his client.
It means avoiding the temptation to present a façade or hide behind a
mask of professionalism, or to assume a confessional-professional
attitude. (Rogers 1989: pp. 11-13)

Unconditional positive regard The attitude of high regard held by the
client-centred counsellor for the dignity and worth of individuals is a
fundamental differentiation between client-centred therapy and a great
many other approaches. This had come to mean that, without reservation,
the therapist experienced and communicated a non-judgemental, acceptant
warmth, a deep and genuine caring, and a non-evaluative 'pure'
('uncontaminated') prizing of client feelings, thoughts or behaviours.
This deep respect for clients included a trust in both their capacity
and their right to self-direction (underpinned by a trust in the
actualising tendency). Rogers stated that, as therapists, we might even
find painful and negative client expressions easier to accept than good
or positive ones, yet unconditional positive regard means the acceptance
of all expressions - no 'ifs' or 'buts' - it is a nonpossessive caring
for the client as a separate person. Yet so often, it seems, we hear
phrases like T accept the person but not their behaviour', though as
Carl said, 'it is doubtful if this is an adequate or true comment', in
that although a client behaviour may feel 'bad' or socially unacceptable
to a therapist, there is a kind of 'there but for the grace of god'
element in acceptance: the behaviour is accepted 'as a natural
consequence of the circumstances, experiences, and feelings of this
client'. By providing a non-threatening climate within which clients are
able to choose to explore their inner selves (rather than approving or
disapproving), the therapist becomes a companion searching with the
client for client meanings and values. Carl Rogers believed that many
people who are striving to become clientcentred therapists do so
because: \[their\] philosophical orientation has tended to move in the
direction of greater respect for the individual. (Rogers 1951: p. 21)
Becoming a client-centred therapist offers an opportunity to put this
philosophical belief into practice. Such a trainee counsellor: soon
learns that the development of the way of looking upon people which
underlies this therapy is a continuing process, closely related to the
therapist's own struggle for personal growth and integration. He can be
only as 'nondirective' as he has achieved respect for others in his own
personality organization. (Rogers 1951: p. 21) Thus a link emerges
between congruence and unconditional positive regard, for as Carl stated
time and time again, respect for clients needs to be a deeply

30

Being empathic

integrated, fundamental and integral aspect of the therapist's
personality. On the one hand, experiencing deep respect for another can
be deeply enriching and energising for the therapist. On the other hand,
it can be a strenuous and problematic struggle: I have found it highly
rewarding when I can accept another person. I have found that truly to
accept another person and his feelings is by no means an easy thing, any
more than is understanding. Can I really permit another person to feel
hostile toward me? Can I accept his anger as a real and legitimate part
of himself? Can I accept him when he views life and its problems in a
way quite different from mine? Can I accept him when he feels very
positively toward me, admiring me and wanting to model himself after me?
All this is involved in acceptance, and it does not come easy. (Rogers
1961: pp. 20-21) The more acceptance the therapist experiences and
offers, the more a useful helping relationship exists: By acceptance I
mean a warm regard for him as a person of unconditional self-worth - of
value no matter what his condition, his behavior, or his feelings. It
means a respect and liking for him as a separate person, a willingness
for him to possess his own feelings in his own way. It means an
acceptance of and regard for his attitudes of the moment, no matter how
negative or positive, no matter how much they may contradict other
attitudes he has held in the past. This acceptance of each fluctuating
aspect of this other person makes it for him a relationship of warmth
and safety, and the safety of being liked and prized as a person seems a
highly important element in a helping relationship. (Rogers 1961: p. 34)

Accurate empathic understanding Empathic understanding also needs to be
deeply embedded within the personality of the counsellor: In
client-centered therapy the client finds in the counselor a genuine
alter ego in an operational and technical sense - a self which has
temporarily divested itself (so far as possible) of its own selfhood,
except for the one quality of endeavoring to understand. (Rogers 1951:
p. 40) Carl Rogers offered us a challenge, and through trying this we
could test the degree of our empathic understanding: The next time you
get into an argument with your wife, or your friend, or with a small
group of friends, just stop the discussion for a moment and for an
experiment, institute this rule. 'Each person can speak up for himself
only after he has first restated the ideas and feelings of the previous
speaker accurately, and to that speaker's satisfaction.' You see

Empathic understanding: origins and developments

3I

what this would mean. It would simply mean that before presenting your
own point of view, it would be necessary for you to really achieve the
other speaker's frame of reference - to understand his thoughts and
feelings so well that you could summarize them for him. Sounds simple,
doesn't it? But if you try it you will discover it is one of the most
difficult things you have ever tried to do. (Rogers 1961: p. 332) Once
therapist congruence and unconditional positive regard are present: The
ability of the therapist accurately and sensitively to understand
experiences and feelings and their meaning to the client during the
moment-to-moment encounter of psychotherapy constitutes what can perhaps
be described as the 'work' of the therapist (Rogers 1967: p. 104) Rogers
identified two major aspects of empathic understanding, namely immediacy
and communication. Over the years it seems as though there have been
many interpretations of the term 'immediacy', including the therapist
spontaneously blurting out every passing feeling (which Carl so much
disliked). What Carl Rogers meant by this term was that immediacy in
experiencing empathy was a necessity. After all, it is of little use if
the therapist only achieves insight or feels completely at home in the
universe of the client some time after the counselling session has ended
(for example, in the car on the way home!). The capacity to sensitively
communicate client inner meanings back to the client in such a way that
they belong to the client - and in a language attuned to the client -
was the other crucial factor for effective client-centred therapy. Such
communicating serves to clarify and expand client awareness of feelings
or experiences, and includes the 'sensitive play of voice qualities
which reflect the seriousness, the intentness, and the depth of feeling'
as well as the actual words used. Rogers again differentiated between
internal and external frames of reference. At that time, the most common
form of understanding in therapies other than client-centred was an
external, even impersonal, evaluative diagnostic formulation that
implied T know what is wrong with you' (an understanding from the
outside looking in), as compared with 'an accurate and sensitive grasp
of events and experiences and their personal meaning to the client (in
other words, an understanding from within the world of client feelings
and meanings). Carl offered us questions that he had found useful when
exploring the degree to which he could permit himself to experience
empathy. They included the following: Can I let myself enter fully into
the world of his feelings and personal meanings and see these as he
does? Can I step into his private world so completely that I lose all
desire to evaluate or judge it? Can I enter it so sensitively that I can
move about in it freely, without trampling on meanings which are
precious to him? Can I sense it so accurately that I can catch not only
the meanings of his experience which are obvious to him, but those
meanings which are only implicit, which he sees

32

Being empathic

only dimly or as confusion? Can I extend this understanding without
limit? (Rogers 1961: pp. 53-4) Rogers also pointed out that the
communication of striving to understand can in itself be therapeutic -
if nothing else, it both lets clients know that they are worth the
effort, and encourages them to communicate further. However, a
consistent inability to do more than strive might not be so helpful.
Indeed, if the therapist does not achieve accurate empathic
understanding over a significant period, a consequence may be that the
client feels ever more helpless and despairing. Carl also gave some
pointers to factors characteristic of low, intermediate, high and very
high levels of empathy. At the extremely negative end of the scale, the
therapist shows no comprehension at all of the feelings and meanings
that the client is trying to communicate, and fairly negative elements
included the therapist being perceived as hostile, superior, and even
disgusted. Clues to low levels of empathy included the therapist going
off at a tangent, communicating only the client's most obvious feelings,
misinterpreting, being intellectually preoccupied, attending to content
rather than what the client is experiencing in each moment, evaluating,
giving advice, using inappropriate language or timing, or reflecting
upon therapist experiencing rather than the client's experiencing.
Intermediate levels of empathy are indicated by the therapist accurately
sensing and communicating the client's most obvious feelings, yet only
occasionally sensing and communicating less apparent ones. In so doing,
the counsellor 'may anticipate feelings that are not current or may
misinterpret the present feelings'. High levels of empathy are indicated
by the therapist communicating deeper yet slightly inaccurate awareness
of feelings and experiences - 'pointing' to more hidden feelings yet
'unable to grasp their meaning': At a very high level of empathic
understanding \[my italics\] the therapist's responses move, with
sensitivity and accuracy, into feelings and experiences that are only
hinted at by the client. At this level, underlying feelings or
experiences are not only pointed to, but they are specifically
identified so that the content that comes to light may be new but it is
not alien. At this high level the therapist is sensitive to his own
tentative errors and quickly alters or changes his responses in
midstream, indicating a clear but fluid responsiveness to what is being
sought after in the patient's own explorations. The therapist's words
reflect a togetherness with the patient and a tentative trial-and-error
exploration, while his voice tone reflects the seriousness and depth of
his empathic grasp. (Rogers 1967: p. 106) Rogers was interested in the
findings of two research programmes undertaken by Fiedler, who found
that therapists who were able to totally engage with client
communications were most characteristic of a good therapeutic
relationship, followed by accurate therapist comments, co-operative
therapists, power equality, good therapist understanding, consistent
striving to understand, accurate

Empathic understanding: origins and developments

33

tracking of the client, and a sharing tone of voice (Rogers 1951:
pp. 53-4). The theme of levels of empathy is explored more fully in
Chapter 4. Empathic understanding enriches both therapist and client,
for as Rogers wrote: When I can permit myself to understand . . . it is
mutually rewarding. And with clients in therapy, I am often impressed
with the fact that even a minimal amount of empathic understanding - a
bumbling and faulty attempt to catch the confused complexity of the
client's meaning - is helpful, though there is no doubt that it is most
helpful when I can see and formulate clearly the meanings in his
experiencing which for him have been unclear and tangled. (Rogers 1961:
p. 54)

Towards the end Carl Rogers stated the obvious - that all approaches to
counselling and psychotherapy have a focus on clients. However, he also
stated that in client-centred therapy there is a seldom explicated
technical connotation, in that while in most approaches achieving
understanding of clients is seen as a step towards eliciting a case
history for future reference and analysis, or behaviour modification or
reeducation or whatever (the 'real work' of such therapists): Instead,
the client-centered therapist aims to remain with this phenomenal
universe throughout the entire course of therapy and holds that stepping
outside it - to offer external interpretations, to give advice, to
suggest, to judge - only retards therapeutic gain. (Rogers 1989: p. 21)
In 1980, Carl wrote that he was so shocked and appalled at the way
empathy had become known as a set of techniques (like 'reflecting' or
'mirroring'), and had become such an insulting caricature of what was in
fact 'one of the most delicate and powerful ways we have of using
ourselves', that for many years he had written or said little on the
subject. Then he wrote In Retrospect: Forty-Six Years because he was:
getting tired of the misunderstanding of the concept of empathy, of
superficial notions such as saying back to the person what they said and
things like that. (Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 211) In reminiscing, Carl
remembered how in his earlier days he had learned that 'simply
listening' to a client was helpful: Yet listening, of this very special
kind, is one of the most potent forces for change that I know. (Rogers
1980: p. 116) However, the phrase 'simply listening' might be a little
misleading: I think that one of the elements most likely to be
misunderstood is the intensity of empathic listening. People feel, you
know, that listening is a sort of passive experience. I feel that's one
thing that's badly

34

Being empathic

misunderstood . . . One of the complexities of the person-centered
approach is that in many ways it is a very disciplined approach . . .
And there's a discipline involved in helping to make that shift \[into
the client's world\]; there's a discipline involved in being deeply
empathic. It means you really do shut things out, and you are focused.
Because the essence of it is simple, people forget that there is also
disciplined learning and disciplined action in the interaction. (Rogers
and Russell 2002: p. 284) Then, when Rogers moved to Teachers College,
Columbia University, he learned (from Elizabeth Davies or Leta
Hollingworth - he quoted Elizabeth in Rogers and Raskin (1989) and Leta
in Rogers (1985) - both Rankian social workers) that listening for
feelings and emotions was effective, and that these feelings could be
'reflected back' to the client. Although he expressed gratitude for this
as it improved his work at that time, he also wrote of: 'Reflect'
becoming in time a word that made me cringe. (Rogers 1980: p. 138)
Rogers then moved to Ohio State University, and the recording of
counselling sessions began. Although he believed throughout his life
that the recording and analysis of interviews is one of the best routes
to self-improvement as a therapist, and although a great deal of
client-centred theory was derived from such 'microscopic' studies, there
were deeply regrettable consequences, especially in terms of a focus on
skills and techniques, as compared with 'a way of being that is rarely
seen in full bloom in a relationship'. So for many years Rogers spoke
and wrote only of empathic attitude rather than of how empathic
attitudes might be communicated, choosing to focus instead on congruence
and unconditional positive regard because, he said, although they too
were 'often misunderstood . . . at least they were not caricatured'.
Only in 1980 did he return to commenting on how an empathic attitude
might be implemented. He stated that in part this was due to his view
that an increasingly technological society was breeding approaches to
therapy (citing gestalt, psychodrama, primal therapy, bioenergetics,
rational-emotive therapy and transactional analysis as examples) in
which the therapist was very much the expert and which involved clients
being actively manipulated, whereas he believed empathy to be 'possibly
the most potent factor in bringing about change and learning', and that
an empathic way of being empowered rather than disempowered clients.

Experiencing Carl Rogers referred to Eugene Gendlin, who formulated the
view that at all times human beings can refer to their ongoing inner
experiencing. The client-centred therapist accurately gathers this 'felt
meaning', and the perceiving of this by clients helps them to focus
further on such meanings. Thus clients can access this 'ongoing
psycho-physiological flow within' and use it as an inner referent (hence
'internal frame of reference'). Carl said that this psychophysiological
flow is very real:

Empathic understanding: origins and developments

35

It's the kind of process that enables the therapist to be really in
touch with the correct words that are going on in the client's mind . .
. One word will not fit; another one that seems quite similar may
absolutely fit. It's as though there's some physiological click, and you
can see it in the client's face and manner of expression: 'No, that's
not quite it; yes, that's it'. Their response indicates whether it is a
click or not. (Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 254) Imagine, if you will,
the therapist venturing an empathic communication: 'You seem angry . .
.'. The client pauses a moment, and says, 'Kind of. . . Maybe more
frustrated than angry . . .'. What is the client doing during the pause?
When I pause in this way, I am taking a few moments to sort of 'stop'
myself, or 'freeze-frame' and I kind of Took inside myself to see what
is 'really' going on. Take a moment now - do it yourself and see. Thus
the client-centered therapist aims to concentrate on the immediate
phenomenal world of the client. For he believes that it is in confusions
or contradictions within this world that the client's difficulties lie.
This exclusive focus in therapy on the present phenomenal experience of
the client is the meaning of the term 'client-centered'. (Rogers 1989:
p. 22) However, there is a difference of opinion among client-centred
practitioners with regard to quite how this focus on the client's
phenomenal world is implemented: Some aim to convey an understanding of
just what the client wishes to communicate. For Rogers, it has felt
right not only to clarify meanings of which the client is aware, but
also those just below the level of awareness. (Rogers and Raskin 1989:
p. 171) Also: This is not to say, however, that the client-centered
therapist responds only to the obvious in the phenomenal world of his
client. If that were so, it is doubtful that any movement would ensue in
therapy. Indeed, there would be no therapy. Instead, the client-centered
therapist aims to dip from the pool of implicit meanings just at the
edge of the client's awareness. (Rogers 1989: p. 21) From such
statements we can glean something of different levels of empathy within
a therapeutic process. When speaking of the therapist being a companion
to clients, Carl said: I think that the therapist's function is that of
being a companion to the client in the client's search for the innermost
aspects of self and experience. It is much easier to face a denied
experience if someone is right with you. (Rogers and Russell 2002:
pp. 281-2) It is far better to journey with a companion than to travel
alone . . . In striving to 'track' a client, the therapist is sometimes
a little way behind yet

36

Being empathic

striving to be alongside, sometimes there is an equal reciprocity, and
sometimes the therapist is aware of feelings and meanings only vaguely
experienced or perceived by the client. We saw that being too far behind
(being unempathic) is not at all helpful - being too far ahead can be
hurtful, too. Carl Rogers was mindful of the work of radical
psychoanalyst Heinz Kohut, and said: Similarly, way back in my early
years of training young counselors, some of the most sensitive of them
were so empathic that they understood material the client was not yet
aware of, was quite frightened of. And when it was verbalized, the
client vanished. We began to call them 'blitz therapists'. They had the
makings of very good counselors, but they had to learn that you don't
verbalize an understanding that is deeper than the client needs, or
wants, or can deal with consciously. (Rogers and Teich 1992: p. 56)

From state to process One development that was clear by 1980 was that
Rogers had changed from writing about empathy as a state of being to
defining empathy as a way of being, a process:

An empathic way of being with another person has several facets. It
means entering the private perceptual world of the other and becoming
thoroughly at home in it. It involves being sensitive, moment by moment,
to the changing felt meanings which flow in this other person, to the
fear or rage or tenderness or confusion or whatever he or she is
experiencing. It means temporarily living in the other's life, moving
about in it delicately without making judgments; it means sensing
meanings of which he or she is scarcely aware, but not trying to uncover
totally unconscious feelings, since this would be too threatening. It
includes communicating your sensings of the person's world as you look
with fresh and unfrightened eyes at elements of which he or she is
fearful. It means frequently checking with the person as to the accuracy
of your sensings, and being guided by the responses you receive. You are
a confident companion to the person in his or her inner world. By
pointing to the possible meanings in the flow of another person's
experiencing, you help the other to focus on this useful type of
referent, to experience the meanings more fully, and to move forward in
the experiencing. (Rogers 1980: p. 142) Carl Rogers added: One thing
that seems very true to me is that there is no such thing as a
perception without a meaning. That is, the human organism immediately
attaches a meaning to whatever is perceived . . . The world of reality
for the individual is his own field of perception, with the meanings he
has attached to those various aspects . . . None of us

Empathic understanding: origins and developments

37

knows for sure what constitutes objective reality and we live our whole
lives in the reality as perceived. (Rogers and Evans 1981: pp. 9-10)
Here then, yet again, we see a focus on both feelings and meanings as
integral aspects of empathic understanding. We see, too, a more dynamic
process of an ongoing perception checking of our empathic understanding
than would be the case, say, with simply paraphrasing, or summarising,
or asking 'open' questions, or reflecting (feelings or otherwise) in
response to what a client has just said. Indeed, it might be helpful if
trainee client-centred therapists were to eliminate the word 'response'
from their therapeutic vocabulary - it could well be more fruitful to
think in terms of striving to respectfully communicate empathic
understanding than respond to what has just been said. It might be, too,
that focusing on each individual counsellor 'response' carries with it
the risk of empathy being seen as a state (any individual therapist
communication being rated on a scale from empathic to non-empathic -- a
kind of 'in that moment it either is or is not empathic' approach),
thereby losing sight of the flow, the process, the essence of an
empathic way of being and a therapeutic, reciprocal relationship. If
would-be therapists simply learn to reflect, paraphrase, summarise and
the like, there is a tragic loss of both unique individuality and
potential. Research concludes that there is a great variety of
counsellor communications, influenced by both the life history of a
counsellor and their personal style. Individual therapists must choose
each communication that they utter: Each therapist has his favorite
themes, specific sensitivities, and degrees of high attunement. With
each special attunement, there are characteristic areas of low emphasis
in which each therapist is fairly opaque, insensitive, and even
neglectful. (Barton 1974: p. 201) Perhaps a couple of personal examples
might be helpful at this point. As a humanist I do not believe in any
God or gods, and I became aware that I was less sensitive and open to
religious beliefs than I would ideally like to be; my experiences of the
church and other religious establishments had also generated bias and
prejudice. I have therefore had to work on my acceptance in these areas.
On the other hand, being a male who once experienced a sexual assault
(when I was 12 years old) has, I believe, served to sensitise me to
clients who have been violated (although I have to be constantly
vigilant in differentiating between empathy and identification). A third
example might be worthy of mention. Often in training students decide to
explore empathic communications (not reflecting or paraphrasing) in a
group setting, and several different communications emerge in response
to one client disclosure. Yet examine these varied communications, and
many of them will be positively therapeutic - celebrate diversity! To
clarify yet further the range of empathic expressions available to
individual therapists, we can turn to Peggy Natiello, who took a close
look at a 30-minute session that a client called Mary had with Carl
Rogers: Even in the half-hour relationship presented here, there is a
subtle change and expansion of Rogers' style of response. Most of his
responses are geared toward empathic understanding, but there is a

38

Being empathic

good deal of variety in the form they take. He asks direct questions to
further his understanding; repeats what he thinks he is hearing,
sometimes literally, sometimes metaphorically; links ideas from earlier
in the session to later disclosures; completes the client's sentences;
helps her find the right words; speaks in the first person as though he
were her; and even jokes a little. (Farber et al 1996: p. 126) Some
trainees and practitioners struggle with the notion of therapists making
choices each time they communicate to clients, for might this not imply
that client-centred therapy is not so 'non-directive' as they had
thought it to be? Maria Villa-Boas Bowen tackled Rogers on this very
issue. He replied (in a personal communication, dated 16 January 1983):
When I try to respond to the feeling that is most important to the
client, my choice of what is most important is certainly influenced by
my own personality, past history, and so forth. I agree that that is
most assuredly true and I don't think I have ever said \[otherwise\]. .
. . If it is openly recognized that such responses are partly shaped by
the therapist's perception and that this perception is shaped both by
the client's expression and by the therapist's personality, we may be
able to avoid imitative 'modeling'. (Farber et al 1996: pp. 90-91) As we
explore the various aspects involved in empathic understanding, we see
once again the importance of the therapist being sensitive, non-judging
and unafraid, for: To be with another in this way means that for the
time being, you lay aside your own views and values in order to enter
another's world without prejudice. In some sense it means that you lay
aside your self; this can only be done by persons who are secure enough
in themselves that they know they will not get lost in what may turn out
to be the strange or bizarre world of the other, and that they can
comfortably return to their own world when they wish . . . being
empathic is a complex, demanding, and strong - yet also a subtle and
gentle - way of being. (Rogers 1980: p. 143) Here we might again make
links with both congruence and unconditional positive regard, for only
if this intense and respectful focus on the inner world of the client is
a consequence of deeply held and integrated beliefs can it be deemed to
be authentic - that is, congruent. I need to be genuinely interested in
the world of feelings and meanings of the other, not simply playing a
role or somehow pretending to be absorbed by the other. This suggests
most strongly that if I am to become a client-centred therapist, then
developing my own personal growth and awareness far outweighs the
learning and implementation of 'non-directive' skills and techniques.
Gay (Swenson) Barfield quotes some of Rogers' 1980 definition when
exploring empathy with him in a filmed exchange of views in 1985, in
which Carl acknowledged the benefits of empathy in a variety of
settings, such as the

Empathic understanding: origins and developments

39

classroom, intimate relationships (such as marriage and parent/child
relationships), hostile groups and international relations. Carl said: I
know that many tensions exist because of failures in communication, and
each group has arrived at the pattern of feeling: 'I'm right and you're
wrong. I'm good and you're bad'. And the trouble is that the other group
feels exactly the same way: 'I'm right and you're wrong. I'm good and
you're bad'. This destroys communication; it is also a good example of
an absolute lack of empathy. (Rogers and Teich 1992: p. 58) However,
Carl went on to mention his unhappiness at the misuse and abuse of
empathy that has taken place, quoting counselling training programmes as
an example of this - courses wherein 'wooden, mechanical' techniques of
'reflecting feelings' and paraphrasing are taught and learned, and there
is a lack of sensitivity and affect. Indeed, Rogers recalled one trainer
saying to him after a demonstration session that only three or four of
Carl's empathic 'responses' would have been acceptable on his course! Of
empathy as a technique or skill, Rogers said: I regard that as not only
a distortion but really a gross misunderstanding of the whole concept,
that often turns out people who are not helpful at all as counselors.
(Rogers and Barfield 1985) Empathy, said Rogers, involves the whole
person of the therapist intensely yet delicately (because of the
possibility of hurt) focusing on the inner world of the client - so much
so that an empathic way of being at its most intense was 'a slightly
altered state of consciousness' in which the therapist is being a
companion to clients as they explore, sometimes fearfully, their inner
selves in search of new personal meanings and feelings. The inner world
of another person is clearly 'not a place to move around like a bull in
a china shop', and the therapist needs to be a confident companion in
order not to be shocked or judging. Stating that truly being understood
and sensing that you are worth understanding is a 'very precious feeling
to have', Carl recalled a demonstration session with a therapist from a
different approach, who said afterwards 'You know, I've heard all the
jokes about client-centred therapy, but it feels so good to be heard'.
If we are not mechanically reflecting or paraphrasing or whatever, what
are we doing when we empathise? Rogers described the process of empathy
as checking one's perceptions of the client with the client, using
different forms of speech and styles as appropriate. Indeed, Rogers
often found himself speaking for the client as if he were in the
client's inner world, stating that clients would soon let him know if he
was inaccurate. Intuition It could be said that just as Carl Rogers
implicitly trusted the innate resources and potential of clients, so he
grew to trust his own capacities, too: As a therapist, I find that when
I am closest to my inner, intuitive self, when I am somehow in touch
with the unknown in me, when perhaps

40

Being empathic

I am in a slightly altered state of consciousness in the relationship,
then whatever I do seems to be full of healing. (Rogers et al. 1986:
p. 130) It is regrettable (in my view at least, although I know that I
am not alone) that there are some who have argued that Rogers intended
intuition to become an additional. therapist condition, whereas he
himself clearly placed his intuitive experiencing within the realm of
empathic understanding. It is even more regrettable (again in my view,
and again I am not alone) that some people have abused segments like
'the unknown in me' and 'slightly altered state of consciousness' in
their attempts to argue that Carl intended to add spirituality as an
additional. therapist condition. As we shall see - hogwash! Reciprocity
Carl and Gay also spoke of the reciprocity of empathy, saying that
although in other relationships the experiencing and offering of empathy
could be somewhat one-sided (and therefore unhealthy), in therapy,
although it is the therapist who mostly offers empathy, the empathic
process is not entirely one-directional.. In essence, this means that
the therapist relies on clients to empathise with and understand his or
her empathic understanding of them - there is a reciprocal. process.
Thus 'two persons being in contact' and 'the client receives, at least
to a minimal. degree, the unconditional. positive regard and empathic
understanding of the therapist' (the first and sixth necessary and
sufficient conditions) can be linked with the notion of reciprocity in
empathic process. Another illustration of 'reciprocal. empathy' is when
the therapist chooses to express an apparently nontherapeutic or
'negative' feeling that has persisted in the counselling relationship,
such as anger or boredom. Carl stated that in such moments the therapist
relies on the empathy and understanding of the client to get through
such phases. Gender although it is difficult to find many references to
gender issues in the writings of Carl Rogers, it might be of interest to
note that in this interview with Gay Barfield, Rogers did comment on a
trend, namely males becoming more acquainted with and accustomed to
their 'softer' or more 'feminine' side, rather than simply being
dominating and 'macho' men. It may be that this greater willingness of
men to strive to be empathic and understanding is linked with a move
away from more directive approaches to psychotherapy. It is abundantly
clear when watching the video Empathy: an Exploration that in his later
years Rogers believed passionately that empathy was a compassionate,
delicate and sensitive way to be with people, not some technique or
skill to use on them.

Summary What have we learned of empathic understanding by trawling
through its origins and developments? Here are six headings:

Empathic understanding: origins and developments

1 2 3 4 5 6

41

Context Clients are active, not passive Being a person Does not, is not
Empathic understanding is . . . Predictable process and consequences.

Context Empathic understanding occurs within the context of other
necessary and sufficient conditions, namely being in meaningful contact
with another person (the client), the other person being relatively
incongruent, the therapist being congruent and experiencing
unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding, and the client
perceiving the unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding
of the therapist. These conditions are both necessary and sufficient -
client-centred therapy is not eclectic. although it is true that
therapeutic relationships can include broader applications of
client-centred therapy, known as the person-centred approach, it is also
a fact that Carl Rogers went so far as to state that the use of
different techniques for different people in one-to-one therapy: goes a
long way towards destroying the possibility of a growthful experience
for clients. (Rogers and Sanford 1985)

Clients are active, not passive At the heart of client-centred theory
lies the actualising tendency, a belief that individuals have their own
inner resources (which have traditionally been underestimated or even
ignored). Clients are capable of setting their own time and pace in
therapy (for beneficial emotional disclosure, for instance) and of
selfexploring at self-controlled depth. Clients may be self-protecting
(withdrawing when appropriate, as compared with resisting or avoiding)
and, given the right conditions, are strong, resourceful, positive and
constructive. Clients are capable of achieving insight, which in turn
may lead to behavioural choices. Clients also know best when to end
therapy. People have access to their experiencing and their inner
psychophysiological flow, and thus have a capacity for organismic
valuing. The client does the probing, examining, exploring and
reflecting. The constructive capacity of clients is immense, and the
efforts of the therapist are puny by comparison. The client-centred
therapist goes to work with a client - not on one!

Being a person The prime requisite for becoming a client-centred
therapist is being a person - an imperfect, whole person is good enough.
This person strives in a disciplined way to be delicately sensitive,
true, honest, trustworthy, compassionate, secure, transparent, real,
non-defensive, non-possessive, non-threatening, self-aware (of inner
warps, biases and prejudices), aware of others and their social/cultural
contexts, genuinely receptive and interested, caring, deeply
understanding, warm

42

Being empathic

and permissive, and engages only in appropriate self-disclosure.
Unconditional positive regard (characterised by a 'there but for the
grace of some deity go I' attitude) and empathic understanding must be
integrated and owned parts of the congruence of the therapist, as must a
respect for the sovereignty and autonomy of individuals and their
potential capacities and resources. Does not, is not Such a person finds
it impossible to moralise, be prejudicial, judge, be horrified, blame,
interpret, probe, question (open or otherwise), advise, suggest,
paraphrase, summarise, persuade, reassure, diagnose, evaluate, deliver
prognoses, guide, manipulate, go off at a tangent, reflect on therapist
(their own) experiencing, use inappropriate language, mirror, reflect,
become lost or over-immersed in the other's inner world, project a
professional façade or front, pretend or be otherwise phony, direct,
criticise, approve or disapprove, praise, lose the essence of the I-thou
relationship by focusing on a frozen state of empathy (individual
'responses', for example), be the expert or blurt out every passing
feeling. Technological society has tended to produce experts who use
skills on people (going to work on clients, not with them). As a result,
a regrettable caricature of empathic understanding arose. However, in
client-centred therapy empathy is not at all to do with skills,
techniques, tools, tricks, expertise or wooden, mechanical, textbook
counsellor responses. Tricks? The therapist using tricks on people
conjures up the image of the conjurer. Con suggests manipulative, and a
juror decides, or is judgemental. Why, expertly and professionally, pull
this technique out of the hat, or that skill from up your sleeve, or
suddenly wave your wand to make that tool appear as if from nowhere?
Authentic unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding are
the magic. So: Why be the magician when you can be the magic? Empathic
understanding is . . . Being empathic is demanding - the therapist needs
to be strong yet also gentle. To be empathic means to enter the world of
another as if it were one's own, yet without ever losing the 'as if
quality. The therapist is flexible, altering, changing, fluid - engaging
in a sensitive togetherness as a delicate, confident companion. The
therapist may at first 'simply' listen and really hear, and then,
through ongoing perception checking, enter what is almost an altered
state of consciousness - a reciprocal process for both therapist (from
tentative to more confident) and client. The essence of the I-thou
relationship is an authentic and respectful striving (and accuracy) to
do with sensing and communicating with immediacy (not in one's car on
the way home!) one's being attuned to client feelings and meanings,
including the unspoken and underlying feelings and meanings of which the
client is only dimly aware. The therapist strives with an intense focus
to understand clients as they experience themselves to be, from the
client's own internal frame of reference (their sensations, perceptions,
meanings and memories). For those who say that client-centred therapy is
all about feelings, or too heavily focused on feelings, Rogers stressed
the importance of feelings and meanings throughout his entire career.

Empathic understanding: origins and developments

43

Predictable process and consequences If the necessary and sufficient
client-centred conditions are present, then the power of the actualising
tendency will be released. This is an empowering relationship that taps
the growth forces within the client, enabling them to be more in touch
with their inner psychophysiological flow. It can be said to have an
if-then quality. If certain conditions are present, then a predictable
process will follow; if the process ensues, then predictable outcomes
accrue. Carl Rogers can provide our final summary of the origins and
developments of empathic understanding: I think at first I realized that
it paid to listen carefully, and I gradually realized that I was
listening to understand the feelings and the personal meanings.
Sometimes people skip that second part - not only listening to the
feelings but the personal meaning that experience has for the
individual. Then I realized that I was entering into the private, inner
world of the individual, trying to sense the exact nature of that inner
world and to move around in it freely and maybe sense it from the
inside. I realized that empathy also meant being a companion to the
person as they search their own experience. Then I began increasingly to
trust my own intuitive understanding; sometimes I would want to say
things which had no relation to what the client had just said, and yet
it seemed to me important to say. Gradually my understanding of empathy
extended to an intuitive capacity for empathy, where I would find
something rising in myself that wanted to be said. It might be bizarre.
It might be out of context. But I found that if I voiced it, it often
rang a bell with the person and opened up all kinds of areas that had
been dimly sensed by the client but not really experienced. I don't
really understand the workings of intuition. Do I simply pick up
nonverbal cues? I don't think that's sufficient to explain it. Somehow
there is a way in which the inner core of me relates to the inner core
of the other person, and I understand better than my mind understands,
better than my brain understands - I'll put it that way. Mind is greater
than brain and, somehow, my nonconscious mind understands more than my
conscious mind understands, so I'm able to respond to something in this
other person that I didn't know I was responding to. (Rogers and Russell
2002: pp. 284-5)

Chapter 2

Empathic understanding is not a technique Thou shalt not skill! Having
taken a selective journey through some of the origins and developments
of empathic understanding in Chapter 1, we now take a reverse angle view
in this section. Very often it seems that people (such as Carl Rogers,
trainers, trainees, correspondents and authors) have defined empathic
understanding, at least in part, through a process of eliminating what
it is not as much as by defining and celebrating what empathic
understanding is. although this may very well be understandable, it has
perhaps also been unfortunate in some respects. This tendency to define
empathy by stating what it is not may be understandable for two reasons.
The first is the 'everyday habit' of many human beings of describing how
they are by saying how they are not, as in such phrases as 'I'm not
feeling so good', T don't feel very happy about that' and, when asked
how they are, 'Not too bad'. The second reason is more specific to
client-centred therapy, in that to some degree the approach was
generated through Carl Rogers and others discovering that traditional
counselling methods were not satisfactory either to the therapist or to
the clients with whom they worked, and so there was a rebellion against
'directive' therapy. We can readily see, for instance, that the early
term 'non-directive' described, in effect, what this type of counselling
was not - simply put, it was not directive. Indeed, throughout the
development of client-centred therapy (and the person-centred approach),
frequent references can be found that reject doing to people in favour
of being with them. The regrettable element of this is that defining
what something is not has a rather defensive feel to it when compared
with celebrating fully what something is. For instance, so many
client-centred counselling (or counselling skills) training courses
begin with looking at what client-centred therapy is not and what the
client-centred therapist does not do - for example, the therapist does
not show shock or surprise, does not praise, support or encourage, does
not diagnose or interpret, and so on. One feature of client-centred
therapy is that it is an opportunity for clients to explore and examine
their conditions of worth, including the values of others that have been
internalised due to a need to be loved, accepted or valued, rather than
because they 'feel right' (or are in harmony with 'organismic valuing').
An example of this might be the woman who has come to realise that first
she was someone's daughter, then someone's girlfriend, then someone's
employee, then someone's wife, then someone's mother, and so on.
Eventually her children become more independent, and she realises that
her whole life has been spent meeting the needs of or pleasing others.
Those were her roles ('keeping everyone happy'), and those roles carried
with them values, guidelines and rules about how

46

Being empathic

they should be fulfilled - 'scripts', if you will. There comes a time
when although the roles may have been fulfilled, the person does not
feel fulfilled, and she wonders, 'What about me?' - usually accompanied
by feelings of guilt, shame and embarrassment about even experiencing
such a 'selfish' thought. Yet, as if from deep within, there is
something (often described as a 'voice') that persists with 'What about
me?', and that just cannot successfully or permanently be ignored,
suppressed or denied. If this message is heard to the extent of actually
acting upon it, often another phase is a feeling of liberation - perhaps
the client makes what seems to her at the time to be her own free
choices, feeling a greater sense of self-assertion. Yet after a while
this sense of new-found freedom loses its depth of meaning, because she
realises (sometimes gradually, sometimes as a sudden shock) that what
she is now doing is the exact opposite of the previous values,
guidelines and rules, and if a construction of self is determined in
exact opposition to something, then that something retains a central and
powerful position. Thus if he used to say 'Buy blue', she now says 'I'll
buy red', and somehow his blue is still the determinant. In
client-centred theoretical terms, the locus of evaluation is still
external ('his red', not 'her blue'). Often another phase is that the
woman effectively asks herself 'So who on earth am I, really?', or
alternatively she states T don't know who I am any more'. Now turning to
counselling training, a colleague described facilitating the first day
of a counselling diploma course, when trainees had decided to pool their
current knowledge. A line was drawn down the middle of a board under the
heading 'Client-Centred Counselling', and one column was marked 'The
counsellor does' and the other 'The counsellor does not'. The
facilitator was writing up what the students were calling out: 'does not
praise, does not rescue, does not reassure', and so on (interestingly,
the 'does not' column was the starting point). After writing a few
entries in the 'does not' column, the facilitator turned to the group
and said, 'Why? Why doesn't the client-centred practitioner do these
things?'. Following some debate and exploration, the only explanation or
reason that trainees could come up with was that this is what they had
been told (or had learned) on their previous skills course. Returning to
the analogy of our female client, if traditional therapies were to be
seen as 'his red' it would be most regrettable if client-centred therapy
were to be the equivalent of 'her blue' for no other reason than a
dislike of or rebellion against 'his red' - yet maybe something akin to
this was an understandable developmental phase in the generation of
client-centred therapy. It may well be, too, that counsellor trainees
who begin to feel de-skilled as a consequence of discovering (or being
told) that the techniques that they had learned (and had certificated)
are no longer praiseworthy might well enter a phase similar to asking
'So who am I, really?' or T don't know who I am or how I'm meant to be
any more'. Well, one of the central aims of this book is that moving
towards an authentically empathic way of being - a way of being that is
you through and through - is eminently preferable to learning a
(relatively impersonal) plethora of skills and techniques. There is,
perhaps, a vital difference between the analogy of the female client and
the person who is hoping to become a client-centred therapist. For the
clientcentred counsellor trainee, it might go something like this: 'My
previous skills course tutors taught and told me red. Now these diploma
facilitators are saying no, not red, blue - and furthermore not only is
this a higher-level course, but also they can back up blue by quoting
Carl Rogers, so they must be right'. Yet to jettison or

Empathic understanding is not a technique

47

otherwise discard something for which a certificate has been achieved
might not come easy. There is a strong argument for neither red nor blue
if they are simply or only the introjected values of others (be they
authors, facilitators or even Carl Rogers), rather than being based on
an internal locus of evaluation - experiencing first hand what seems to
work for you (preferably both as therapist and client). Better a chosen
red experienced at first hand than a second-hand introjected
(internalised, the value absorbed or taken on from another) blue!
Reading a book may indeed be a part of the entire experiencing of a
trainee counsellor, yet the message has to be try it and see, or, better
still, be it and see. While rejecting 'traditional red' was undeniably a
significant feature in the development of client-centred therapy, there
was also the equally important element of discovery - of looking for and
at what seemed to be more meaningfully therapeutic. It is tragic to
witness the way of being that was so dear to Carl Rogers reduced to
nothing more than the 'blind' introjection of clientcentred beliefs,
values and technique-oriented practices - not based on personal
discovery, experiencing, feeling and meaning, but on the teachings of
trainers (that is, an external frame of reference to learners). What
might be the qualitative impact if the starting point for client-centred
counsellor training were to be the celebration of what client-centred
therapy is - taking pride and rejoicing in the journey ahead towards
becoming a sensitive companion to clients?

You don't know what you've got until you lose it It was stated earlier
that to some degree the development of client-centred therapy was a
consequence of discarding many traditional beliefs and methods. However,
Rogers also built his research activities around looking at what did
seem to work and what was effective (as described in Chapter 1 and
Chapter 3 onwards). Let us nevertheless spend time exploring some of the
therapist ways of being with clients that did not seem to be effective,
or which were deemed to be philosophically dehumanising. Can you, for
instance, imagine a therapist saying some or all of the following? You
poor thing. It is perfectly understandable why you feel the way that you
do. Still, you can confide in me, your secrets are safe with me. You
know that I'll back you all the way, for I'm on your side. You're not
alone. Well done! (You will be rewarded with oodles of attention and
compassion if you focus on your feelings.) Yes, you can do it - it will
be okay. You have been badly treated and, you know, another client of
mine had a similar experience and . . . And yet I'm glad you're
beginning to sort yourself out, it must be really hard. You are most
certainly justified in feeling as you do. Don't you think that a
sensible course of action might be to . . .? Yes, you could do this; we
could work in achievable stages towards . . . Your tears represent
feelings of loss at your unresolved grief and you lack the ego strength
to fully deal with this right now, so it will clearly take some time
before you do have the inner resources - it is as if I were your parent
and as if you were my child. If I were you I'd . . . because this is
clearly a case of . . . I understand that when you say this you mean
that, don't you? When this happened to me I . . .

48

Being empathic

No, you cannot imagine a therapist saying all of those things, yet if a
bet were to be placed on you recognising and being able to imagine some
counsellors saying some of those things some of the time, the person
placing the wager would not get good odds! Perhaps the above example can
be used to further this process of eliminating what empathic
understanding is not. The intent of empathic understanding is not the
same as sympathy - feeling sorry for a client ('you poor thing') - nor
is it an attempt at rescuing or normalising ('it is perfectly
understandable and natural that you feel the way you do'). empathic
understanding is not akin to befriending ('you can confide in me, your
secrets are safe with me'), nor is it about supporting (I'll back you
all the way, I'm on your side'), or meeting client needs (whatever they
may be). Nor is empathy about praise ('well done', or an implied 'you'll
be rewarded with oodles of attention and compassion if you focus on your
feelings' - the latter hardly conveys unconditional positive regard),
encouragement ('you can do it') or reassurance ('it will be okay').
Empathic understanding is not the same as agreement ('yes, you have been
badly treated'), nor is it about making comparisons ('another client of
mine had a similar experience and . . .'), nor is it patronising ('I'm
glad you're beginning to sort yourself out, it must be really hard').
Empathy is not about making value judgements ('you are most certainly
justified in feeling as you do'), nor does it involve giving advice ('a
sensible course of action might be to . . .') or answers (which are more
often than not disempowering). Empathic understanding has nothing to do
with problem solving ('you could do this . . .'), goal setting ('we
could work in achievable stages towards . . .') or having an agenda or
preconceived ideas (although the therapist will have preconceived
beliefs - a philosophy that underpins the therapeutic approach).
Empathic understanding is not about interpreting ('your tears represent
feelings of loss at your unresolved grief . . .'), diagnosing ('and you
lack the ego strength to fully deal with this right now'), or giving
prognoses ('it will clearly take some time before you do have the inner
resources'), nor is it based on theories of transference ('it is as if I
were your parent') and/or counter-transference ('and it is as if you
were my child'). Empathy is not confrontational (in the everyday meaning
of 'confrontational' as typified by something like 'I understand that
when you say this you mean that, don't you?'), and does not include
inappropriate self-disclosure ('when this happened to me I . . .'), nor
is it about the counsellor knowing best ('if I were you I'd . . .' or
'this is clearly a case of . . .'). Nor is empathic understanding all
about feelings. And nor is empathic understanding concerned with
understanding about. On client-centred training programmes, the issues
that cause the most initial concern among trainees are usually praise,
encouragement, reassurance, support, rescuing and, above all else,
questioning. There has frequently been an additional confusion between
acceptance and agreement, often linked with confrontation as a 'style'
(skill or technique) within counselling. Some research evidence (Vincent
1999a) in support of this comes from having modified, expanded and
administered (to counselling and counselling skills training groups),
over a period of some 18 years, the Counsellor Attitude Scale developed
by Richard Nelson-Jones and Dr Cecil H Patterson (Nelson-Jones and
Patterson 1975). It can be stated through this and other research (see
below) that, inevitably, acceptance, agreement, challenging,
confrontation, diagnosis, encouragement, evaluation, explaining,
focusing, interpretation, leading, mirroring, normalising, paraphrasing,
praise, probing,

Empathic understanding is not a technique

49

prognosis, questioning, reassurance, reflecting, rescuing,
responsibility for clients, suggestion, summarising, support, therapist
self-disclosure, transference and counter-transference, 'uh-huh', and
'understanding about' have featured as key issues. When reviewing
studies by Julius Seeman (Seeman 1949) and W Snyder (Snyder 1943) of the
early days of client-centred counselling, Carl Rogers noted that:
counsellors used a number of responses involving questioning,
interpreting, reassuring, encouraging, suggesting. Such responses,
though always forming a small proportion of the total, would seem to
indicate on the counsellor's part a limited confidence in the capacity
of the client to understand and cope with his difficulties. The
counsellor still felt it necessary at times to take the lead, to explain
the client to himself, to be supportive, and to point out what to the
counsellor were desirable courses of action. (Rogers 1951: pp. 30-31) It
is important to stress that tendencies to praise, support and encourage
(and so on) are usually well meant, and indeed may well form part of a
helping relationship. Thus there is no need for people who experience
such impulses to feel 'bad' about themselves. Nevertheless, it is also
true to say that the person who intends to praise, support and encourage
(and so on) has not fully understood or integrated a client-centred way
of being. The 'client-centred counsellor does not' list above contains
30 items in all. It might prove helpful to look at these
characteristics, now grouped under 13 headings, in an attempt to grasp
more clearly what empathy is not.

Acceptance and agreement Acceptance There's . . . a misunderstanding of
unconditional positive regard: To care for the client, to prize the
client, doesn't mean that you approve of everything the client does; it
means a real caring for the essence of the client. (Rogers and Russell
2002: p. 284) As we have seen, Stanley Standal, a student working with
Carl Rogers in the early days, came to the conclusion that 'acceptance'
was a term which was too easily misunderstood. For instance, acceptance
is not the same as agreement (see below), nor is it the same as belief -
yet the term could be held to mean either (Standal 1954). For example,
if person A believes that the earth is flat, person B can accept that
this is A's belief. Person B does not have to agree with A, or accept
that the earth is, in actual fact, flat. In this instance, if person B
were to agree with person A, or to accept person A's belief as fact,
person B would be in a state of incongruence, because they do not
believe that the earth is flat, and maybe their agreement with person A
derives from their own needs for positive regard from person A. In this
case there is a strong argument for person B engaging in self-awareness
and personal growth work if they wish to become a client-centred

50

Being empathic

therapist! Person B's agreement would also be based on their own frame
of reference - after all, it is person B who is doing the agreeing.
Incidentally, a more socialist critique of 'acceptance' might be that it
can be seen as akin to 'accepting your lot' - that acceptance along the
lines of 'that's just the way it is' dissipates energy for action
(individual or group) through accepting the status quo. Agreement
Agreement would often seem to be confused with acceptance (as described
above). For instance, how often in a counsellor training group have two
people been in some form of dispute where person A disagrees with person
B and is then accused by person B of lacking acceptance? In more basic
counselling terms, therapist agreement or disagreement would seem to
imply a locus of evaluation that is external to the client and internal
to the therapist (or the theory held by that therapist). Very often
counsellor trainees seem to think that it is okay (or 'nice' or 'warm'
or 'compassionate') to agree, yet not okay (or 'nasty' or 'cold' or
'dispassionate') to disagree. However, in terms of the power dynamics in
the relationship, does not the right to agree also imply the right (or
authority) to disagree? Often agreement is verbalised while disagreement
is not. Perhaps we can deduce from this that it feels okay (or
acceptable) to be 'nice' and 'warm' and 'compassionate', but not to be
'nasty' or 'cold' or 'dispassionate' - despite the power dynamic being
exactly the same. Clearly agreement and disagreement involve value
judgements, usually from either a therapist or a theoretical frame of
reference (or both), and as such both agreement and disagreement are
directive, potentially manipulative, and generate a power imbalance in
the therapeutic relationship. Agreement, disagreement, non-agreement and
collusion Trainees and supervisees often become concerned that their
acceptance will be received by clients as somehow condoning or colluding
with actions or behaviours that the counsellor, in private at least,
finds unacceptable or even appalling, such as the client who admits
aggressive behaviour towards or abuse of a partner, or selfaggressive or
abusive acts. This raises a number of issues, not least of which are the
congruence of the therapist and the potential consequences in terms of
social responsibility and conscience. Ideally, it could be argued that a
wholly non-judgemental therapist will not face such issues. Yet few
counsellors, it seems, have escaped grappling with such feelings,
thoughts and meanings. If a therapist does experience difficulty in
'reality', what then? If the therapist somehow feigns or puts on a show
of acceptance when 'really' he or she is anxious about being perceived
as colluding with a hurtful behaviour, the therapist is hardly in a
state of congruence. Furthermore, many believe that if a therapist
'privately' agrees or disagrees with a client, then the client will
sense that approval or disapproval at some level, for clients too have a
capacity to be empathic ('reciprocal empathy, being in contact'). Some
then go on to say that if clients perceive therapist discomfort at some
level, then it is probably best for the therapist to self-disclose, as
unspecified client sensing could potentially be more harmful than
transparency and open-

Empathic understanding is not a technique

51

ness. (This theme is explored more fully in Chapter 3 when looking at
empathic understanding in relation to congruence.) Some practitioners
and theorists maintain that the therapist accepts the client but not her
or his behaviour, which as we have seen in Chapter 1 is not a wholly
satisfactory answer. For instance, if being client-centred includes a
belief in engaging with whole persons, how can one aspect of a person
(their behaviour) be separated out as if it does not matter? Surely
behaviour is an integral part of the whole person, and a significant
part at that? We have also seen in Chapter 1 that acceptance can be seen
as a 'there but for the grace of some deity go I' kind of attitude - if
a person has this experience, then maybe that behaviour is a natural and
understandable consequence. Is it, though, possible for a client to
sense non-agreement, as compared with agreement or disagreement? Can a
therapist 'suspend' all judgement, both positive and negative? Might it
even be important for a client to actually sense nonagreement? For if a
client senses therapist agreement, then feelings of collusion or
condoning might well be an outcome, and if a client senses therapist
disagreement, devalued and worthless feelings might be the result.
Perhaps this can be brought more to life through an illustration. A
young boy is referred for counselling because he has begun to cut
himself at school. Each time he does so, those around him (mostly the
adults, but peers, too) are very concerned, and their caring leads them
to try their utmost to find a way of stopping or preventing such
self-harming activities. They can 'accept' the young boy as a valuable
person for whom they feel compassion, but they find it very difficult
indeed to accept (or have compassion for) him physically cutting
himself. The therapist is a human being, too, and of course does not
like to see self-inflicted scars on such a young person - and would most
certainly feel uncomfortable at the notion of therapy somehow condoning
or colluding with such behaviour. However, the therapist takes a genuine
interest in what is going on for the boy. The therapist is not trying,
overtly or covertly, to stop the behaviour. Rather, the therapist is
authentically respectful of the behaviour, and is striving to sense the
feelings and meanings associated with this self-harm. Striving to engage
with the boy as a whole person, it becomes clear that within the boy's
self-structure are at least three significant aspects, namely a
'perpetrator' (the boy who is cutting himself), a 'victim' (the boy who
is being harmed) and some kind of 'observer/ mediator' who watches over
and tries to make sense of what is going on. If the therapist was to be
anxious about colluding with or condoning the selfharm, this would seem
to be to do with 'siding with' the perpetrator construct, and maybe with
a failure to rescue or protect the victim, too. This is hardly
unconditional positive regard, for the perpetrator is 'bad' and the
victim is worthy of protection (and the observer/mediator would seem to
have been somewhat neglected in this equation, too). The boy at first
seems surprised (even shocked) that here is someone who is not trying to
prevent or correct an aspect of his behaviour. Rather, here is someone
who actually seems to be taking a 'no strings attached' interest in
anything and everything that the boy is (including what he does) - and
he seems to be valued as no more or less worthy whatever he decides to
disclose. The boy even doubts whether this can be true. However, in part
as a consequence of this unconditional positive regard, the boy
gradually becomes free of any need to be defensive, and thus shares more
and more of his inner feelings and meanings, slowly moving towards a
greater trust in the therapist's acceptance

52

Being empathic

of his whole being as genuine. The boy discovers that his inner
'perpetrator' is actually doing its best to keep him safe - for when the
boy feels hurt by others he experiences not being able to 'handle it',
yet he had also discovered that if he inflicted the pain on himself by
himself, he could manage it. Suddenly, it seems, it becomes possible for
him to value his inner perpetrator as a part of him that is well
meaning, creative, protective and constructive. Had the therapist
neglected, ignored, lacked compassion for or disapproved of the boy's
inner perpetrator, it is far less likely that client self-acceptance
would have emerged. It is so easy - and it seems so tempting - to be
'seduced into naturally' extending all of our compassion to the victim,
with the consequence that the perpetrator and the observer/mediator are
neglected. When this happens, our positive regard is not unconditional,
and opportunities for therapeutic movement may well be thwarted. The
young boy in this illustration, through a process of being able to own,
value, understand and respect himself more fully, changed his own
behaviour. No one had to do anything - the therapist 'simply' had to
strive to be, as fully as was possible, the client-centred core
conditions. The boy did the rest.

Challenging and confrontation Confrontation often appears as a technique
that is either taught or learned on many counselling skills courses
(and, regrettably, on many counselling programmes, too). Indeed, at the
time of writing 'confrontation and/or challenging skills' is on the
syllabus of at least three major counselling course validating bodies in
the UK. At its 'worst', confrontation would seem to assume a hectoring
quality, in that the implementer of the skill is seemingly determined to
get the client to see things as the counsellor does. At its 'best', the
user of counselling skills perceives client incongruence, for example,
and is determined to confront the client with this observation in order
to ensure that the client sees it, too. Yet is there really anything
more 'confrontational than authentic unconditional positive regard and
genuine (and accurate) empathic understanding? For instance, if clients
have low self-esteem as a result of their conditions of worth,
introjected values, and needs for positive regard (and so on), and the
therapist offers unconditional acceptance and empathic understanding of
them, then their very self concept is effectively 'challenged' or
'confronted'. However, the crucial differentiating factor here is to do
with therapist intent, for in genuinely striving to experience and offer
acceptance and empathy, the therapist's intent is simply and only that -
to strive to the best of their ability to experience and offer the
fourth and fifth necessary and sufficient conditions from a position of
congruence (the third condition). Study the writings of Carl Rogers and
you will find very few references indeed to challenging or
confrontation. Find a reference and it will be linked with congruence,
not empathy. For example, writing about relationships other than therapy
(such as partners, sex partners, colleagues, friends, employers and
employees), Rogers states that congruence is probably the most important
of the three core conditions, and that it: may involve confrontation and
the straightforward expression of personally owned feelings. (Rogers
1980: p. 160)

Empathic understanding is not a technique

53

It is important to note that Rogers excluded counsellor-client
relationships from this, and included 'confrontation' within the
client-centred core condition of congruence, not within empathic
understanding. When it was stated earlier in this chapter that empathic
understanding is not about having an agenda or preconceived ideas, yet
it might involve preconceived beliefs, remember that one fundamental
client-centred belief is in the potential for (client) autonomy and
self-direction. Client-centred therapists trust in the resources of
clients to 'make what they will' of their therapist's authentic striving
to experience and offer unconditional positive regard and empathic
understanding. However, this is far from a 'couldn't care less' or 'pass
the buck' attitude - if counsellors genuinely intend to offer the core
conditions, then they are providing an opportunity for therapeutic
growth. This is as far as it is possible to be from setting out with an
intent to 'confront' or 'challenge'. During some 20 years spent as a
trainer of counsellors, I was intrigued as to why trainees would abandon
client-centred principles and resort to confronting or challenging their
clients, and two main reasons emerged. Either trainee therapists felt
that their clients, the process, or they themselves had become 'stuck',
or trainees had been influenced by their supervisor (many of whom
described themselves as 'person-centred') into importing ways of being
that are contrary to client-centred attitudes. Carl Rogers recognised
this himself when he said: Sometimes people feel that client-centered
therapy is good for going only so far, and when you really strike
difficult problems you should probably be more confronting or more this
or more that. I think - and I feel quite strongly from my experience -
that that is really a mistaken line of thought. I think that when the
situation is most difficult, that's when a client-centered approach is
most needed, and what is needed there is a deepening of the conditions
we've talked about - not trying something more technique oriented. It
might be worth saying what I've probably said before: in this
technological age, an approach that simply lives a philosophy and puts
its trust in the capacities of the client seems lacking in glamour,
compared to things that try all sorts of tricks and techniques and do
different things and try different procedures. It interests me that
people who use that sort of an approach often burn out because they just
come to the end of their rope; whereas when you get nourishment from the
client by seeing the client grow, that's very rewarding. (Rogers and
Russell 2002: pp. 258-9)

Diagnosis, evaluation and prognosis The whole diagnostic look at an
individual is in sharp contrast to the I-Thou kind of relationship.
(Rogers and Evans: 1975, p. 25) Therapist diagnosis, evaluation and
prognosis clearly do not respect the inner resources of clients and
their potential and capacity for self-direction, as there is an obvious
implication that actually the therapist, not the client, knows best.
Carl Rogers wrote that:

54

Being empathic

If we can provide understanding of the way the client seems to himself
at this moment, he can do the rest. The therapist must lay aside his
preoccupation with diagnosis and his diagnostic shrewdness, must discard
his tendency to make professional evaluations, must cease his endeavors
to formulate an accurate prognosis, must give up the temptation subtly
to guide the individual, and must concentrate on one purpose only; that
of providing deep understanding and acceptance of the attitudes
consciously held at this moment by the client as he explores step by
step into the dangerous areas which he has been denying to
consciousness. (Rogers 1946: p. 420) Writing of client-centred
principles applied to a learning context, Carl differentiated between
empathic understanding and evaluative ways of being, stating of empathy
that: This kind of understanding is sharply different from the usual
evaluative understanding, which follows the pattern of T understand what
is wrong with you'. When there is a sensitive empathy, however, the
reaction in the learner follows something of this pattern: 'At last
someone understands how it feels and seems to be me, without wanting to
analyze or judge me. Now I can blossom and grow and learn.' This
attitude of standing in the students' shoes, of viewing the world
through their eyes, is almost unheard of in the classroom. But when the
teacher responds in a way that makes the students feel understood not
judged or evaluated - this has a tremendous impact. (Rogers 1980:
pp. 272-3) Diagnosis, evaluation and prognosis necessarily involve
judgements, and being judgemental is not in accord with congruently
experiencing and offering both unconditional positive regard and
empathic understanding: Yet it would appear to be true that whether the
theme is evaluative or self-concerned, there is slightly less of full
respect for the other person than in . . . thoroughly empathic
understandings. (Rogers 1951: p. 45) If therapists are absorbed with
their own processing, or are considering courses of action, then without
doubt there is a decreased focus on the world of the client. Even
accuracy of evaluation is irrelevant here, because any 'objective'
judgement means less respect for client self-direction: On the other
hand, to enter deeply with this man into his confused struggle for
selfhood is perhaps the best implementation we now know for indicating
the meaning of our basic hypothesis that the individual represents a
process which is deeply worthy of respect, both as he is and with regard
to his potentialities. (Rogers 1951: p. 45) Returning to this theme in
1980, Carl Rogers was able to categorically state that:

Empathic understanding is not a technique

55

Brilliance and diagnostic perceptiveness are unrelated to empathy. It is
important to know that the degree to which therapists create an empathic
climate is not related to their academic performance or intellectual
competence (Bergin and Jasper 1969; Bergin and Solomon 1970). Neither is
it related to the accuracy of their perception of individuals or their
diagnostic competence. In fact, it may be negatively related to the
latter (Fiedler 1953). This is a most important finding. If neither
academic brilliance nor diagnostic skill is significant, then clearly an
empathic quality belongs in a different realm of discourse from most
clinical thinking - psychological and psychiatric. I believe that
therapists are reluctant to accept the implications. (Rogers 1980:
pp. 149-50) Much of Carl's earlier writing to do with diagnostic
evaluation stemmed from his reactions against the psychoanalytic
approaches that were so prevalent at the time. For instance, Rogers
believed that the diagnostic testing of patients objectifies people
rather than prizing them, and thus was 'worse than a waste of time. It
is destructive . ..' (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 98). While Carl Rogers
did believe that childhood experience (such as the introjection of
values from significant others, culminating in our conditions of worth)
is a force to be reckoned with, and therefore that behaviour can be
influenced by the past, he added: I'm objecting to putting hard-and-fast
labels on these processes. I don't like the pigeonholes that Freudian
and other theories have promulgated. I think people handicap their
thinking when they think in terms of so many labels. (Rogers and Evans
1975: p. 8) As we have seen, Rogers went further than simply objecting
to labelling when he described targeting individuals in this way as
destructive. He added of practitioners who do label: I feel that they
are destructive, primarily because they make pigeonholed objects out of
human beings. If I say you're a paranoid, then you're quite naturally
placed. I don't even have to think about you as a person. You belong in
that pigeonhole. I've been very interested to see this at work among
psychiatrists. If one psychiatrist doesn't like another psychiatrist,
then he begins to label him, calls him a manic, or says that he's got
paranoid tendencies, or that he's essentially a schizophrenic. They're
quite deceptive in that they're really finding a different way of saying
they don't like that guy. They have to admit there's some truth in that.
Now I think it's a pseudo-thing; I hate pseudo-things. They make it
sound as though T know what illness you've got'. Physicians overuse
labeling, even in physiological diseases; but there are real diseases
which they can identify and which deserve a label. To my way of
thinking, in psychological states, there are certain patterns. Sure,
there are people who are suspicious, and I would call them that instead
of giving them a high-falutin label like

56

Being empathic

paranoid. At any rate, labels give a pseudoscientific sound to what is
actually a very loose and unfounded categorization. (Rogers and Evans
1975: pp. 96-7) A frequent consequence of diagnostic evaluation was (and
often still is) medical prescription, of which Rogers wrote: Medication
is seen so often as a means of dealing with psychotic disorders. Perhaps
sometimes that's justified; I don't want to try and step into the field
of medicine, but it is most certainly overdone to a great degree. Often
patients are medicated in order to be of help to the people caring for
them rather than for the welfare of the patient. I think most
psychological disorders are psychological in their origin. Their
treatment should be dealt with in that fashion. (Rogers and Evans 1975:
pp. 290-91) Carl believed that much diagnostic testing was
institutionalised, yet, to further evidence what a useless waste of time
such activities are, he pointed out that once a person leaves working
for 'the establishment' in order to work privately, that practitioner
almost never repeats: \[the bureaucratic\] rigmarole of diagnoses . . .
which shows that he doesn't believe at all in a lot of this folderol
he's been sponsoring in the institution. As I see it, rigid
classification has no logical or helpful basis. It has just become
established as the custom or the tradition, and I wish tradition weren't
so hard to change. (Rogers 1975: pp. 98-9) Can the client-centred
therapist completely do away with diagnosis and evaluation (especially,
perhaps, if he or she is working in a medical setting)? This is a vexing
question, for even Rogers acknowledged that: There are difficult border
lines, and the border line between what is physical, physiological,
medical and illness and what is psychological is sometimes difficult to
determine. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 291) This strongly demonstrates
the importance of both supervision and access to medical consultancy.
Carl believed that client creativity is generated when people experience
freedom from evaluation and measurement from an external locus of
evaluation, and wrote that: Evaluation is always a threat, always
creates a need for defensiveness, always means that some portion of
experience must be denied to awareness. (Rogers 1961: p. 357) If, for
example, some aspect of a client is evaluated as 'good' by a therapist,
then that makes it all the more difficult for that client to 'admit' (to
the therapist or to themselves) that actually they dislike this aspect
of themselves. Conversely, if a counsellor evaluates some client
characteristics as bad, then it makes it all the more difficult for
clients to openly express and be those characteristics. Client

Empathic understanding is not a technique

57

creativity is fostered through clients moving towards an increasingly
inner locus of evaluation. It is impossible to be accurately perceptive
of another's inner world if you have formed an evaluative opinion of
that person. If you doubt this statement, choose someone you know with
whom you deeply disagree and who is, in your judgment, definitely wrong
or mistaken. Now try to state that individual's views, beliefs and
feelings so accurately that he or she will agree that you have
sensitively and correctly described his or her stance. I predict that
nine times out of ten you will fail, because your judgment of the
person's views creeps into your description of them. (Rogers 1980:
p. 154) Consequently, true empathy is always free of any evaluative or
diagnostic quality. The recipient perceives this with some surprise: 'If
I am not being judged, perhaps I am not so evil or abnormal as I have
thought. Perhaps I don't have to judge myself so harshly.' Thus the
possibility of self-acceptance is gradually increased. None of this
means that the therapist becomes some kind of 'cold mirror' - on the
contrary, for Carl Rogers differentiated between having a reaction and
making an evaluation. For instance, there is a real contrast between
your saying to me T am not enjoying reading this book' and 'You are a
bad writer'! Your stating to me that you are not enjoying this book
leaves me relatively free to keep my own evaluation of my writing,
whereas telling me that I am a lousy author condemns me. Note that the
same effect would be true of T am enjoying reading this book' and 'You
are a great writer' - for with the former I remain free to evaluate my
own writing, and with the latter the locus of evaluation is effectively
taken away from me. When the counsellor perceives and accepts the client
as he is, when he lays aside all evaluation and enters into the
perceptual frame of reference of the client, he frees the client to
explore his life and experience anew, frees him to perceive in that
experience new meanings and new goals. But is the therapist willing to
give the client full freedom as to outcomes? Is he genuinely willing for
the client to organize and direct his life? Is he willing for him to
choose goals that are social or antisocial, moral or immoral? If not, it
seems doubtful that therapy will be a profound experience for the
client. (Rogers 1951: p. 48) There may well be what might appear to be a
conundrum, in that the more accepting the therapist can be of client
choice, autonomy and self-direction, the more likely it is that the
client will choose healthy, positive directions - the actualising
tendency is trustworthy. Carl stated that it could be even more
difficult for the therapist to be truly accepting of clients who appear
to be 'regressing' rather than growing, to be moving in a direction the
therapist believes to be counter to mental well-being - even to be
choosing death over life. Yet Rogers wrote that: only as the therapist
is completely willing that any outcome, any direction, may be chosen -
only then does he realize the vital strength

58

Being empathic

of the capacity and potentiality of the individual for constructive
action. (Rogers 1951: p. 48) We began this section with a quote from
Carl Rogers about diagnosis and evaluation being 'in sharp contrast to
the I--Thou kind of relationship'. Let us end this section on a similar,
comparative note: It was just incredible to have that kind of c o n t a
c t . . . He was a troubled person who was not able to cope with
society, that was certain. The one thing that brought him out of it, I
feel, was that we were able to form a close person-to-person
relationship, and the fact that his feeling about that relationship has
continued through eight years is really astonishing. It's even more
interesting because, until the very last portion of our contacts
together, he would never have openly and consciously admitted that our
relationship meant anything to him. It was only by his behavior of
continuing to come for interviews that he showed it had a meaning for
him. So it's things like that make me feel that if you can reach the
psychotic in a real relationship, you've got a chance of bringing him
out of his psychosis. I don't underrate the difficulty of reaching such
a person as him because, for most individuals who have turned to
psychosis as an escape, life has hurt them so much and so many times,
and they've been so disappointed in all their personal relationships
that they don't believe you. They don't believe you care; they don't
believe you're interested; they won't let you reach them because you may
hurt them again. We did learn in our research how terribly hard it is to
reach some of these people. I still feel that a close human relationship
is far more significant than anything doctors with superior knowledge of
a patient who is ill can think of doing. I just feel the medical model
is ridiculous. (Rogers and Evans 1975: pp. 95-6)

Explaining, interpreting and normalising Carl Rogers was keen to
distinguish between attempts to understand feelings and meanings, and
attempts to explain or interpret them. When writing about group
facilitation, for instance, he referred to those facilitators who try to
interpret (apparently on behalf of group learning and awareness) that
which might not be in conscious awareness, saying that in his
experience: where leaders have used the technique of interpreting
'unconscious' meanings, such interpretations are usually not
facilitating and are frequently disrupting . . . Certainly it is not
even justified to say that 'reflecting meanings and intents' is not
interpretation in a sense. Nevertheless, there does seem to be a valid
distinction between the two, at least in operational terms. (Rogers
1951: p. 353) What are these 'operational terms'? although Rogers grew
to dislike the term 'reflection', he differentiated between an attempt
to reflect feelings and meanings

Empathic understanding is not a technique

59

as they appear in the here-and-now awareness of clients, and
interpretation, which implies trying to bring 'unconscious' (Carl's
quotation marks) experiencing into conscious awareness. He wrote: This
difference is probably essentially the same as the one that appears to
exist between interpretation as used by some psychoanalytic therapists
and the method of 'adopting the client's frame of reference' used by
client-centred therapists. (Rogers 1951: p. 354) Any interpretation of
the client by the therapist diminishes the dignity of that client.
Carl's reaction against this was a passionate one: It made me realize
that if I wanted to look like a smart psychologist, I could go ahead and
diagnose and advise and interpret. But if I wanted to be effective in
working with people, then I might just as well recognize that this
person has the capacity to deal with his own problems if I could create
a climate where he could do it. Since that time, I would say my whole
effort has been focused on the kind of psychological climate that helps
the individual to resolve his problems, to develop and to grow. (Rogers
and Evans 1975: p. 27) 'Normalising' is a term that arose in a recent
supervision session. The supervisee related how the counsellor had
explained to (or instructed) the client that it was perfectly normal to
have the feelings that the client had disclosed. The supervisee seemed
somewhat surprised - perhaps affronted would be more accurate - that
'normalising' was even worth exploring in supervision, for it was
something that had been learned on a client-centred counselling diploma
course (and therefore 'normalising' must be 'right'). Yet Carl Rogers
quoted the findings of Bergman: Evaluation-based and interpretive
responses or 'structuring' responses are followed, more often than would
be expected by chance, by abandonment of self-exploration. (Bergman
1951: 216-24) So how can the therapist who has a specific goal on behalf
of clients, and who thus explains something like 'normalcy' to a client
in order to achieve that goal, be considered even remotely
client-centred? Once again, the notion of therapist intent is so
crucial - there is a huge difference between a client feeling heard,
accepted and understood and being told that it is normal to have
particular feelings. To the incongruent client and the incongruent
therapist, feeling 'stuck' might be accompanied by feelings of
discomfort, and the implementation of techniques may well be a defensive
reaction aimed at easing such tension. Yet Rogers believed that: No
approach which relies upon knowledge, upon training, upon the acceptance
of something that is taught, is of any use. These approaches seem so
tempting and direct that I have, in the past, tried a great many of
them. It is possible to explain a person to himself, to prescribe steps
which should lead him forward, to train him in knowledge about a

60

Being empathic

more satisfying mode of life. But such methods are, in my experience,
futile and inconsequential. The most they can accomplish is some
temporary change, which soon disappears, leaving the individual more
than ever convinced of his inadequacy. (Rogers 1961: pp. 32-3) This
reminds me of a client who had received counselling from a predecessor
at a medical practice for which I was working. The client began by
saying that she had sought help over a bereavement, and that her
previous counsellor had been 'fantastic' in the way that she applied
techniques and methods (such as writing letters to the deceased, placing
them in a box, and then taking them to the park accompanied by the
therapist - to perform a ritual burning). At the time, the client felt
truly grateful to her counsellor. Yet some months later (when she
arrived to see me), her gratitude had turned to anger and resentment,
for she felt as though her previous counsellor had not only taken
something away from her (her natural grieving process), but had also
left a 'gaping dark space' where her organismic coping methods would
have been. In other words, little respect was shown by my predecessor
for the potential of this client - her innate tendency to actualise in a
constructive way was squashed. What a contrast this is to Rogers saying
that: I think that we do accept the individual and his potentiality. I
think it's a real question whether we could accept the individual as he
is, because often he is in pretty sad shape, if it were not for the fact
that we also in some sense realize and recognize his potentiality. I
guess I feel, too, that acceptance of the most complete sort, acceptance
of this person as he is, is the strongest factor making for change that
I know. In other words, I think that it does release change or release
potentiality to find that as I am, exactly as I am, I am fully accepted
then I can't help but change. Because then I feel there is no longer any
need for defensive barriers, so then what takes over are the
forwardmoving processes of life itself, I think. (Rogers 1989: p. 61)
Carl maintained that striving to see a client's world as that client
sees it is very precious and rare. Yet all too often we instead: offer
another type of understanding which is very different. T understand what
is wrong with you'; T understand what makes you act that way'; or T too
have experienced your trouble and I reacted very differently'; these are
the types of understanding which we usually offer and receive, an
evaluative understanding from the outside. But when someone understands
how it feels and seems to be me, without wanting to analyse me or judge
me, then I can blossom and grow in that climate. And research bears out
this common observation. When the therapist can grasp the
moment-to-moment experiencing which occurs in the inner world of the
client as the client sees it and feels it, without losing the
separateness of his own identity in this empathic process, then change
is likely to occur. (Rogers 1961: pp. 62-3)

Empathic understanding is not a technique

61

Talking about a demonstration session he had 'performed', Carl spoke
about how thoughts about the client occurred to him after the session
had ended. Such thoughts can always, of course, be the subject of
self-reflecting and supervision. At the time, though: Yesterday's
client - I don't remember her exact words - but she said something about
how close she felt, and I said we were almost one in this. That's often
the feeling that exists, because I'm not trying to think about \[how to
respond\] or interpret, lead, persuade or advise. None of those things
are present; I'm just with that client at this moment in exactly the way
that he or she is, even though I may not understand what's going on.
(Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 280) Given the notion (referred to in
Chapter 1 and again towards the end of this book) that sociologically,
economically and politically there has been a trend, perhaps driven by
values more akin to technology than to human beings, to be mechanically
problem solving, thereby requiring experts to deliver strategies,
tactics, action plans and so on to us, how does this impact upon a
client-centred way of being therapeutic with clients? Working in GP
surgeries, where there are underlying assumptions based on a medical
model of being broken (ill) and therefore in need of fixing (a cure),
patients very often expect their counsellor to be an expert at mending
them. Here is a light-hearted caricature:

Patient: 'My problem is that I am ill, feeling very depressed.'
Therapist: 'Perhaps you could tell me more about that. . .' Patient:
'Well, I discovered my partner being unfaithful, I've just been made
redundant, I've had test results saying I have an incurable illness, the
car packed up the day after the warranty expired, my house burned down .
. . oh, and the dog was run over.'

We might laugh - yet I have seen patient after patient who regard their
problem as being depression, when in fact they really would be 'nuts' if
they were not feeling incredibly low (and very often there is a
catalogue of tragedies, not just one). Yet they are convinced that they
must be ill, for they have a prescription from their GP for
antidepressants, and surely their doctor would not be prescribing drug
treatment if there was no illness to cure. Worse still, there is an
expectation that in being referred to see me, they will meet an expert
who can help to fix their ailment. So the temptation to 'normalise' or
explain to patients that they are not actually ill can be huge, yet if I
do so, I am putting myself in the role of expert, thereby diminishing
any trust in the personal resources of clients, and possibly colluding
with values internalised into the client's self-concept about being
inadequate (for instance, T should be able to cope'). My intent in such
situations is to be as close to the therapist conditions as I can be,
relying on the client to receive these conditions and move with them.
If, for instance, a client meets with congruent therapist unconditional
positive regard (perhaps a calm acceptance, without

62

Being empathic

judgement, of who and how they are) and empathic understanding, it has
been my experience that they themselves will very quickly come to the
conclusion that they have every right to feel depressed, and that their
feelings and thoughts are worth the effort of understanding and
accepting, rather than failings to be fought.

Encouragement, rescuing, support and responsibility Encouragement You
may recall from earlier on that encouraging: would seem to indicate on
the counsellor's part a limited confidence in the capacity of the client
to understand and cope with his difficulties. (Rogers 1951: pp. 30-31)
At a fairly mundane level, encouraging a client to pursue a particular
course of action (maybe typified by such statements as 'you could have
much to gain by approaching this person and talking it through with
them' or maybe the more indirectly implied 'have you talked with . .
.?') can easily be demonstrated as not being in harmony with
client-centred beliefs. The client is being encouraged, directly or
indirectly, to take a course of action that the therapist thinks is
desirable - and there is little respect shown for the inner resources of
the client. Perhaps there is something, too, about actions that seem on
the face of it to be positive, and those that seem negative. A great
many trainee counsellors, when asked whether or not it is acceptable to
discourage a client, would instantly reply that it is blatantly not
acceptable to discourage. Yet the same trainee may feel far less
strongly about encouraging. However, just as with agreement and
disagreement, surely the right to do one implies the right to do the
other? The power imbalance in the relationship is skewed (that is,
primarily with the therapist, not the client) whether encouragement or
discouragement is the factor. The trainee counsellor who encourages
clients yet baulks at the idea of discouraging them may well withhold
encouragement at times, rather than actively discouraging - the
relationship still remains conditional and imbalanced. Clearly both
encouragement and discouragement involve value judgements, and
judgements of this kind clearly do not communicate unconditional
positive regard and empathic understanding. Having stated earlier that
empathy is not all about feelings, all too often, it seems, in the early
days of learning the clients of trainees appear to be encouraged to
focus almost solely on their feelings, often at the expense of content,
thought, behaviours, meanings or memories (as they influence the here
and now). Indeed, being 'heady' or cognitive often seems to be frowned
upon - and as we have seen, specious arguments about accepting a person
yet not that person's behaviour are often utilised in an attempt to
justify this. At this perhaps more subtle level, if the therapist
consistently responds to disclosures of feelings and not to thoughts,
meanings, behaviour or content, then clients are effectively being
encouraged (or manipulated or directed) to 'operate' at a feeling level
if they are to gain the attention and respect of, and feel valued by,
their therapist. Such therapist direction cannot be described as
client-centred.

Empathic understanding is not a technique

63

Rescuing Rescuing, as with many of the qualities in this section, may
also come from an honourable, humane and understandable place although,
as with other such characteristics, that 'place' is likely to reside
within the therapist, not the client. Once again a judgement is
involved - that the client is worthy of rescuing or needs to be rescued.
In this instance there is a lack of respect for the client's own inner
resources, and in addition the therapist might be encouraging, creating
or promoting dependency. In rescuing a client, the therapist may in
effect be colluding with client denials and/or distortions, colluding
with the perpetuation of a self-concept that includes the personal
construct of being in need of rescue. At a fundamental level, the
counsellor may be colluding with the thwarting of a client's actualising
tendency.

Support Support is not something that the client-centred therapist
intends to offer to clients. Carl Rogers stated of client-centred
therapy: It is experienced as basically supporting, but it is in no way
supportive. The client does not feel that someone is behind him, that
someone approves of him. (Rogers 1951: p. 209) People often respond with
not a little scepticism to the statement that clientcentred therapists
do not intend to be supportive, for how could a therapist be so cold and
uncaring yet describe their approach as client-centred? Yet if the
therapist sets out to support clients, a judgement has been made - no
matter how humane or caring. This judgement is that the client is worthy
of (and maybe in need of) the support of the therapist. The therapist
has the power to withdraw or withhold support, and may even be in danger
of fostering dependency. Is offering support in keeping with beliefs
about client autonomy and self-direction? The answer is no. Is offering
support in keeping with beliefs about the inner strengths and resources
derived from the actualising tendency? Again the answer is no. So
client-centred therapists do not intend to offer support to clients, but
rather their intent is to strive to both experience and offer authentic
unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding. Clients may
well experience, at times at least, this genuine offering of respect and
empathy as supportive. However, that is up to clients to experience and
decide. The therapist intent remains fundamental - to offer certain
conditions which it is believed are not only necessary but also
sufficient to create a relationship within which there is the potential
for therapeutic growth.

Responsible to and not for The notion that therapists are responsible to
clients but not for them frequently arises in counsellor training
programmes, and links with what Carl Rogers meant when he wrote of the
'basic struggle' of the counsellor: only when the counsellor, through
one means or another, has settled within himself the hypothesis upon
which he will act, can he be of

64

Being empathic

maximum aid to the individual. It has also been my experience that the
more deeply he relies upon the strength and potentiality of the client,
the more deeply does he discover that strength. (Rogers 1951: p. 48) In
much the same way as John Shlien wrote that 'undeserved denigration of
the technique (of reflecting) leads to fatuous alternatives in the name
of congruence' (Shlien 1986), so too can the idea of responsible to but
not for be misunderstood or even abused. Imagine two people, A and B, in
relationship. Throughout the relationship A is critical of B, constantly
and incessantly knowing best, putting B down, saying that B is wrong, is
no good, and so on. B eventually discovers the resources to voice a
dislike of A's 'superior' way of being, only to hear from A that B is
wholly responsible for what B feels, for 'no one can make B feel
anything'. This is an utter cop-out! Sometimes even an utter cop-out, an
attempt at the abdication of responsibility such as this, can mistakenly
be 'justified' in the name of congruence. Why 'mistakenly'? Because in
this instance, unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding
are clearly not integrated and deeply held beliefs that guide A's way of
being. At the same time, if therapists are without influence, why be a
therapist? Perhaps it would be more accurate to say that client-centred
therapists need to be responsible to and for themselves, and responsible
to but not for their clients. And therapists being responsible to and
for themselves includes integrated and deeply held beliefs and attitudes
that underpin a disciplined client-centred way of being: It would appear
that for me, as counsellor, to focus my whole attention and effort upon
understanding and perceiving as the client perceives and understands, is
a striking operational demonstration of the belief I have in the worth
and the significance of this individual client. Clearly the most
important value which I hold is, as indicated by my attitudes and my
verbal behaviour, the client himself. also the fact that I permit the
outcome to rest upon this deep understanding is probably the most vital
operational evidence which could be given that I have confidence in the
potentiality of the individual for constructive change and development
in the direction of a more full and satisfying life. As a seriously
disturbed client wrestles with his utter inability to make any choice,
or another client struggles with his strong urges to commit suicide, the
fact that I enter with deep understanding into the desperate feelings
that exist but do not attempt to take over responsibility, is a most
meaningful expression of basic confidence in the forward-moving
tendencies in the human organism. (Rogers 1951: pp. 35-6) When might a
therapist struggle with the notion of not being responsible for a
client? Other than with malpractice, the most difficult moments would
seem to be when there is a considerable risk or danger, either to or
from the client. Carl said that therapists need to ask themselves just
how far their respect for clients actually goes. Can the therapist, for
instance, maintain a deep respect for the capacity of individuals when
life is literally at stake? If therapists are reaching or have reached
the end of their capacity to experience and offer unconditional
acceptance and respect, what are the consequences then? Rogers wrote
that:

Empathic understanding is not a technique

65

One would be the hypothesis that 'I can be successfully responsible for
the life of another'. Still another is the hypothesis 'I can be
temporarily responsible for the life of another without damaging the
capacity for self-determination'. Still another is The individual cannot
be responsible for himself, nor can I be responsible for him, but it is
possible to find someone who can be responsible for him'. (Rogers 1951:
p. 47) Thus one scenario might be that there are those therapists who
believe that they can be (or even are) responsible for the lives of
others, namely their clients. Another example might be therapists who
believe that neither they nor their clients are able to (or should) take
responsibility, in which case the client might either be referred to
someone from the first extreme, or the client might somehow end up being
cast adrift. Yet a third possibility is the therapist who tries to
temporarily set aside client-centred beliefs in the fundamental
trustworthiness of the actualising tendency, believing that client
autonomy can be restored to them once this 'blip' has passed. Carl
Rogers questioned what the crucial factor might be in all of this - is
it communication from a frame of reference external to the client (such
as therapists voicing that they are willing to continue seeing the
client, or communicating a belief in the client's ability to choose, or
referring the client to another resource), or is it holding the client
in deep respect, whether indicated from the internal or external frame
of reference? Rogers entered the moral and ethical debate as to whether
the counsellor has the authority to permit clients to seriously consider
suicide or psychosis without making a positive effort to prevent or
circumvent such choices, asking whether not making such an effort is an
abdication of our general social responsibility. He concluded that:
these are deep issues, which strike to the very core of therapy. They
are not issues which one person can decide for another. Different
therapeutic orientations have acted upon different hypotheses. all that
one person can do is to describe his own experience and the evidence
which grows out of that experience. (Rogers 1951: p. 48) And that is
precisely what Carl Rogers did. In his formulation of the necessary and
sufficient conditions, he placed unconditional positive regard before
empathic understanding, believing that empathy is the primary vehicle
for communicating our deep respect for the actualising tendency: We
might say, then, that for many therapists functioning from a
clientcentred orientation, the sincere aim of getting 'within' the
attitudes of the client, of entering the client's internal frame of
reference, is the most complete implementation which has thus far been
formulated for the central hypothesis of respect for and reliance upon
the capacity of the person. (Rogers 1951: p. 36) It would seem, then,
that it is vital for client-centred therapists to explore the limits to
which they are prepared to go within this philosophy, to determine just
how strong their belief in the right of clients to self-determination
actually is. It could even be posited that the more exceptions there are
to unconditional

66

Being empathic

positive regard, the less client-centred and therapeutic the
relationship will be. And this feels really, really tough - for having
established that it is in no way client-centred to rescue, nor could it
be described as compassionate to stand idly by watching someone drown.
Taking responsibility for the thrashing client might involve diving in
the water and dragging them to the safety of dry land - yet what if the
client somehow needed to flail prior to treading water? Perhaps worse
still, what if the client really, truly, deeply wanted to drown? Could
the therapist sleep at night knowing that the client could have been
saved? Abdication of responsibility might involve referring to a
lifeguard - the therapist is unable to help, clients cannot help
themselves, so there is no option other than to refer to a third party
who can help. Then again, the sinking client could be thrown a lifeline
by the therapist - the client can learn to swim at a later date, once
they have been saved. These are real issues - you cannot counsel a
cadaver. When writing of person-centred group work, Rogers stated that
one obligation of the facilitator was to define the limits within which
unconditional positive regard could be offered. Perhaps the same
obligation could be said to hold true for the clientcentred therapist.
Clearly there are some deep and, to many, troublesome issues surrounding
the extent to which beliefs in unconditional positive regard and the
right of clients to self-determination can be lived out - matters of
personal and social conscience. What a difference there can be between a
philosophical classroom debate and losing a client through suicide. Yet
let us not forget the paradox, too - the more the actualising tendency
is trusted, the more experience of its trustworthiness there tends to
be. Focusing, leading and suggestion Focusing Some fine distinctions
need to be made when looking at the issues that surround focusing. If it
is the therapist who decides what is meaningful to focus upon, then
clearly the therapist is leading (see below), and this could not be
deemed to be client-centred. However, most therapist communications
involve a choice on the part of the therapist, as client disclosures
very often involve many feelings and meanings and/or potential
sensations and meanings, and rarely can the therapist effectively
capture all of them in one verbalisation. To attempt to communicate all
feelings and meanings (and all potential feelings and meanings) can
become somewhat clumsy or cumbersome, or the therapist might be trying
too hard to 'get it right' (maybe connected with their own conditions of
worth), and so on. So what does guide therapists with regard to
communicating their sensing of different aspects of client disclosures?
Perhaps a fairly basic paraverbal communication exercise might
illustrate this ('paraverbal' means the way we speak, rather than what
is spoken; it includes volume, speed, pitch, and so on). Consider the
following statement: I never said he stole that money. Imagine saying
the above sentence placing the stress on the word T, and the meaning
becomes I didn't say anything, but someone else did. Place the stress on
the word 'never' and it becomes a protestation of innocence. Place the
stress on 'said' and

Empathic understanding is not a technique

67

there is a belief but not a verbalisation. Stress 'he' and the
accusation is levelled at a different person. Stress 'stole' and the
meaning might become borrowed. Stress 'that' and it was different money
that he stole. Stress 'money' and the theft was of something different.
Thus this sentence, consisting of just seven words, can have at least
seven different meanings depending upon the paraverbal nature of the way
it is spoken. The therapist who communicates a sense of righteous
indignation because the word 'never' was stressed by the client is
closer to empathic understanding than the therapist who picks up on
theft because his or her own house was burgled last week! In stressing
the importance of paraverbal communication, Rogers wrote that: even the
transcripts of our recorded cases may give to the reader a totally
erroneous notion of the sort of relationship which existed. By
persistently reading the counselor responses with the wrong inflection,
it is possible to distort the whole picture. (Rogers 1951: pp. 27-8) The
same kind of deliberation also applies to non-verbal communication - the
client might make significant eye contact when speaking a particular
word, or grimace, or tense a part of their body. If 'focusing' in this
way is based on what seems significant to the client, from the client,
then it could well be seen as part of being client-centred. If focusing
is based on anything other than what seems significant to the client
(that is, it is significant to the therapist, or psychological theory,
for instance), then it is not client-centred. Incidentally, a further
development has been that some theorists and practitioners regard
'focusing' as meaning that therapists focus primarily upon themselves.
Carl Rogers clearly wished to distance himself from this view, in that
while it is true that therapist congruence is a core condition for
client-centred therapy, it is fundamentally to do with embodying
authentic unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding - and
the more that therapists become absorbed with themselves ('therapist-
centred therapy'!), the less attention is available for clients. For
therapists to internally monitor themselves along the lines of 'How am I
experiencing myself in relation to and in relationship with this
client?' seems fair enough in terms of striving to be congruent, and
especially if the aim of such self-awareness is to access, maintain and
enhance the degree of unconditional positive regard and empathic
understanding that the therapist is able to give to the therapeutic
relationship. However, if the focus of the therapy was to shift too far
away from the client because the therapist is so self-absorbed and
self-monitoring, then that relationship would lose client-centred
therapeutic integrity.

Leading and suggestion Issues about leading and suggestion bear many
similarities to the reasoning outlined above for non-acceptance,
evaluation and rescuing. Something that Carl Rogers wrote about
person-centred group facilitation can be reapplied to clientcentred
therapy: What the facilitator does not do is perhaps as important as
what he or she does do. A facilitator committed to a person-centered way
of being does not guide, push or prod. He or she is content to go with
the

68

Being empathic

process of the group, whether rapid or slow. He or she does not persuade
or take sides. The facilitator does not offer solutions. His or her
basic trust is in the wisdom which, from experience, he knows resides in
the group, if he can only create the psychological climate in which it
can emerge. (Rogers and Ryback 1984: p. 6) Put simply and briefly,
client-centred therapy is about the therapist either following or
'tracking' clients, or being alongside clients (as a respectful and
sensitive companion) in their journeys of self-discovery. If the
therapist leads (other than occasionally voicing a perception of which
the client is as yet only dimly aware), then the relationship cannot be
client-centred. If any suggestion comes from a frame of reference that
is external to the client, the therapy cannot be client-centred.

A brief journey into power Most procedures in psychotherapy may be
placed on a scale having to do with power and control. At one end of the
scale stand orthodox Freudians and orthodox behaviorists, believing in a
politics of authoritarian or elitist control of persons 'for their own
good', either to produce better adjustment to the status quo or
happiness or contentment or productivity or all of these. In the middle
are most of the contemporary schools of psychotherapy, confused,
ambiguous or paternalistic in the politics of their relationships
(though they may be very clear regarding their therapeutic strategies).
At the other end of the scale is the client-centered, experiential,
person-centered approach, consistently stressing the capacity and
autonomy of the person, her right to choose the directions she will move
in her behavior, and her ultimate responsibility for herself in the
therapeutic relationship, with the therapist's person playing a real but
primarily catalytic part in that relationship. (Rogers 1978: pp. 20-1)
Let us temporarily step out of 'Thou Shalt Not Skill' to look at the
notion of power and control, for many of the attitudes and practices
rejected by Carl Rogers link with beliefs about the location of power
and control in psychotherapy. Carl said that elements we might explore
include: Who will be controlled? Who will exercise control? What type of
control will be exercised? Most important of all, toward what end or
what purpose, or in the pursuit of what value will control be exercised?
(Rogers and Evans 1975: p. lxii) Therapists, said Rogers, first need to
think about both their general and their specific goals when practising
therapy, to settle within themselves their purpose in being therapists
in the first place. although he agreed with the prevailing scientific
view that research can help us to determine the means of achieving the
goals that we have settled upon, Rogers also thought that the tradition
had been

Empathic understanding is not a technique

69

for an individual or group (such as a therapeutic approach) to gain the
power to use their methods. Individuals are then exposed to these
established conditions and there is a high probability that outcomes
will be in line with them, leading to an ongoing, socialised
organisation that continues to produce the desired behaviour in patients
or clients. He believed, with regard to the first point, that: It is
possible for us to choose to value man as a self-actualizing process of
becoming; to value creativity, and the process by which knowledge
becomes self-transcending. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. lxxviii)
Client-centred therapist conditions can be set with a minimum of power
or control, and client outcomes are to do with self-actualising, a
process whereby clients move towards greater self-responsibility: Thus
such an initial choice would inaugurate the beginnings of a social
system or subsystem in which values, knowledge, adaptive skills, and
even the concept of science would be continually changing and
selftranscending. The emphasis would be upon man as a process of
becoming. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. lxxix) Not only do therapists
establish the conditions in which they work, but also clients give power
to therapists: The client, a somewhat lost, confused, not too
well-ordered person, has typically never met anyone with such a
powerfully directed focus and lived belief. As already indicated, the
client's position as a failed person hoping to find his way also lends
substance to the therapist's power. (Barton 1974: p. 191) And therapist
power has a value base that the therapist cannot but help communicate:
The methods the therapist uses . . . represent values. They communicate
the essential therapeutic values . . . or the lack of them. The
therapist's methods are not simply objective techniques but are part of
the therapist as a person. The therapist as a person relates to the
client as a person. The responses of the therapist reveal what the
therapist values. These responses also reveal whether the therapist
considers himself or herself an expert by leading, questioning,
interpreting, guiding, suggesting, advising, or whether the therapist
places the responsibility on the client by . . . (Patterson 2000:
p. 121) Many trainee therapists have said that their main reason for
wanting to become a client-centred therapist is their desire to be of
help (wanting either to 'give something back' to repay valued help that
they themselves received, or to offer to others the assistance they
themselves never received) - yet Carl Rogers believed that even this
ideal or goal was somewhat secondary, for:

70

Being empathic

in the most real moments of therapy I don't believe that this intention
to help is any more than a substratum on my part. . . Surely I wouldn't
be doing this work if it wasn't part of my intention. And when I first
see the client that's what I hope I will be able to do, is to be able to
help him. And yet in the interchange of the moment, I don't think my
mind is filled with the thought of 'now I want to help you'. It is much
more 'I want to understand you. What person are you behind that paranoid
screen, or behind all these schizophrenic confusions, or behind all
these masks that you wear? In your real life, who are you?'. It seems to
me that is a desire to meet a person, not 'now I want to help'. It seems
to me that I've learned through my experience that when we can meet,
then help does occur, but that's a by-product. (Rogers 1989: p. 55) Let
us now return to the 'Shalt Nots' of meeting with a valued client.

Mirroring, paraphrasing, reflecting and summarising Let one thing be
absolutely clear: There is no such thing as a client-centred skill.
Likewise, Carl Rogers wrote of therapist communicating that: If it is
simply reflection, that's no good. That's just a technique. It must be a
desire to understand empathically, to really stand in the client's shoes
and to see the world from his vantage point. (Rogers and Evans 1975:
p. 29) Many people react with astonishment to the statement that there
is no such thing as a client-centred skill, yet we have seen in Chapter
1 how Carl was appalled at the way in which client-centred therapy (and
empathic understanding in particular) had become a caricature of itself,
and he was utterly dismayed at the way in which in many counsellor
training programmes the learning or teaching of 'wooden techniques' had
somehow replaced becoming a person, and developing a client-centred way
of being. It is clear that, in part, techniques such as mirroring,
paraphrasing, reflecting and summarising became associated with
client-centred therapy because they are relatively 'non-directive' when
compared with more overtly manipulative practices (to give an extreme
example, paraphrasing a client's words is less directive than referring
a client for electroconvulsive treatment). It is also true (and by his
own admission), that in the early days of developing client-centred
therapy, Carl Rogers and his colleagues did pay considerable attention
to therapist techniques. It may be, too, that those who desire to be of
help to others readily grasp skills and techniques that are relatively
easily taught or learned. Approaching this from a different angle,
surely a skill is a skill is a skill whatever the orientation of the
therapist? If, for instance, a transactional analyst mirrors or reflects
something that a client has said, does it mean that for that moment only
the therapist is suddenly 'being client-centred'? If a psychodynamic
practitioner paraphrases a client disclosure, has that analyst suddenly
ceased to become

Empathic understanding is not a technique

71

psychodynamic and miraculously converted to being client-centred? If a
cognitive-behavioural therapist summarises what the client has just
shared, has that therapist somehow 'integrated' client-centredness into
cognitive-behavioural therapy? The answer to all of these questions is
of course not. In part we can say 'of course not' because Rogers stated
that the six client-centred conditions of contact, client incongruence,
therapist congruence, unconditional positive regard and empathic
understanding, and client perception of the therapist's respect and
empathy were both necessary and sufficient - and that the 'importing' of
elements from other therapies goes a long way towards destroying the
possibilities for a therapeutic encounter. And in part we can assert 'of
course not' because a reflection is a reflection whatever the
therapeutic approach of the therapist (indeed, such communication skills
have even been adopted to enhance sales techniques and other forms of
'people management'). So let it be repeated, there is no such thing as a
specifically client-centred skill. To paraphrase or summarise what a
client has just said, the practitioner needs to develop a fairly good
memory that includes the ability to absorb, store and recall
information, have a reasonable vocabulary and understanding of the
language being spoken (including synonyms), and have the ability to
re-order words (usually into a more succinct form) without losing their
essential meaning. While this may, then, involve a degree of cleverness
(and indeed may form the basis of a helpful relationship), it does not
necessarily have to involve the demanding task of truly and delicately
entering the world of another and striving to respectfully experience
and understand it as the other person experiences it, including their
feelings, meanings and memories. Paraphrasing or summarising hardly
represents an attempt to communicate the fruits of a counsellor having
strived to sensitively and delicately enter the world of another and to
respectfully experience and understand it as the other person
experiences and understands it. Another way of seeing how client-centred
therapy is more to do with an empathic way of being than with the
implementation of skills might be to look at the technique called
'reflecting' - and 'reflecting' or 'reflecting feelings' appear on the
curriculum of the majority of counselling skills and even (allegedly)
clientcentred counsellor training programmes. Yet Carl Rogers wrote of
the influence of a Rankian trained practitioner: The next social worker
that I employed in Rochester was Elizabeth Davis . . . and one of the
things she taught me was to focus on the feelings that were being
expressed and to respond to those feelings. It was this that led to this
whole idea of reflection of feelings, which is much misunderstood.
(Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 113) although Carl expressed gratitude for
this having improved his work early in his career, he later wrote of
'reflect becoming in time a word that made me cringe' (Rogers 1980:
p.+138).It is possible to reach the conclusion from Carl's words that
the learning of reflecting skills (or the technique of 'reflecting
feelings') could therefore be a useful step on the way towards
developing an empathic way of being. That may be - yet imagine the
counselling skills trainee who has received positive feedback and indeed
certification for both open-ended questioning and reflecting discovering
later (when training to become a client-centred therapist)

72

Being empathic

that not only is there nothing specifically client-centred about the
generic skill of reflecting, but also Rogers 'cringed' at the notion.
Worse still, if the implementer of the skill of reflecting primarily
focuses on feelings, the relationship comes to have a narrow focus, as
the therapist is not engaging with a whole person - it becomes directive
(the client is not leading) and judgemental - a n d the client's world
of personal meanings, thoughts, behaviours and memories may be
neglected. To illustrate this point, if another person is speaking, it
is not too difficult for listeners to train themselves to listen for key
words or phrases and to 'reflect them back' to the speaker. However,
this is largely an exercise in discerning listening, memory and recall -
the listener does not need to invest their whole being in this exercise,
as it is primarily their intellect that is utilised. For instance, it is
possible to reflect a client's words with little or no compassion or
caring. Indeed, one could listen for and reflect the key words or
phrases of someone speaking on television, or from a passage in a book.
There is no necessity for many of the necessary or sufficient
conditions - there is no absolute need for 'psychological contact' or a
quality of presence, no essential requirement for the listener to be
congruent, no necessity for great respect for the inner world of client
feelings and meanings (if engaged in a primarily intellectual exercise),
and no real demonstration of empathy or understanding. Instead, this
could be a demonstration of competency in hearing and recall. Hence
Rogers wrote that he had become more and more 'allergic' to the use of
the term 'reflecting'. However, Carl Rogers did acknowledge that viewing
or listening to his demonstration counselling interviews could easily
result in the idea that he did regularly 'reflect'. It was a friend and
former colleague of his, Dr John Shlien, who wrote to Rogers that
'reflection is unfairly damned', for while Shlien agreed with him that
reflecting purely as a technique or skill lacked quality of presence,
Shlien also maintained that reflecting can be 'an instrument of artistic
virtuosity in the hands of a sincere, intelligent, empathic listener'
and that 'it made possible the development of client-centred therapy,
when the philosophy alone could not have. Undeserved denigration of the
technique leads to fatuous alternatives in the name of congruence'
(Rogers 1986: pp. 375-7). This correspondence with John Shlien enabled
Carl to further clarify his process of communicating empathy. Rogers was
not trying to 'reflect feelings' but was engaged in a process more akin
to 'perception checking' - by which he meant a cautious (or tentative)
offering of his sensing of what the client was experiencing from moment
to moment, and being constantly prepared to amend his sensing in
response to client feedback. At the same time, Rogers acknowledged that
there was a sense in which the therapist is 'holding up a mirror' to the
client, a 'mirror' that enables clients to see and experience themselves
more clearly. Carl stated that Sylvia Slack expressed this 'beautifully'
when she wrote: It was like Dr Rogers was a magical mirror. The process
involved my sending rays toward that mirror. I looked into the mirror to
get a glimpse of the reality that I am. If I had sensed the mirror was
affected by the rays being received, the reflection would have seemed
distorted and not to be trusted. although I was aware of sending rays,
their nature was not truly discernible until they were reflected and
clarified by the mirror. There was a curiosity about the rays and what
they revealed about me. This experience allowed me an opportunity to get
a

Empathic understanding is not a technique

73

view of myself that was untainted by the perceptions of outside viewers.
This inner knowledge of myself enabled me to make choices more suited to
the person who lives within me. (Slack 1985: pp. 35-42) Thus therapist
communications need to be undistorted, and that means not 'polluting'
the internal frame of reference of the client. Watching videos of Carl
Rogers in action has been experienced as confusing by some viewers. In
one session, for instance, Rogers seemed almost to repeat, word for
word, what the client had just said. However, in the question-and-answer
session that followed the demonstration, he explained that in that
moment, with that particular client, using the client's own words and
speaking in the first person (as if he were that client) seemed the best
way to try to enter her frame of reference, her world of feelings and
personal meanings. In other demonstration therapy sessions, Carl was
perceived quite differently, so we can see that striving to empathically
understand another is far from being a 'wooden', 'cold' or systematic
technique. Rather, empathy is a fluid yet consistent way of being with
another, that will vary from client to client and with the same client
over time (from, for instance, tentative to more confident, as we saw in
Chapter 1). In an interview given just months prior to his death
(transcription published posthumously in 2002), Carl Rogers said: It is
interesting that the term reflection offeelings still is a current issue
.. . When one looks at it from an external point of view, and studies a
transcript of an interview, for example, it is quite clear that the
therapist very often is giving a restatement, a fresh verbal
organization of the feelings and personal meanings the client has
expressed. In that sense, reflection of feelings seems like a fairly
accurate term. But from the point of view of the therapist, when good
therapy is going on, the therapist is not trying to reflect feelings. He
is trying to check understandings or test perceptions. He's trying to
say, 'Is this the way it is in you? Am I getting the flow of your
feeling? Am I understanding the nuances of what's going on in you? Are
you saying that you're angry with your father?' although those questions
as I'm now stating them are usually not verbalized, that's always the
intent. (Rogers and Russell 2002: pp. 253-4) Praise and reassurance
Praise Many people over the years have expressed how, without praise,
their learning would have been impaired in some way, or that if only
they had received more positive feedback they would have done better.
Praise is often viewed as a human need, and as a very good thing indeed.
Once again, though, praising involves the judgement that something
merits positive feedback. Does the counsellor feel the same way about
voicing criticism or negative feedback to clients? If the counsellor
does not feel the same way, how can it be argued that therapist positive
regard is unconditional? For sure, if therapists grant themselves the
power and authority to praise and encourage

74

Being empathic

and support and reassure, then by implication they also grant themselves
the power and authority to chastise or criticise, or at the very least
to withhold or withdraw praise, encouragement, reassurance and other
apparently 'positive' feedback. Empathic understanding is about entering
the internal frame of reference of the other. Praise indicates that the
therapist believes that the other person is deserving of positive
feedback - from a locus of evaluation external to the client. Lest it
again be thought that the client-centred therapist lacks warmth, if a
client clearly feels good about themselves or something they have
achieved, and the therapist empathically understands this from within
the client's frame of reference - and the client perceives this
appreciation - then that relationship will not lack warmth. Rather,
being in tune with the client's internal locus of evaluation, it will
have deeper and more personal meanings for that client. Reassurance
Again, recall the words of Carl Rogers: reassuring . . . would seem to
indicate on the counsellor's part a limited confidence in the capacity
of the client to understand and cope with his difficulties. The
counsellor still felt it necessary at times to take the lead . . .
(Rogers 1951: pp. 30-1) Reassurance, at least in the early days of
counsellor training, is often seen as another of those 'nice' qualities.
Without intending any disrespect for the word 'nice', can we
nevertheless examine the concept of 'nice' in a client-centred therapist
and client context? First, let us question where the need to reassure
comes from. If it is the therapist's need to reassure, then no matter
how honourable or nice a place that need comes from, it is clearly the
therapist's need, and not the need of the client, and so it can hardly
be described as client-centred. alternatively, the therapist might sense
a need for reassurance coming from the client, and there are those who
see counselling as being about responding to or meeting such needs. At
first glance, this might even seem to make some sense, yet it does not
stand up to more serious scrutiny. The statement that client-centred
therapy is not at all to do with meeting client needs often meets with
surprise. Yet ask yourself 'If a client expresses the need for me to
provide all the answers and solutions, is to do so client-centred?' The
consensus of opinion would surely be that client-centred therapy is not
about the therapist providing solutions, so in this instance responding
to an expressed client need by simply going along with it would clearly
be inappropriate. The clientcentred therapist might well strive to
respect and empathically understand a client's needs, but that is not
the same as judging the need as okay or not okay (from a frame of
reference external to that client) and responding accordingly. Another
question could be asked: 'What if it is a client need to seriously abuse
the therapist in some way?'. Does the therapist creating a 'permissive'
atmosphere mean that counsellors respond to client needs by becoming
their victim? Of course not! If it is clear that there are some client
needs that a therapist would certainly not meet, who determines which
needs it might be okay for the therapist

Empathic understanding is not a technique

75

to meet? If the therapist determines what is and is not acceptable, then
'say goodbye' to unconditional positive regard. If the client determines
what needs the therapist will meet, 'say goodbye' to therapist positive
self-regard! Client-centred practice is about authentically and
unconditionally respectingallclient needs - the therapist 'responds' to
such needs not by trying to meet them, but by striving to sense and
understand the feelings and personal meanings that generate such needs.
Thus responding to client needs has no place whatsoever in
client-centred therapy. Whatever the context, reassuring clients is not
in the spirit of being clientcentred, for reassurance does not respect
client autonomy and self-direction, is judgemental, and often involves a
frame of reference external to the client. Secondly, and on a quite
different level, consider the situation where a therapist reassures a
client that 'it will be okay' or 'you are not alone', for instance.
Suppose that it will not be okay and that despite the therapist's
assurances the client still does feel alone? The therapist in this
example could hardly be said to be respecting the client's world of
experiencing and perceptions. As with so many of these skills and
techniques, there would appear to be an anxiety that not to use them
would result in the therapist being perceived as heartless. It is really
very important to understand and live the difference between an outcome
being predictable and striving to achieve that outcome. If a therapist
strives to empathise with and understand a client's world of feelings
and meanings, a predictable outcome is that the client will experience
being someone worthy of being understood - and the client may well feel
reassured by this. However, it is not the therapist's intent to reassure
the client, nor are client feelings of reassurance a goal of
client-centred therapy. As Rogers said, if the therapist can be the core
conditions, the client can do the rest.

Probing and questioning Probing At one extreme, it is not difficult to
see that client-centred therapy has nothing to do with the therapist
taking a crowbar to the client in order to jemmy out their feelings or
meanings - client-centred therapy is about prizing, not prising!
However, clients reflecting upon the process of their therapy often
describe it as having been Tike peeling back the layers of onion' until
they discovered the 'core' of their personality or being. What part does
the counsellor play in this process? After all, the core conditions for
client-centred therapy do indicate that the therapist needs,
necessarily, to be genuinely interested in (and respectful of) the
client's world of feelings and personal meanings. Might taking a genuine
interest in someone relate to probing in an effort to understand?
Returning to the theme of therapist intent might be helpful here. It is
true that if the therapist communicates, with some degree of accuracy,
authentic and respectful empathic understanding, then the client is
likely to respond by taking further steps on their journey of
self-discovery. However, the intent of the therapist is to strive to
sensitively empathise, not to somehow 'move a client on'. In other
words, a predictable consequence of the client perceiving authentic
unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding from the
therapist is that the client will continue on their journey, going
deeper and further if they

76

Being empathic

choose to do so. This is the if-then quality of client-centred therapy
that was described in Chapter 1 - if the client receives nurturing
conditions, then the client may grow. Just as the phrase 'Why be the
magician when you can be the magic?' emerged: Why be the gardener when
you can be the garden? Carl Rogers wrote of the 'soil of the theory' out
of which client-centred therapy grew. Similarly, maybe the counsellor
can provide the soil out of which clients may grow. It might be that
counsellor supervisors can in part tend the garden, and it might be that
therapist personal and professional development activities are important
in the process of striving to ensure that conditions in the garden are
all that they can be. However, the therapy garden is all that is
necessary for the plant to grow - there is no need to prise open or go
poking around, whether clumsily or smoothly, in the petals.

Questioning During one post-workshop discussion, a participant said to
Rogers, 'I noticed that you asked questions of the client. But just last
night a lecturer told us we must never do that'. Rogers responded,
'Well, I'm in the fortunate position of not having to be a Rogerian'.
(Brink, personal communication, 1990, quoted in Farber et al. 1996:
p. 11) Carl Rogers and his colleagues discovered through their research
activities that a distinguishing feature of client-centred counselling
was that the therapist frames far fewer communications as questions than
is the case with most (if not all) other approaches to psychotherapy.
Likewise, at the commencement of client-centred therapy training courses
(or at the end of counselling skills programmes), it is not uncommon for
something in excess of 90% of trainee counsellor communications to their
clients to be phrased as questions. On skills courses that purport to be
'client-centred' (or 'person-centred' or 'humanistic' or
'non-directive') most of these questions will be open-ended - yet a
question, whether 'open' or 'openended' or otherwise, cannot and does
not convey empathy or understanding. If, for instance, therapists have
empathically understood clients, why would they then need to question
them? Just how respectful of client feelings and meanings is it when,
after a client has just described the most harrowing and dreadful
experiences, the therapist says 'How do you feel about that?'.
Furthermore, there are repercussions to asking questions in process
terms, for if the counsellor asks questions, the onus is then upon the
client to reply to those questions - in other words, the counsellor is
leading the session, not the client. As a consequence of this therapist
question-client answer-therapist question-client answer pattern, the
client could be forgiven for inferring that if all of the therapist's
questions are adequately answered, a solution will be given to the
client by the therapist, or if not a solution, at least an accurate
prognosis or diagnosis, or whatever. Yet another consequence is that if
the therapist's capacities are, to whatever extent, engaged with
formulating their next question to the client, how fully is the client
being heard? How fully is the therapist striving to respect, empathise
and understand? To illustrate this point, many trainee therapists have,
over the years, commen-

Empathic understanding is not a technique

77

ted that when they were tape recording counselling practice sessions,
they felt a need to 'perform' and to 'get it right', and they usually
believed that the taperecorded evidence was not accurately reflecting
their usual practice. In other words, their capacities were largely
devoted to formulating responses, rather than really listening, really
hearing and really striving to respectfully enter their clients' worlds
of feelings and meanings. However, by the end of successful
client-centred therapy training, less than 5% of therapist
communications are questions. Instead, the therapist communicates
(albeit it tentatively and cautiously at times) empathic understanding
rather than responding to clients with openended questions, or
reflections, or by paraphrasing or summarising what the client has just
said. Please note that this is not to say that the client-centred
therapist never asks questions. A general guideline is that a
client-centred way of being is only to ask a question when no empathy is
being experienced, and the question asked is designed to generate
empathic understanding. This guideline can be refined somewhat, too, for
Carl Rogers wrote about empathic guessing and empathic inference. That
is, it is not as simple as an instant 'no empathy - therefore ask' there
is no 'if-then' formula here (as in if there is no empathy being
experienced, then ask a question in order to gain some). Rather it is a
case of striving to gather and absorb all client cues (verbal,
paraverbal and non-verbal) in an attempt to enter their frame of
reference. A tentative guess or inference is preferable to a
non-empathic question (no matter how open-ended).

Therapist self-disclosure 'Letting it all hang out?' It is true to say
that during the course of his career Carl Rogers did change his views
somewhat with regard to the therapist's presence. In the early days,
Carl wrote on many occasions of the need for therapists to 'set their
selves aside' when with clients, as typified when he quoted Nat Raskin:
the counselor makes a maximum effort to get under the skin of the person
with whom he is communicating, he tries to get within and to live the
attitudes expressed instead of observing them, to catch every nuance of
their changing nature; in a word, to absorb himself completely in the
attitudes of the other. And in struggling to do this, there is simply no
room for any other type of counsellor activity or attitude. (Raskin,
quoted in Rogers 1951: p. 29) In 1951, Rogers himself wrote: the
relationship is experienced as a one-way affair in a very unique sense.
The whole relationship is composed of the self of the client, the
counselor being depersonalized for the purposes of therapy into being
'the client's other self. It is this warm willingness on the part of the
counselor to lay his own self temporarily aside, in order to enter into
the experience of the client, which makes the relationship a com-

78

Being empathic

pletely unique one, unlike anything in the client's previous experience.
(Rogers 1951: p. 208) However, within just a few years Rogers came to
realise that the quality of therapist presence was a very significant
factor in counselling, and by the end of his career he was speaking with
Gay Barfield of reciprocal empathy (as we saw in Chapter 1) rather than
'a one-way affair', and in 1985 he was able to say: I think congruence
means that one is aware of what one is experiencing inside, and
consequently one is able to express it if it seems appropriate in the
situation. The most important part is that one is aware of what one is
experiencing. And experiencing, as we have said, has both content and
feeling in it. (Rogers and Teich 1992: p. 62) We might again refer to
John Shlien's phrase 'fatuous alternatives in the name of congruence'
when looking at appropriate and inappropriate therapist self-disclosure
within a client-centred framework, for regrettably there are those who
seem to view 'being appropriately congruent' as meaning that it is
perfectly in order (or 'appropriate') for the client-centred therapist
to 'let it all hang out' (a kind of 'anything goes' approach to
therapy). Such people, it seems, can try to justify just about anything
by saying 'I was just being congruent' or, worse still, 'I was just
communicating my congruence'! Well, maybe it is true that such a person
is being congruent, yet it is also true to say that this congruence
hardly deeply encapsulates unconditional positive regard and empathic
understanding. As Rogers stated: For therapy to occur the wholeness of
the therapist in the relationship is primary, but a part of the
congruence of the therapist must be the experience of unconditional
positive regard and the experience of empathic understanding. (Rogers
1959: p. 215) 'I was just communicating my congruence' is worse still
because it demonstrates a complete lack of understanding about what
congruence in a clientcentred framework means and is. Carl Rogers
maintained that much of our experiencing is available to awareness
(given the right conditions - more of this in Chapter 4), and congruence
is a lack of denying significant experiencing to awareness, or not
having to distort our experiencing in order to allow it into our
awareness. To 'communicate congruence' to a client, a therapist would
need to be saying something like 'Right now, I am denying none of my
significant experiencing to my awareness, nor am I distorting it in
order to permit it into my awareness, albeit in a skewed fashion' - this
is not very likely or appropriate, nor is it very client-centred! Nor
was therapist communication or client perception of therapist congruence
initially one of the six conditions for therapeutic personality change.
It was only deemed necessary for the client to receive the therapist's
unconditional positive regard and empathic empathic understanding (the
fourth and fifth conditions), because at the time Rogers was less
certain about the place of therapist disclosure. The notion of therapist
congruence will be more fully explored later, but for

Empathic understanding is not a technique

79

now let it be stated that there is a crucial difference between
communicating congruence and congruent communication. Thus while
disclosing that there is no denial or distortion of significant
experiencing of the therapist by the therapist is both highly unlikely
and undesirable, it is highly desirable that the client experiences the
therapist's respect and empathy as authentic because it is authentic -
that is, congruent. When speaking of the personal growth journey that is
an ingredient (and probably the main ingredient) on the way to becoming
client-centred, Carl did say that it was regrettable that some people
never moved beyond the self-self-self phase (Berwick and Rogers 1983).
Some members of the Center for Studies of the Person came up with the
idea of a 'narcissistic paradigm' (this is what I want, so to hell with
you!). Perhaps a 'masochistic paradigm' is worthy of mention, too (this
is what you want, so to hell with me!). Quite frequently, internalised
conditions of worth about pleasing others lead to the thwarting of the
actualising tendency the person lives their life as a server, a carer, a
tender of others, hence the masochistic paradigm (what I want, need or
desire is of meagre merit compared with catering to the needs of
others). One of the predictable process phases in client-centred therapy
is a movement away from values introjected from others, a movement away
from pleasing others and towards pleasing the self, hence the
narcissistic paradigm (my wants, needs or desires clearly take
precedence over those of others). It is crucial to realise that this
phase does not constitute the entire journey, and, as Rogers conceded,
there are those who emerge from training and other person-centred
experiences not having moved beyond self-self-self. Just as it is
conceivable that the learning of counselling skills might represent
steps along the way towards becoming empathic as a way of being, so
entering a narcissistic phase might be a process movement towards
(client-centred) congruence. Nevertheless, let us be clear that the
counsellor 'letting it all hang out' or believing that 'anything goes'
is not what Rogers meant client-centred therapy to be. Such attitudes
are more akin to Shlien's 'fatuous alternatives'. alternatives'.
However, this is not to say that the client-centred therapist is a
'closed book' or a 'blank screen'. As already stated, it has been
extremely unfortunate that some people seem to take words like
'transparency' and 'genuineness' or phrases like 'being real' to also
mean 'let it all hang out' or 'anything goes'. Being transparently real
is only client-centred if the therapist has deeply integrated the core
conditions as a way of therapeutic being. This is not the same as
stating that the client-centred therapist never self-discloses. When
asked by John Masterson about the danger of personal growth journeys
resulting in everything else having to stop this instant (perhaps 'a
fatuous alternative in the name of immediacy') until personal feelings
are worked through, Rogers said: I've seen that happen, yes. . . . The
risk runs two ways. Sometimes what people learn is to be more expressive
of their feelings - period. Sometimes what they learn is to be more
willing to listen, and to hear and then perhaps sit on their own
feelings. Either is a risk and unfortunate. I think it has to be a
balance: of being willing to express what I deeply feel, but also a
willingness to hear what you deeply feel and that I think is the basis
for a stronger, richer relationship, when there is that balance. (Rogers
1985)

80

Being empathic

Appropriate therapist self-disclosure Carl Rogers gave us useful
guidelines on when it might be appropriate for a therapist to
self-disclose, the primary reason being when not to do so would serve to
block the therapist's capacity to absorb, empathise and understand -
when the therapist is prevented from meaningfully entering a client's
world of feelings or meanings due to some personal experiencing acting
as a barrier across the gateway to the experiencing and meanings of
another. However, Rogers also believed that if a therapist feeling is
experienced as persistent and prolonged in the relationship, then it
probably merits being voiced in that relationship. He quoted the
experience of a colleague who, near the end of his working day, received
a call saying that his son had sustained minor injuries in a road
traffic accident. With only one client to see, and knowing that his son
was in no dire danger, the therapist believed that he could set aside
his own feelings and thoughts until later. However, during the therapy
session the counsellor's feelings and thoughts did veer towards his
injured child so, after some internal mulling over, he thought it best
to 'come clean' with the client - who responded by expressing relief,
because they had perceived the therapist's distraction as meaning that
it was something 'unattractive' about them that had elicited a negative
reaction from the therapist. To refrain from self-disclosure might be
anti-therapeutic: From the beginning, and with increasing emphasis as
time has passed, Rogers has stressed the centrality of sincerity,
honesty, and genuineness in the therapist's responses. It is only his
genuinely felt understanding and honest positive regard that can be
deeply helpful and curative; technique alone is not enough and may even
be irrelevant or harmful at certain moments in psychotherapy. If, for
instance, the therapist uses his nondirectiveness as a way of
suppressing his own annoyance because the poor weak client couldn't
possibly take it, an attitude of fundamental disrespect, annoyance, and
lack of real regard for the client's powers will be communicated. Even
with the best of intentions, such communication of lack of understanding
and regard is damaging because the sneaky obscurity of it tends to
poison the atmosphere and inhibit that flow of honest feeling that is at
the heart of client-centered help. (Barton 1974: p. 195) For a therapist
to feign empathic understanding (perhaps by reverting to skills and
techniques) or to offer only a semblance of unconditional positive
regard would not be authentic self-expression - the therapist is not a
whole person, the therapist is incongruent. Carl Rogers said that
respect for the capacity of individuals was a central tenet that
permeated his whole being, so when being a whole person in the
counselling relationship: I still feel that the person who should guide
the client's life is the client. My whole philosophy and whole approach
is to try to strengthen him in that way of being, that he's in charge of
his own life and nothing that I say is intended to take that capacity or
that opportunity away from him. It is changed in this respect, that I
would try to be aware of my own feelings and express them as my feelings
without imposing

Empathic understanding is not a technique

81

them on him. I would express even negative feelings. I might tell a
client, 'I'm really bored by what you're saying'. It doesn't guide him.
It does provide him with some rather jolting data which he must handle
in some way or another. But I'm not telling him what he should do to
avoid boring me. Maybe he would just as soon bore me; that's up to him .
. . I was quite fascinated by the discovery that people did have much
more capacity to guide themselves than I'd given them credit for. I
became sort of a tourist in that, thinking 'Let's not let any of me into
the situation except just an understanding of the client's feelings'. I
gradually realized over the years that the tourist approach shakes the
client out of what might be a very close interpersonal relationship
which is much more rewarding. (Rogers and Evans 1975: pp. 26-7) Rogers
also wrote of experiencing yet being unaware of annoyance: When I am
experiencing an attitude of annoyance toward another person but am
unaware of it, then my communication contains contradictory messages. My
words are giving one message, but I am also in subtle ways communicating
the annoyance I feel, and this confuses the other person and makes him
distrustful, though he too may be unaware of what is causing the
difficulty. When . . . I fail to listen to what is going on in me, fail
because of my own defensiveness to sense my own feelings, then this kind
of failure seems to result. It has made it seem to me that the most
basic learning for anyone who hopes to establish any kind of helping
relationship is that it is safe to be transparently real. (Rogers 1961:
p. 51) Rogers followed this by writing that, strange as it may seem, it
is helpful if a therapist can be his or her own therapist. We shall see
that one outcome of therapy is that clients become more self-accepting,
and an outcome of that outcome is that they become more accepting
towards others. The person who has achieved unconditional positive
self-regard in a responsible and socialised way through a process of
being sensitively aware of, respectful of and understanding towards
their own inner feelings has moved significantly towards being the
necessary and sufficient conditions for being a client-centred
therapist. Rogers continued: Now, acceptantly to be what I am, in this
sense, and to permit this to show through to the other person, is the
most difficult task I know and one I never fully achieve. But to realize
that this is my task has been most rewarding because it has helped me to
find what has gone wrong with interpersonal relationships which have
become snarled and to put them on a constructive track again. It has
meant that if I am to facilitate the personal growth of others in
relation to me, then I must grow, and while this is often painful, it is
also enriching. (Rogers 1961: p. 51) In other words, if a feeling (or
attitude) is persistent enough or strong enough in a relationship, it
will probably be sensed by clients anyway (this could be viewed as

82

Being empathic

an example of the 'reciprocal empathy' referred to in Chapter 1), so
honesty and openness are preferable to the alarm or insecurity that the
therapist being a 'closed book' might generate. However, such honesty
springs from the integrity of the therapist, and that integrity includes
the deep embodiment of a client-centred way of being. Let us close this
section with three final quotes about Carl Rogers that hopefully capture
the essence of congruent therapist communication. The first illustrates
his total commitment to entering and being with clients in their own
personal worlds of experiencing: It is interesting to note that, after a
demonstration interview, Rogers would occasionally tell his audience
that his attention was so totally focussed on his client that the rest
of the world simply disappeared for him. (Brink, cited in Farber et al
1996: p. 30) Next comes a quote that resonates with my own experience
and with comments made by several associates. In it we can see how
self-disclosures made by Rogers were very much located in and relevant
to the client's world of feelings and meanings: One of our recorded
clients in our research said at the last interview 'I really don't know
you at all, and I've never known anyone better in my life'. And both
things could be true. She didn't know anything about me as a person
outside of therapy, but in therapy she knew me as someone who was
understanding and real. (Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 286) Finally,
Rogers spoke of his regret at not emphasising the rigorous and
disciplined nature of being client-centred: Being real does not involve
us doing anything we want to do; it means a disciplined approach. That's
one thing that I realize I have not stressed enough, and consequently it
has been overlooked. I'm quite a disciplined person myself, and it comes
naturally to me to think that everyone else is, too, but that's not so.
(Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 286)

Transference and counter-transference The view of Carl Rogers with
regard to the theories of transference and countertransference was
unequivocally clear - they were unfounded and had outlived their time.
Carl deplored them, believing them to be seductively disgusting and
socially reprehensible. There is no place at all for such thinking or
practice in clientcentred therapy. I have a very strong conviction that
psychoanalysis is a speculative, outdated theory which still hangs on,
which has an incredible amount of undue importance in the training of
psychiatrists and social workers. I think it is absurd that it hasn't
been displaced. (Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 243)

Empathic understanding is not a technique

83

If psychoanalysis, including such theories of 'transference' and
'countertransference' (and 'resistance', too) are so repugnant, why are
they still with us? Carl's opinion with regard to their continuing
influence was as follows: I think it is because it appeals to a certain
type of mind. Some people feel something simple must obviously be untrue
or low grade, but if you have a complicated theory that nobody can quite
understand, and it's really mysterious, and it takes an expert to even
spell it out, and the way it applies to an individual is so complicated
that it would take years and years to really understand it - 'Ah, that
must be true'. (Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 243) While some people might
think that it 'must be true' because it is complex and long-winded in
its learning, Carl Rogers believed there to be a distinct lack of
meaningful research data to back up the alleged importance of so-called
transference in therapy, and indeed a reluctance on the part of
practitioners for whom 'transference' is a fundamental aspect of their
counselling to open their data to public scrutiny. Carl's opinion was
that: To deal with transference feelings as a very special part of
therapy, making their handling the very core of therapy, is to my mind a
grave mistake. Such an approach fosters dependency and lengthens
therapy. It creates a whole new problem, the only purpose of which
appears to be the intellectual satisfaction of the therapist - showing
the elaborateness of his or her expertise. I deplore it. (Rogers 1987b:
p. 183) Looking at notions of 'transference' and 'counter-transference',
Carl differentiated between two main types of client feelings or
emotions towards the therapist, namely feelings that are an
understandable client response to the attitudes and behaviours of the
therapist, and feelings that have little or no relationship with or to
the therapist. Thus a client might understandably feel anger or
resentment at the therapist offering (premature) interpretations, or
projecting an aura of expertness or superiority, or a client might
understandably feel warmth or love when experiencing a deep
understanding from the counsellor. Such feelings are understandable
client responses to a client-centred therapeutic relationship. On the
other hand, feelings such as love, sexual desire, adoration, hatred,
contempt, fear and mistrust are projections from the client, they may be
positive or negative, and they are usually 'transferred' from a
'significant other', or indeed they may be aspects of the client's self
that the client cannot as yet accept. Furthermore, in psychoanalysis,
client attitudes that are 'transferred' to the current therapeutic
relationship are usually deemed to be infantile in nature and origin,
and hence link with Freudian theories about psychosexual development -
theories that play no part whatsoever in the client-centred framework.
In addition, Carl also stated that even if the phenomena described as
transference and counter-transference become discernible, 'In
client-centered therapy, however, this involved and persistent dependent
transference relationship does not tend to develop' (Rogers 1951:
p. 201), indicating that so-called transference phenomena might be more
to do with the practitioner and the relationships that practitioners
create than with some 'universal fact' of human relations. Carl

84

Being empathic

proposed that it is not necessary for the therapist to determine whether
client feelings and emotions are counsellor-caused or projections,
stating that while such deliberations may be of theoretical interest,
they are not problematic in client-centred therapy theoretically, for: A
true transference relationship is perhaps most likely to occur when the
client experiences another as having a more effective understanding of
his own self than he himself possesses. (Rogers 1951: p. 218) Carl also
stated that there was absolutely no need to make 'transferred' attitudes
'special', or to permit the dependence that features so prominently in
other (especially psychoanalytic) approaches. Instead, the
client-centred therapist can accept dependent feelings, thereby not
colluding with client attempts to change the counsellor's role. In other
words, accurate understanding and genuine acceptance, together with
non-evaluation, non-judging and non-interpretation, result in a tendency
for 'transference' attitudes to dissolve, with the feelings becoming
expressed towards their true object, thus resulting in greater client
awareness of and new insights into the meanings of experience. Linking a
belief in and a therapeutic focus on so-called transference with the
psychoanalytic notion of 'resistance', Carl also differentiated between
an understandable resistance to the often painful process of admitting
to awareness previously denied and distorted experience (as happens in
client-centred therapy), and resistance to the therapist created by the
therapist (as occurs in more Freudian-based therapies). Transference and
resistance are interpreted by the therapist, usually serving no really
useful purpose other than to satisfy the intellectual curiosity of the
therapist (and maybe make the therapist appear very clever). Focusing on
such phenomena as 'transference' and 'countertransference' (if they even
exist), interpreting them and dealing with the resistance created by the
therapist's interpretations, therapeutically seems to have one main
function - to needlessly prolong the counselling. Why then might notions
of so-called transference and counter-transference seem to keep
re-emerging as somehow desirable, even among so-called clientcentred
practitioners? Why is it that every so often we hear yet another
speaker, or read yet another article, which suggests that transference
and countertransference could be incorporated into client-centred
therapy with no loss of integrity? Could it be that Carl was right when
he said that maybe some therapists do experience a need to be perceived
as exceptionally clever and smart by either their clients or their
peers, as knowing far more about client psychological processes and
experiencing than clients themselves can possibly know or discover?
Might there be something in the links made by Carl Rogers and Gay
Barfield to the problem-solving, mechanically and technologically
orientated nature of the so-called 'developed countries'? Perhaps we can
let Carl have the last word on transference: I feel there's something
about its complexity that is very seductive and disgusting. I get really
upset - perhaps that word should not be used. But it is socially
reprehensible that the professions have not moved beyond psychoanalysis.
(Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 244)

Empathic understanding is not a technique

85

Rogers passionately believed that the 'special virtue' of client-centred
therapy is that the client has no need to resist the therapist, as the
client is free to deal with any resistances found within the self.

Uh-huh One of the more gross caricatures of client-centred therapy is
that the therapist has a bouncy rubber spring for a neck, and simply
sits there nodding and bobbing sagely, interjecting the occasional (but
well-timed) 'hm-mm' and 'uh-huh'! It gets worse - despite all that we
have learned from Carl Rogers about thou shalt not skill, and how
non-client-centred it is to direct or manipulate clients, many
counselling skills and, regrettably, counsellor training courses teach
students 'minimal encouragers' or therapist noises as techniques
designed to encourage the client to talk. It may well be that if you are
listening to someone very attentively, closely tracking their every
word, gesture and movement, and striving to sense, absorb and understand
the feelings and personal meanings that 'lie behind' client words from
within their frame of reference, then you may well utter the odd 'mm' or
'uh-huh' or whatever noise comes naturally for you, but what a far cry
this is from using noises like 'uh-huh' and 'hm-mm' as techniques
designed to get the client to do something! Here is another minimal
noise: Sigh . . .

Understanding about It may seem somewhat surprising that understanding
is included in a 'The clientcentred counsellor does not' section of a
book on empathic understanding! Carl Rogers believed that therapist
communications from an external frame of reference were not necessarily
'wrong', 'bad' or to be decried, stressing that such communications are
usually sympathetic - coming, as it were, from a good, understandable
place. Indeed, he wrote that often such sympathetic communications are:
even attempts to 'understand', in the sense of 'understanding about',
rather than 'understanding with'. The locus of perceiving is, however,
outside of the client. (Rogers 1951: p. 33) Understanding about is
perhaps best characterised by the 'You (feel) - because (reason)'
exercise that is sometimes employed in counselling skills training. For
instance, the person utilising this skill might say something like 'You
feel angry because it seems so unfair'. The learning of such techniques
may or may not represent a step on the way towards becoming empathic
(perhaps for some trainees it does and for others it does not). However,
this type of response demonstrates that the helper understands why it is
that the other person feels the way that they do. It does not
communicate that the listener has absorbed what the sensations of anger
feel like to the client, or what personal meanings lie behind

86

Being empathic

the notion of justice for that client. For instance, 'You feel sad
because your partner has just died' states the obvious - it does not
communicate an as if feeling of grief or a sensitive understanding of
what this means to the client. With client-centred empathy: the client
himself has been the source of understanding; he, from his own point of
view, can gradually articulate the sense and meaning of his
difficulties. Hence, there is no need for an elaborate developmental
theory or complex theory of neurosis for an effective understanding of
the client. The client can be helped to explain himself, to give an
account of his own world, and it is his account, his description, his
developing consciousness, and his expression of feeling that will make
most ample sense of his life. (Barton 1974: p. 179) Moving beyond
understanding about and towards an empathic way of being is essential
for the client-centred therapist.

Quack of all trades, master of none? If we are to be client-centred,
perhaps it might be as well to listen to our clients. In personal
correspondence (later made public), Professor Dave Mearns wrote: I am
concerned and frustrated at the bad name which is attaching to
person-centred practice in Britain. An example is the fact that
complaints against 'person-centred' members of BAC \[the British
Association for Counselling\] far outweigh those of any other
discipline, even taking into account the fact that more people ascribe
to the person-centred approach than any other core model. Particularly
frustrating is the fact that when you scratch beneath the surface of
these complaints you almost always find that the practitioner has
virtually no training in the approach . . . (Dave Mearns, quoted in
Vincent 1998: p. 1) In the UK at least, there has been a major increase
in counsellor training programmes that describe themselves as 'eclectic'
or 'humanistic' or, most commonly, as 'integrative'. The vast majority
of them aim at just above the minimum hours requirement for validation
or accreditation. So in what usually amounts to a course of around 450
hours in total, it is maintained that trainees can come to grips with,
thoroughly understand and competently practise two or often three
'mainstream' approaches to therapy - that's either 225 hours or 150
hours per approach. Why? Why, oh why, oh why? Do trainers who offer such
programmes genuinely, honestly and deeply believe that the best
interests of clients are served by 150 to 225 hours of training in each
approach? Do trainers maintain this belief (and their integrity) even in
the light of research evidence which demonstrates that 'hotchpotch'
counsellors (many of whom call themselves 'person-centred' because it
seems to be the most embracing label) attract a disproportionate number
of client complaints? Or might this be down to market forces ('buy two,
get one free' and 'it's more attractive to punters if they think they're
getting more')? Might this even be due to there

Empathic understanding is not a technique

87

being some trainers who enjoy 'strutting their stuff', and the more
stuff there is to strut the better? Whatever the reason or reasons, it
is clearly bad news both for clients and for authentic client-centred
therapists. Some further evidence can be cited. A local counselling
directory (Hampshire Association for Counselling 2001) contains the
details of 91 counsellors, of whom just under one-third offer therapy
rooted in a single approach, and of these, three counsellors are
identified as client-centred and three as person-centred. The average
number of approaches offered by the rest of the counsellors is slightly
over three. Around 30% of the counsellors offered two different
approaches, over 15% offered three different approaches, 18% offered
four different approaches, and 4% offered five different approaches.
Over 40% of these 'eclectic' counsellors included 'client-centred',
'person-centred' or 'Rogerian' (a term Rogers disliked) in their
descriptions. Yet Carl Rogers believed that the use of different
techniques and styles with the same or with different therapeutic styles
actually destroys the potential for a truly therapeutic relationship
with clients (Rogers and Sanford 1985), so how with any integrity can
client-centred or person-centred be included in the description of an
'integrative' counsellor? We know, too, that Rogers gave us necessary
and sufficient conditions to work within. Carl identified two further
drawbacks, the first being the trainee counsellor who becomes
'mesmerised' by or idolises a trainer, therapist or even an approach to
counselling. Such people, said Carl, tend not to think for and be
themselves: The other - and this is an equal danger, I feel - is when
people say 'Well, I'm an eclectic therapist; I do whatever seems
necessary'. That tends to mean they have no theoretical basis by which
they're operating, so they have no way of determining whether they're
really doing the right things or not. They sort of fly by the seat of
their pants, which has certain good qualities, but also very grave
deficiencies . . . The need is to think about theory, expand theory,
expand hypotheses, but to do it in a thoughtful and coherent way.
(Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 275) It seems, then, that there are
external threats to the integrity of client-centred therapy - for
instance, from people who 'use' the core conditions some of the time or
with some of their clients, or who see being client-centred as a 'good
basis for the relationship' but not sufficient to resolve all client
concerns. Sadly, there are threats from within, too. We have already
looked at issues surrounding those who seem to think that being
congruent means 'anything goes', or who claim to use client-centred
'reflecting' skills. When Carl Rogers was asked about 'using anything
and everything', he said: I think that in many ways it can and, in some
respects, has gone completely wild, and I regret that. In its more solid
aspects, it's one of the most significant social inventions of this
century because it is a way of eliminating alienation and loneliness, of
getting people into better communication with one another, of helping
them develop fresh insights into themselves, and helping them get
feedback from others so that they perceive how they are received by
others. It serves a great many useful purposes. (Rogers and Evans 1975:
p. 32)

88

Being empathic

Rogers went on to say that the reputation of the person-centred approach
(he was talking at the time about broader applications, not just
therapy) could be damaged in the public eye. It may well be that our
reputations have been damaged and continue to be damaged by these
internal and external threats to client-centred integrity. However, we
can live by our own beliefs - rather than be defensive, let us celebrate
what and who and how we are. Anyway, I think that because I'm not trying
to do all these fancy things that other therapists do, I have a more
complete freedom to really enter the world of the client. (Rogers and
Russell 2002: p. 281)

Summary The importance of not seeing counselling or therapy as a
skills-based activity is clear from the fact that when, near the end of
his life, Carl Rogers was asked whether he had any regrets, he replied:
I regret that in early writings about therapy we were so fascinated with
the enormous learnings from recording interviews that we became too much
focussed on techniques, and that has misled a great many people in the
counseling field. I realize that. (Rogers 1989: p. 198) Furthermore, to
take a principled stance against skills and techniques places the
therapist in a minority, for: Contrary to the opinion of a great many
psychotherapists, I have long held that it is not the technical skill or
training of the therapist that determines his success. Instead, I
believe it is the presence of certain attitudes in the therapist, which
are communicated to, and perceived by, his client, that effect success
in psychotherapy. (Rogers 1989: p. 10) There is clearly an essential
difference between being skilled and the implementation of skills. Being
skilled is something that someone is, whereas implementing skills is
something that someone does to another person. Witness Carl Rogers in
action and you will most likely experience someone who is extremely
skilled not only at being authentically respectful and understanding,
but also at communicating genuine acceptance and empathy. The therapist
who has got (or acquired) the skills and techniques to use on or apply
to clients tends to respond by utilising tools that are designed to do
or achieve some desired result. There is an anecdote about an audience
watching Rogers demonstrate clientcentred therapy. One viewer turns to
another and says 'Boy! That Carl Rogers! He sure has got it!'. After a
reflective pause comes the reply 'No . . . He hasn't got it he is it'.

Chapter 3

Empathising in action: an inter-view Background to this inter-view
During a diploma group, a counsellor trainee asked me to describe, 'off
the cuff so to speak, my process of empathising. The questioner spoke of
having learned all about definitions, academic understanding and the
theory of empathy (such as the place of empathic understanding within
client-centred therapeutic process), and had experienced both the giving
and receiving of empathy in personal therapy, in practice sessions and
on a client work placement. Yet this trainee was really curious about
what actually happens within a therapist when that therapist is engaged
in empathising. although I recall feeling somewhat 'put on the spot',
there was also a simultaneous experiencing of curiosity as my mind
engaged with the quality of the question, followed by the thought that
it deserved a full and honest answer. So . . . I took a deep breath and
spoke. A dynamic dialogue ensued, in which questioners were encouraged
to reflect upon their own experiencing, with further questions being put
by group members, which in turn triggered further exploration,
clarification and ideas. A couple of days later I started trying to
remember and type up what I had said. I recall feeling somewhat abashed
in that I was quite interested in my own answers! What had emerged from
the dialogue felt useful - a pulling together of some of the strands of
'empathising in action', if you will. As the session felt a bit like an
interview at the time, I thought 'Who can I get to interview me?'. As I
started typing, I framed the first sentence as the initial question that
had been asked in the training group. Then I thought 'Why not interview
myself?'. This idea seemed a little crazy at first, but I nevertheless
persevered, and the process turned out to feel quite dynamic. A college
manager reminded me, when I happened to mention my feeling of silliness,
of 'FAQs' ('Frequently Asked Questions') computerised systems, and I
became more aware that it might actually be helpful to remember and
collate questions about empathic understanding that trainees have posed
over the years, and to attempt to respond to them fully and honestly. So
what follows is in part an interview with Steve Vincent, in which he
responds to questions put to him by . . . Steve Vincent! Many of the
questions are ones I recollect trainees and other peers having asked
over the years; some of the questions are my own. This process of
exploring what actually happens within the therapist when empathising
has since been repeated in other groups and in further dialogues, and
some of these sessions were tape recorded and transcribed. Here, then,
is an edited version of responses to questions about empathy in action -
an interview drawn from a variety of sources. I hope that it has meaning
and relevance.

90

Being empathic

Empathy: an inter-view I Would you be prepared to describe for us your
process of empathising? W e l l . . . I realise that I might sound a
little like a stereotyped politician, but first of all I'd like to amend
the question somewhat! I think that it makes more sense for me to try
and describe my process of striving to empathise . . . Yes, this has
more meaning, for it seems to me that what is most therapeutic is an
authentic striving to empathise, rather than some kind of 'effortless
and accurate' empathy all of the time. If we think in terms of being a
compassionate companion to the client, for example, I will be journeying
alongside rather than knowing or showing the way . . . something like
that. Maybe there is something, too, about empathy being very hard work,
and a place we strive to reach rather than a place we instantly find
ourselves at. Maybe the journey to get there is as important as the
arrival. Anyway, I'm with a client. I think one of the primary and . . .
No, let me step back a minute . . . I'm not with a client. Maybe there
is something about preparing myself before I meet with the client in
person. I am reminded of some of the clinical psychology research into
receptiveness. In one experiment a volunteer group was divided into two
equal halves, one half being told that pain would be administered at a
set time, the other half being kept in the dark. When the pain was
administered, those who had received prior warning experienced the pain
more keenly - both subjectively and physiologically (through scientific
measurement) - so the discovery was that our brains can be 'primed' to
be ready to receive stimuli and sensations. So maybe something similar
could be true for empathising. Maybe if I prepare myself to receive then
I will perceive more keenly. This is one reason why I am all in favour
of the 50-minute counselling hour! I use the space between meeting with
clients to calm myself in different ways - mentally and physically. I
remember now, I think Professor Susan Greenfield called this 'mental
priming process' modulation (Greenfield 2000). For me, regrettably, this
often means slipping out of the back for a cigarette and a pace around,
and during that time I usually kind of mentally freewheel. It feels,
when I look back at it, rather as if I am emptying myself of the last
client (maybe a kind of storing, rather than a forgetting) in order to
be as open as I can be to receiving the next one. I do experience myself
after this short break as somehow freshened up and ready to meet with
whatever comes through the door next. So I'm not smoking, I'm
modulating! Not only is there something about my own experience, but
also it would not surprise me in the least if this kind of receptivity
is physiologically or neurologically (or whatever) measurable. There may
well be reliable clinical back-up research data to support the view that
'priming' could be a significant factor in preparing to empathise. It
occurs to me that this view could be backed up by looking at its
opposite, too. Just a few days ago I joined a group an hour or so after
it had started. although my late arrival was expected (it had been
negotiated and agreed well in advance), I nevertheless felt relatively
disconnected from the group for quite some time. It occurs to me, too,
that I simply drove up, parked, and rushed in. As I speak, I feel sure
that other factors were also relevant here (factors that I shall not go
into right now as they do not feel appropriate), yet it seems to me that
part of my feeling of disconnection was due to my not being adequately

Empathising in action: an inter-view

91

primed. I think that I tend to trust my experience in this - I sense
that there is something very real and true in the significance of
modulating my mind to receive empathically. So where was I? Now I am
primed and meet with a client. I think one of the primary and initial
inner processes is that I am uncluttered and receptive, and that enables
me to strive to absorb all that is passing between us, and primarily all
that a client is communicating. I will strive to be watchful, in that I
think it really helps to look at the person who is communicating! I
strive to be attentive to the eyes, the mouth, the face, the head, the
body, the hands and arms, the feet. . . And this is not some 'detached
observing' that takes place. Rather I am trying to absorb all that the
client is experiencing from moment to moment. I recall watching a Carl
Rogers demonstration session, in which he began a communication with 'I
gather . . .', and I liked that - the therapist strives to gather all
that a client is giving off and giving out. Gathering includes absorbing
sounds as well as vision and words. For instance, how is a client
speaking? What is the quality of a client's silence? There is a whole
universe of communication to absorb . . . 2 Can you clarify some of this
by giving an example now? Of what? I'm sorry, I see that some of you are
looking quizzical or puzzled. Yet there are so many aspects to this
universe of communication! I shall try to bring in examples as we go
along. Okay, I recall a demonstration session last year where I was one
of a couple being counselled. The therapist missed the 'discreet' tears
of my partner. Those tears were communicating something and the
therapist was unaware of that communication, let alone what the crying
might feel like or what personal meanings might underlie this weeping.
Come to think of it, the therapist totally missed what it felt like or
what it meant to me, too! I recall another instance where a client was
saying nothing out loud, but her fingers were kind of trammelling (the
movement that a cat's paws and claws often make) the arm of the chair. I
not only noticed this, I actually (unobtrusively) made the same movement
myself, in an attempt to gain some kind of insight into what she might
be experiencing. I think I often gaze at clients when we first meet. I
certainly don't stare in some kind of piercing way - I like the idea of
a gentle gaze. I hope that this gentle gaze conveys that I am
interested, curious and wanting to absorb. At least, I hope that some
clients sense something of this, if they look! As I think about it, I
feel that in initial meetings many clients are too absorbed in what is
going on for them to notice very much of my intentions. Maybe as therapy
progresses clients sense more of my countenance and what it means.
Anyway, my hope is that if clients do look at me, my face (and perhaps
especially my eyes) will let them accurately discern something of my
intentions. (I'm not sure where this comes from, but I remember someone
writing about how utterly weird and bizarre it is that two lumps of
fatty gristle could communicate so much - yet the eyes do very often
seem to say a great deal.) So I see things, I do not just hear things.
Sometimes what I see might not be what is being voiced. For instance, a
client might look ashamed or embarrassed as they are speaking, yet they
do not use the words shame or embarrassment. If I am striving to absorb
what the client is experiencing in the moment, then their embarrassment
or shame is as much a part of their being as their words.

92

Being empathic

3 Doesn't what you have said involve a degree of interpretation? How
truly client-centred is that? I suppose that depends upon your
interpretation of interpretation! I guess that there are different
degrees of interpretation. It doesn't feel like interpretation to me,
although it does mean an absorbing and a trying to sense the sense of
whatever is going on in clients, trying to tune into their sensations
and grasp something of what their experiencing means to them. I have
come across the phrase 'empathic inference' somewhere, and Rogers wrote
of 'empathic guessing' at some point (in 'The Silent Young Man', Chapter
17, Rogers 1967). For me, there is something around . . . If a client
looks, say, embarrassed, then I think that this is a pretty unequivocal
communication. This is not some kind of arrogance about interpretation
or some highly intellectualised theory about 'body language', and nor
will any communication of empathic inference or guessing be assertive.
You don't look convinced . . . okay, let us dwell on this a little
longer. I recall a television programme on the human brain that I saw
recently, and one of the statements made was that one of the largest
single functions of the brain is given over to face recognition. I don't
want to get into pedantic semantics, but I wonder if, at one level at
least, there is any kind of subtle difference between recognition and
interpretation. In the Nineteen Propositions (Rogers 1951: pp. 4 8 1
533), Carl wrote about internal and external frames of reference, yet he
also wrote about a common frame of reference, saying that there are
counterparts of experience in each of us. Many argue that without a
common frame of reference, there would be little or no communication at
all between us! I am reminded of Maurice Merleau-Ponti, an
existentialist philosopher who added being-within-theworld to the
categories of being-in-itself and being-for-itself. In other words,
there are inanimate objects that have no awareness whatsoever of their
own existence (and hence nothing with which to empathise), and there are
entities that do have awareness of their own being, yet there is also
something about conscious entities (organisms that have awareness of
self, others and the world about them) being born into a world where
feelings and meanings pre-exist and are absorbed and internalised as we
grow into that world within which we share reciprocal relationships. I
am also reminded of the idea of the 'I-thou' relationship. There is the
T, there is the 'thou' and there is a hyphen. Let us not forget the
hyphen! So do I interpret a look as meaning 'embarrassed' or do I
recognise a look as meaning embarrassed? This for me would all seem to
link with Carl describing the process of empathising as
perception-checking - it certainly doesn't feel like a detached
observation of client 'body language' coupled with some theoretical
belief about what it signifies! And my experience has been that when I
have communicated my sensing of client embarrassment to that client -
perhaps somewhat tentatively if I feel somewhat uncertain - it is
usually accurate or at least nearly accurate. And I feel fine with
nearly accurate! 4 I'm a little surprised that you have referred to
clinical psychology a couple of times already - that doesn't sound like
you! Can you say more about that? It grieves me that so often our focus
is so narrow. It grieves me even more that there are those among us who
try to develop client-centred therapy by incorpor-

Empathising in action: an inter-view

93

ating old stuff from other approaches. And by 'old stuff' I mean things
like transference, for that seems to rear its ugly head every so often,
despite the fact that Rogers despised the whole notion of transference!
Yet there is so much that we could be learning and that is compatible
with client-centred theory and beliefs! I'm excited, for instance, by
the work of Professor Susan Greenfield. Look at Freud. He believed that
it was only a matter of time before the physical structures of the id,
ego and superego would be found in the human brain. We can say with some
certainty that this has turned out to be utter rubbish! Yet what has
been discovered, at the 'cutting edge' of neuroscience, if you will,
seems to me to bode very well for client-centred therapy - for instance,
some of the findings about perception, and how we create the perceptual
world around us. Professor Greenfield talks of how nonsensical it is to
tie down the development of the self to ages and stages. She writes of
what she calls a 'transient self that is a process of becoming -just
like Rogers. I think that it is very important that we pay attention to
neuroscientific discoveries and are open to learning from them. I also
think that it is fantastic that so many of these discoveries are in
harmony with client-centred thinking, and that we can develop within our
approach without damaging or diluting our integrity. 5 What did you mean
by feeling fine with 'nearly accurate' empathy? Can I step back a
moment? It occurs to me that when I said 'You don't look convinced'
earlier, that was a live example of what I mean. You didn't look
convinced, and I voiced my understanding of what your facial expression
meant. Subsequent non-verbal signals led me to believe that on this
occasion my recognition of your signals was pretty accurate. Anyway, a
few things come to mind about feeling fine with 'nearly accurate'
empathy. I am aware of feeling absorbed by the concept of absorbing, so
I would like to get back to that before long, too! I remember writing an
article called In Praise Of Being Off-Beam, the gist of which was that
accurate empathy, like a zap right between the eyes, is maybe not so
therapeutic - or at least persistent and prolonged zaps might not be. My
experience of offering therapy is of a striving to sensitively enter the
world of my client. I venture, sometimes very tentatively, sometimes
more confidently, my grasp of what they are experiencing, a grasp that
includes, ideally, feelings, thoughts and meanings (and personal
meanings may well link with memories). I hope that my empathy and
understanding are not wildly off-beam, for if my client experiences me
as being 'on another planet', then I suspect that the encounter will not
be therapeutic for them. So there is something about conditions five and
six - that I am actually experiencing a degree of accurate empathic
understanding and that the client is receiving this. Therefore constant
zaps between the eyes might be inappropriate - too scary, or
over-threatening, or whatever. And missing by miles is not too good,
either, but if I can get pretty close pretty much of the time - maybe
with an occasional zap then that feels good, to me. It's as if the
client knows that I am striving to sensitively enter their world, and so
will be co-operative in that joint venture. If I don't 'get it quite
right' then they will clarify for me. And who knows? Maybe in clarifying
for me, things will become clearer for them, too.

94

Being empathic

6 You did a couple of demonstration sessions, and in one I saw you as
being confident with your empathy, and in the other as really tentative.
What is that all about? Well, that's just how it was. I remember the
first session well, and I really did feel reasonably confident that my
empathising was fairly accurate, so part of being authentic was neither
to be over-confident nor to be too diffident either. In the second
session I had a heavy cold, and it felt as if I was absorbing through a
layer of cotton wool, so I definitely felt less confident (there was
that word 'absorbing' again! I would like to return to that soon . . .).
Yet it occurs to me that even when I felt more confident I remained kind
of. . . humble? That doesn't feel quite right maybe a kind of humility
is incorporated in my way of being, a kind of selfacceptance that I feel
confident about the accuracy of my empathy, yet also experience a real
willingness to be guided by the client. Rogers wrote about constantly
being prepared to change horses in midstream, and Dave Mearns wrote
about the 'dance of psychotherapy'. They both capture some of what I
mean, I think. Can I just go back to the idea of near enough accurate
empathy being good enough for me for a moment? I am reminded of Carl's
adage 'what I am is good enough', and on one of the CSP/CCTPCAS videos
he says more about this. It goes something like: What I am is good
enough. And what I am is an imperfect human being. Yet imperfect beings
can achieve astonishing things. Especially when they are aware that they
are imperfect beings. (Rogers and Sanford 1985) I like that. And it
seems to me that the degree of accuracy in my empathic communications
almost feels less important than my striving to be empathic - at times
at least. The outcome may be imperfect, yet if the striving is there,
that is kind of perfect! It's almost as though if I am authentically
striving, I can't 'get it wrong'. If the striving is there, the rest
will follow. You know, it occurs to me that there is also something
about timing in this confident or tentative thing. If I reflect on my
work with clients, then I think that it is fair to say that I am less
likely to be very tentative the more I have come to get inside a
client's world of feelings and meanings. I will still, I hope, maintain
a degree of humility, but yes --I think that's true. The less I know (or
the less I have absorbed or gathered), the more tentative I am likely to
be. Of course, if an ongoing client discloses a completely new aspect,
then the tentativeness might return. So maybe increased confidence and
reduced tentativeness is a therapeutic trend, but not a straight line on
a graph, if you see what I mean. Anyway, can I return to absorbing? I
started off talking about priming myself to be alert, attentive and
watchful. I want to say something more about absorbing sounds. By this I
mean that I think it is unfortunate that, over the years, there has
perhaps been too much attention paid to words, at the expense of sounds.
I remember a recent demonstration session where at one point I voiced
something of the client's sense of 'righteous indignation'. In the
audience feedback session that followed, considerable surprise was
expressed because the client had said nothing about indignation -

Empathising in action: an inter-view

95

righteous or otherwise - so surely this couldn't have been
client-centred and must have been interpretative or analytic or
something. Well, for me the process of 'absorbing' a client includes
hearing the sound of their communications, and not just the words that
they speak. When I listened to the sound of this client's voice, almost
a kind of 'plaintive wailing', the communication of righteous
indignation was a strong current that ran through a significant section
of the session, and the client later confirmed that this was a very
accurate sensing. So it seems to me extremely evident that communication
is about far, far more than the words that are being spoken. Another
example occurs to me. At an international gathering of person-centred
folk, the idea emerged of delegates initially speaking in their first
language and only afterwards having their words translated into English
(rather than phrase by phrase). People spoke in several languages. With
most delegates I didn't understand a word that they said, and for a few
I understood at best the meaning of only a smattering of words. Yet I
sure as hell could sense what they were feeling - and pretty accurately,
too. Interestingly enough, for me the translations that followed tended
to lack the emotive content which was expressed by the original speaker.
Maybe you could try watching the television or a video with the sound
muted. You might not hear a single word, yet my guess is that you will
accurately perceive many of the emotions being expressed - perhaps
largely through facial expression, gesture, bodily signals, and so on -
so maybe these aspects of communication could be considered as the
nature of 'non-verbal' signals. Or you could try listening to a tape and
just focus on the words or, better still, look at a transcript of a tape
and then listen to the tape, focusing on the sounds. Quite often, in my
experience, the sounds impart information that the words do not, and
this might illustrate the nature of 'paraverbal' communication. And it
does not stop there! A client who is extremely anxious might speak very
rapidly. He or she might not use the word 'anxious', yet the rate of
their speech might be communicating anxiety. Loudness of speech could be
communicating anger, quietness might indicate feeling low or exhausted,
and so on, and so on. Thus my process of absorbing is in part about a
seeing and hearing beyond the words that are spoken. 7 I'm confused. Are
you saying that the client-centred therapist is somehow detached,
somehow objectively absorbing and analysing or processing, if you p r e
f e r - all of these sights and sounds? No, that's not what I'm trying
to communicate. It's interesting to me, because for many years I would
experience a heated reaction to words like 'objective' in the belief
that 'objective' symbolises 'cold', 'dispassionate', 'clinical' or
whatever. To me, client-centred therapy is involved and compassionate
and subjective and warm and . . . It is in-volved because I am really
trying to be 'in there' with the client. Yet I realise as I speak that I
am feeling some surprise at my lack of a strong reaction to the word
'objective' that I once would have felt. I think this is because the
words 'subjective' and 'objective' have come to have less and less
meaning and relevance for me. They both feel like the extremes of a
linear scale, and my experience is that life ain't like that. Perhaps
just as Rogers felt pretty passionately about the artificiality of
separating above the neck and below the neck, believing rather that we
are (potentially at least) whole persons, so I feel that this apparent

96

Being empathic

need we have to be purely one thing or another is nonsense. Perhaps
being a whole person doesn't mean being wholly this or wholly that - it
could mean that the whole is comprised of many gradational aspects. So
maybe I don't need to ferret out whether I am being wholly objective or
wholly subjective. Maybe I can be a composite of many, many different
attributes. I know I have used the word absorbing a lot. Maybe another
word to describe my process could be immersing. I feel as if I am
immersing myself in my client's world of feelings and meanings.
although, to quote Rogers, I keep a sense of self about me (not losing
the 'as if quality of empathy), this hardly equates, for me, to the
notion of objectivity. I want to say, too, and with some passion, that
nor is this a passive process. Not only am I trying really hard to
absorb and immerse myself in the world of my client, but also I will
strive to communicate something of what I have sensed. It feels very
active to me, far from passive. 8 You said that you regretted the focus
on words . . . Yes. And by this I mean that, for instance, I find it
bizarre that 'the powers that be' consider it desirable - or even a
requirement - for someone embarking on counselling diploma training to
have completed counselling skills training. Now don't get me wrong, I
think that counselling skills courses can be invaluable there are many
people for whom the implementation of counselling skills is their end
aim, and that's great in my view. It is also very worthwhile, in my
opinion, for people to have the opportunity to explore the mainstream
therapeutic approaches prior to making as informed a choice as is
possible of which diploma course to pursue. Yet over and over again my
experience on diploma courses is that many trainees have spent at least
the first term or two unlearning skills - and a process of unlearning
the old alongside learning the new can be extremely problematic for
many. Oh gosh - this self-referencing is getting a bit embarrassing! I
wrote another article called How Do You Do (I was really pleased with
that title!), the gist of which was that in 'non-directive' counselling
skills training, a kind of stock response would be 'How do you feel
about that?'. Now it seems to me that 'How do you feel about that?'
(hence the How Do . . . part of the title I like) is a perfectly good,
non-directive (up to a point - the focus is on feelings), open-ended
response. Yet if I am communicating empathy, my communication is more
likely to be characterised by 'You feel sad' or 'You're really angry',
or whatever (hence the You Do ... part of the title). Note, too, the
differentiation between a response (to a client's words, more often than
not) and a communication (of sensing a client's moment-tomoment
experiencing). This focus on words is perhaps even more stark when it
comes to paraphrasing, summarising and, Carl Rogers forbid, reflecting.
It seems to me that the process is that many counselling skills trainees
have to focus on words in order to be able to log and recall them for
the purpose of paraphrasing, summarising, reflecting or whatever. And in
the process of having to concentrate on the spoken word in order to be
able to demonstrate specific skills and techniques, they very often miss
out on the full depth and richness of what is passing between two
people. So while I think that the implementation of skills certainly has
its place, I am not convinced that such training is particularly helpful
when it comes to a process of becoming client-centred.

Empathising in action: an inter-view

97

So in general it would seem that most of my words thus far have not been
about words - and for me this is significant. Perhaps now we can turn to
the words themselves. Of course the words that a client speaks are
important. Of course it is important that I absorb and am able to
remember a good proportion of the words that have been spoken. My point
thus far has been that there is far, far more to communication than
words alone. It almost seems helpful to think in terms of essence - and
perhaps essential, too. Am I able somehow to distil the essence of what
a client is communicating? What are the essential ingredients of a
client's experiencing? As I said earlier, I remember watching a video of
Carl Rogers in action, and he commenced one communication with 'I gather
. . .', which I really liked. It triggered for me the idea that my
process when I am striving to empathise is one of gathering. I am a
gatherer, an absorber, of all of the elements of client communication.
And if there is a whole universe of communication to absorb, maybe the
words only represent one solar system. Within that system there may well
be a very significant sun that casts light, or there may be significant
planets, yet that solar system is only a part of the whole universe. I
might mention, too, that Rogers was interested in the process of finding
the right words. Choose a word and look it up in a thesaurus. You now
have a list of several words, all with very similar meanings. Yet when
clients describe something, only one - just one - of those words seems
to fit exactly. And you can see clients very obviously referencing
themselves in order to sense, feel and think which word is the precise
symbol of what they mean. Hit on the right word first time and hey -
accurate empathy! Hit on one of the others, in a humble, flexible way,
and clients experience your striving to empathically understand - and
they will soon put you right if the relationship is one in which they
feel free to do so.

9 You seemed to suggest that 'How do you feel about that?' wasn't
entirely non-directive, because it focused on feelings. Could you say
more about that? r d be delighted to! I have also spoken (and written) a
few times about feelings and meanings, and this links with the word
thing, too. Carl Rogers wrote that the instant we become aware of or
perceive something, we attach a meaning to that awareness or perception.
So if I just focus on the words, I might miss the feelings and meanings
that lie 'behind' the words, or 'underneath' the words, or inform the
words, or whatever. In other words (hah!), if I focus only on what is
voiced (in order to paraphrase, reflect, or whatever), I run the very
real risk of not sensing 'underlying' feelings or meanings. Part of my
agenda here is to try to dispel the myth that seems to have arisen about
client-centred therapy (or the person-centred approach) being all to do
with feelings - because that is simply not true. Read Rogers and you
will quickly discover that he was consistent throughout his life, both
in his writing and in his practice, about linking feelings and meanings.
In his book A Way of Being, Carl wrote passionately about the artificial
distinction that we make between 'head' and 'gut' (above the neck and
below the neck, as he put it). If we are to be whole persons - that is,
if I am to engage as one whole person with another whole person - then
let us move away from yet another example of linear extremes -

98

Being empathic

head and gut! Feelings and personal meanings interweave; there is an
incredibly rich flow between and among feelings and meanings. 10 What
are your views on internal and external frames of reference? I think
that they may be useful concepts on the journey towards an empathic way
of being when with clients, clarifying the difference between my world
view (including my view of myself) and yours. And I guess that for me,
when I am with a client what is internal and what is external is usually
fairly clear - I think that I am relatively aware of what is 'my stuff'
and what is 'the client's stuff'. The idea of a common frame of
reference interests me, too, as I have already said. I I You mean that
there is a third frame of reference? Oh yes! If you picture the 'Two
Circles' diagram that Rogers used to illustrate and summarise the
Nineteen Propositions (Client-Centred Therapy 1951, front cover and
pp. 526-7) . . . you are seeing two circles, side by side - yes? So,
using this format, the client's internal frame of reference would be in
the left-hand-side segment, the therapist's frame of reference (that is,
a frame of reference external to the client) would be in the
right-hand-side segment, and the overlap would represent their common
frame of reference. Thinking only in terms of internal and external
frames of reference feels too rigid to me, too extreme and too linear.
There is how you see the world, how I see the world, how we see the
world, a preexisting world of meanings (and feelings), the world that is
becoming (new meanings, meanings in a process of being formed), and so
on. 12 Did Carl Rogers write or say anything about this, or is this all
your own thinking? Some of both, I guess. There is Merleau-Ponti who I
mentioned earlier, too. In fact there are many, many resources. As for
Carl Rogers, when he wrote Proposition Seven in Client-Centered Therapy
he mentioned that the experience and perceptions of others have
counterparts in our own experience, and that these counterparts can be
used as tentative guides. Thus when a client speaks of anger, for
instance, I too have experienced anger, and although I need to be
constantly aware that the client's feelings and meanings are 'unique' to
that individual, it would also be naive, it seems to me, not to
acknowledge that without some form of shared frame of reference there
would be little if any communication. So I can, perhaps, use my own
frame of reference as a tentative guide into your frame of reference. I
can also use our common frame of reference as a tentative guide into
your frame of reference. On a simplistic level, we would probably all
agree that a particular object is what can be called a chair, so 'chair'
falls within our common frame of reference. However, we need to be aware
that the chair has many properties that constitute its 'chairness', and
that we shall not perceive the chair identically. For instance, one
person might perceive shape first, another colour, another the material
of which it is made, or whatever. I'm not sure that picking on a chair
is necessarily the best example, but I hope that you are catching some
of the sense of what I mean. And what the chair means to each of us
might vary. For most of us, it probably goes no further than something
to sit upon. Yet what if I was bound to a similar chair during a
horrific assault, or it reminds me of

Empathising in action: an inter-view

99

my mother's chair, and my mother died recently, or something like that?
So there is something about humility and remaining tentative. On the one
hand, it may be reasonable to assume a probability that we do understand
each other when we say 'chair', but on the other hand, we need to
continually perception-check if we are striving towards empathic
understanding. So if as therapist I identify something as clearly 'my
own stuff' - that is, 'stuff' from a frame of reference that is external
to the client - then it follows that it is unlikely to have any place in
the counselling room. If what emerges clearly belongs to the client -
that is, from a frame of reference that is internal to the client - then
it clearly has every significance to therapy. Sometimes, though, things
seem to emerge from the space between us - from the hyphen of the I-thou
relationship, if you will. I have come to trust what emerges in that
space more and more, but then I also do a lot of exploring of such
issues in my writing, my personal reflecting, and in supervision. I 3
Did you mention memory as part of the internal frame of reference of the
client? Doesn't that seem more like psychoanalytic thinking? I want to
be accurate here - can I just quickly look something up? This is the
1959 paper that Carl wrote, in which he gives us lots of definitions.
Ah, here it is. I quote: Internal frame of reference. This is all of the
realm of experience which is available to the awareness of the
individual at a given moment. It includes the full range of sensations,
perceptions, meanings, and memories, which are available to
consciousness. (Rogers 1959: p. 210) So the instant we perceive
something we attach a meaning to it. When we speak of the here and now
or of immediacy, our current experiencing includes any past experiencing
(feelings and meanings) that have relevance to the here and now. So
while the client-centred therapist does not direct the client to focus
on past experience (or to then analyse that past experience), it is of
course true that feelings and meanings gathered along the way may well
pertain to current experiencing - and if the therapist is to grasp the
intricacies and depth of current client experiencing, this understanding
may well include the history that clients bring into now. 14 I've had t
w o or three clients now, all of them male, and I just can't seem t o
get through their cognition and into their feelings. What can you say
about that? Okay . . . I think that I have a few thoughts about that.
Let me see . . . I feel a reaction inside of me so that I know I have an
agenda again, something I feel quite passionate about. Let me try to
access this. It is that I want to try to dispel what seems to be a
fairly popular myth that client-centred therapy is all about feelings.
It isn't, as I have already said. Rogers wrote, for instance (I'm sorry
that I'm repeating myself - it feels important), that every time we
perceive something we instantly attach a meaning to it. And the meanings
have importance, as do our perceptions, feelings and memories. There is
something about wholeness. It reminds me of those who say that 'So long
as I can be client-centred, why

100

Being empathic

should I need to know theory?'. These same people will often talk about
being whole persons or meeting clients as whole persons, or whatever.
Yet theory is an integral part of the wholeness of client-centred
therapy, and any reading of Rogers makes this crystal clear. How can I
claim to be a whole person engaging with another whole person while at
the same time dismissing an integral part of the whole of the approach
that I claim to belong to? Anyway, to get back to the point, I would
want to be cautious about labelling a client as 'cognitive' or 'all head
and no feeling', or whatever. Another issue that Carl Rogers was
passionate about was this artificial differentiation that we make
between feeling and thought. Read the part of A Way of Being where
Rogers refers to Vincent Hanna and you will see what I mean. I feel
passionate about this, too it is yet another example, as I see it, of
extreme and linear categorising, and it simply doesn't fit my
experiencing of myself or others. So often people (including me) say 'I
feel . . .' when what follows seems more like a thought, for instance.
Well, that might just be language and pedantic, yet it does seem to me
that there has been a trend in some client-centred circles to place more
emphasis and value on feelings, to the detriment of meanings. And I
think that this is a most regrettable trend, and one that Carl would
have been hesitant to follow. In any case, how can I claim to regard you
unconditionally if I value your feelings above your thoughts or, as I
prefer, your personal meanings? So if I am faced with an apparently
'cognitive' or 'heady' client, then maybe one of the first things I will
want to explore is my own value system, to check out the authenticity of
my unconditional positive regard. Thus there are real links with both
congruence and unconditional positive regard here, it seems to me. I am
also reminded (with, I confess, not a little embarrassment) of a client
of mine from a few years back. A bit like the questioner, I felt
frustrated that I could not get past all of his 'head stufi' and into
his feelings. How I flinch now when I hear myself saying that! As if
somehow I've got to apply this crowbar to get into a client's feelings!
And even if my crowbar is wrapped in fluffy cotton wool, it is hardly
client-centred! Prizing (with a 'z') not prising (with an 's') is a
catchphrase I've come up with. Anyway, I took a tape of this client to
supervision. To my eternal chagrin, after about ten minutes my
supervisor stopped the tape and said something like 'Well, to me that
was full of feeling'. This was an extremely salutary lesson for me to
learn, and it is one that has stayed with me. What I had spectacularly
failed to recognise was that my client was talking about his feelings in
a cognitive way. Another example comes to mind. Early in counsellor
training (or in counselling skills development), a client begins - in a
flat, steady, toneless voice and with an expressionless face and body -
to say something like: Well, I've just discovered I am terminally ill,
my partner has been laid off and our house is to be repossessed, and the
cat was run over . . . And the counsellor replies: How do you feel about
that? You can laugh, but it happens! For the sake of the point I am
trying to make, we can say that there were no verbal, non-verbal or
paraverbal clues to emotional content. Yet the client expects us to
infer feeling. That is why people laugh -

Empathising in action: an inter-view

101

because it seems absurd that the counsellor would not infer feelings. So
maybe here is another clue about how to experience empathy. Perhaps this
links to what Rogers meant when he wrote about empathic inference. It
seems to me that there is a tendency in client-centred circles to veer
away from such discussion and exploration, because 'inference' gets
equated with analysis, or interpretation, or diagnosis, or whatever - so
best to avoid them. There is another possible example of our value base.
I feel sure that words such as 'intuition' are somehow much more
acceptable than 'inference', and I really think that this is a great
shame, because sometimes I think that we miss out on exploring our
processes as a consequence of such p-c p-c (person-centred political
correctness!). Yet if I am to engage as a whole person, and if I have a
capacity for inference, might not that capacity have a part to play? And
if I can remain humble - that is, retain a sense of tentative humility -
if I continually engage in a process of perception checking, might not
this be another strand in the process of empathising? To get back to our
'heady' client, then - first of all, can I experience acceptance? Can I
value 'headiness' just as I value emotions, perhaps especially given an
awareness that, at times at least, 'head' can be 'gut in disguise'? That
doesn't feel right - it might be true, yet maybe I can value 'headiness'
for precisely what it is (intellect, or brains, or whatever). Do I have
to relegate someone's intellect to lower divisions, being interested
only in the premier league of feelings, yet kid myself (and therefore
con clients) into believing that I am being unconditional? Can I remain
client-centred, thereby not utilising my crowbar to get at feelings? Can
I gather whether my client might actually be talking about or alluding
to feelings, yet in a cognitive way? It seems to me, too, that other
clients whom I have experienced as 'heady' have been using their
intellect as a defence against their feelings. That's okay! If a client
needs to protect himself (or herself, although I note the gender
implications in the question) then that is their process in the moment.
Rather than trying to prise my way into feelings, why not prize the
individual? I may or may not communicate something of my sensing of
their defensiveness, and that may or may not loosen up the expression of
feelings. Yet I do not have any aim in mind other than to come as close
as I can to being the core conditions of client-centred therapy. So with
a 'heady' client, it seems to me that if I can strive to authentically
experience unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding, and
the client is able to perceive this from me, then many things are both
possible and, indeed, predictable. To stray from being client-centred
makes client-centred process an impossibility, and would result in
something that I predict would be very different in many respects. 15
How does all of this relate to what I've read about 'cognitive' and
'affective' empathy? Well, I wouldn't want to dismiss those terms out of
hand, as I guess that there are contexts within which they could be
helpful. For example, if I am going through a transcript of a session
with a client, I might want to make use of certain 'tools' or strategies
that help me to explore how I was in that session. Many trainers say
that 'cognitive empathy' is about understanding meanings, and affective
empathy is about resonating with feelings. Well, okay, although I have
already mentioned

102

Being empathic

the artificiality of such harsh and linear distinctions. Nevertheless,
it might prove helpful in terms of me exploring whether I could identify
any predominant trends within me within the session. For instance, if I
discover that I was relating mostly to meanings at the expense of
engaging with feelings (or vice versa), why was that? I suppose that I
have to say, too, that in my experience as a trainer the idea of
'cognitive empathy' has not proved too useful. I can recall several
instances where this kind of understanding has really been 'from the
outside' - almost as if the trainee therapist is observing the client
and understanding that they are feeling something and maybe why, too.
Yet it somehow lacks the rich profundity of really getting into the
client's world of feelings and meanings. Does 'inside out' as compared
with 'outside in' make sense? Maybe this links with Carl Rogers
differentiating between understanding about and understanding from
within a client's frame of reference. I6 It reminds me of the 'You -
because -' exercise we did on our skills course. Is this what you mean?
Yes, I think so - nice example (he said in a non-evaluative way!). This
is often presented as 'You feel - because -', as in 'You feel angry
because this situation is unfair'. The 'You feel angry' part is
presented as affective empathy and the 'because this situation is
unfair' as cognitive empathy, or understanding. Put the two together and
hey presto - empathic understanding! Yet this feels somewhat shallow to
me. Again, I don't mean to be dismissive as I'm sure that this kind of
empathic understanding has its place, either in itself or as part of a
journey towards other ways of being empathic. But it somehow feels
'clever', 'dispassionate' or 'detached' when compared with the
incredible experience of almost becoming the other person - without
losing the 'as if quality, of course! There is a title in that
somewhere - 'On Becoming Your Client' perhaps! So it occurs to me that
the 'You - because - 'type of empathic understanding, albeit somewhat
formulaic, has a richness that simply reflecting, paraphrasing or posing
open-ended, non-directive questions does not have, yet at the same time
it lacks the richness that I hope I have described. And remember that
Carl did distinguish between understanding about and 'truly'
understanding from within the client's frame of reference. 17 Wasn't
there talk of Rogers going to include intuition as a seventh condition,
or a fourth core condition? Well, if there wasn't, it would seem as if
there is right now! My understanding is that there has been some talk of
intuition being added as a seventh condition, or a fourth 'core'
condition, but not by Carl Rogers! It is true that, especially later in
his life, Carl became very interested in the intuitive aspects of his
empathy, although my understanding is that Rogers looked at intuition
under the umbrella of empathy, so to speak. 18 So do you have views
about intuition? Of course! Intuition fascinates me. I have increasingly
come to trust my intuition, too, although yet again I strive to maintain
a kind of tentative humility. I have not

Empathising in action: an inter-view

103

to date encountered an explanation of this intuitive capacity that I
have come to trust, so I tried to formulate my own. I recall meeting
with a client for the first time. He described his experience of a
one-night stand and how rejected and worthless he felt on being spurned
at college the next day. At one point I said something like 'And this
feels so much more raw because this person was another guy', and I
remember feeling astonished - it was as if the words just kind of
'popped into my head' and it felt as if I wasn't at all in control of my
own process. It felt scary, almost, and certainly very bewildering. Yet
after a pause, the client said 'You've just saved several weeks of
therapy - but how on earth did you know?'. I listened to a tape of this
session many times, and began to formulate a theory around my own
intuitive process. I think that I should perhaps stress at this point
that to me this feels like an extreme example of my intuition, yet it
was significant in shaping my thinking. What I discovered through
listening to the tape was that the client had been very careful about
using gender-free terminology - for example, several times he said
things like 'the other person', or 'they', or 'them', or whatever. Not
once had he used a gender-specific word. At the time I was not
consciously aware of this, yet my belief now is that at some level just
'behind', or 'beneath' or 'at the edge o f full awareness, my brain had
somehow 'clocked' this careful choosing of words - not just once but in
a sequence. In retrospect, it feels as if as this sequence accumulated
it eventually became strong enough to break through into awareness, and
that was the intuitive moment. For me, this explanation of this
particular instance feels right. I am not convinced that such an
explanation applies to all intuitive moments, though. As I speak I am
wondering if there might be links between what I was saying about
empathic inference and empathic guessing and intuition, too. I want to
return more directly to trying to explain my process of empathising. It
seems to me that another vital aspect is the sixth necessary and
sufficient condition - that the client perceives, at least to a minimal
degree, the unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding of
the therapist. What a tragic waste if I utilise my senses to try to
sense what the client is experiencing moment by moment, yet then do not
communicate anything of the outcomes of my efforts! You know, again it
seems to me that this is a critical point in differentiating between the
implementation of counselling skills and being an empathic therapist.
When being at my best empathically, I think that I use very little of my
capacity in thinking about what I am going to say next. This feels very,
very different to me from trying to identify, store and recall words for
the purpose of paraphrasing, summarising, reflecting, or whatever. It
also feels much more deeply immersed in the client's world of
perceptions, feelings and meanings than offering an openended,
non-directive question. Rather, the words seem to flow. In really trying
to gather and absorb the client's feelings and meanings, and then
offering the fruits of my harvesting, I need not be too concerned about
the quality of storage and recall, formulation and so on. Rather, I am
striving to communicate my striving to empathise and understand. I can
honestly say that thoughts about implementing skills (such as
'reflecting') just never, ever enter my head. It is hard to explain
properly. At my best, I am just so immersed in trying to experience the
feelings and meanings of the other person that when I speak it is as if
I were that other person - or at least as if I am some close
approximation to that other person. It is incredibly unlikely that this
other person is thinking about reflecting my words

104

Being empathic

back to me, or paraphrasing my words, or whatever - so it is equally
unlikely that I will be! Even if a client feels stuck, or numb, then my
striving is to experience what their numbness feels like and what
feeling stuck means to them, and whatever will flow, will flow - or not,
as the case may be. I am striving to be in there with them, not
intending to pull them out, or move them on, or whatever. I think that
sometimes counsellors do not enter the numbness, 'stuckness' or stasis
of clients because not to try to pull them out or move them on somehow
feels like abandoning them to their hopelessness, but far from it. I
cannot be really in there with someone if I am hell-bent on trying to
get them moving. 19 I'm sorry to disagree with the last questioner, but
I was told that Rogers was going to include spirituality as the fourth
core condition. Is this true? Again, to the best of my knowledge, the
answer is no, this is not true. I feel concerned and somewhat suspicious
about how such rumours arise. I suspect that they say more about the
people who would like to see spirituality incorporated into
client-centred therapy or the person-centred approach than they do about
Carl Rogers. I have no particular quibble with the therapist who is
spiritual - and I guess it's a very personal, individual thing anyway.
Perhaps of greater importance is therapist congruence - if I am
spiritual I need to in some way be spiritual, and if I'm not, I won't
be. I do feel concerned, though, when people say 'Carl was going to make
spirituality a condition', without backing it up. Show me where Carl
said or wrote that - yes? Carl expressed caution about even using the
word 'spirituality', and this would seem to include a couple of things.
First, he was eager to avoid religious connotations and connections, for
if he did use the word, he meant it in a nonreligious way. Second, he
commented that the word 'spirituality' meant so many different things to
so many different people that there was a lack of clarity in meaning.
Carl did clarify his own meaning, though. He spoke and wrote of how,
when being deeply empathic, it almost felt like an altered state of
consciousness, and that he would experience a kind of connectedness
between his own 'spirit' or 'essence' and the 'spirit' or 'essence' of
the client. He talks with Gay Barfield about this on the Empathy: an
Exploration video from 1985, and it is very clear to me that even if
couched in terms of 'transcending the everyday' or 'altered states of
consciousness', his thinking nevertheless falls very definitely within
the realms of empathic understanding - an existing therapist condition.
So no, I know of no evidence that Carl was thinking of any new
conditions, spiritual or intuitive or otherwise. Incidentally, Carl also
said in his 'A Way of Meeting Life' interview (Rogers, 1984: p. 2) that
he originally had no interest in a notion so vague as a 'self but that
he researched it because client after client referred to it. If he had
another lifetime and clients perpetually referred to spirit, then that's
the way he would go - and he recognised a trend towards the more
spiritual and was certainly open to it.

Empathising in action: an inter-view

105

20 What exactly does 'the client receives, at least to a minimal degree'
actually mean? You mentioned this just now Now there's a question! One
of my worries about training in client-centred therapy is that we don't
really have any locally, nationally or internationally agreed measure of
what 'minimal' means. I think that it could be helpful to link the first
and sixth necessary and sufficient conditions here - 'two persons are in
contact' (or 'psychological contact' if you prefer) and 'the client
receives the unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding of
the therapist' (at least, as you said, to a minimal degree). With regard
to being in contact, Rogers wrote about 'contact' as meaning that the
therapist makes a significant difference in the perceptual (or
phenomenal) field of the client. So from this we might infer (or
intuit!) that 'receiving to a minimal degree' is to do with being heard,
maybe to do with a degree of understanding, and so on. In the video I
have just mentioned where Carl Rogers and Gay Barfield discuss empathy,
and in another video where Carl takes a question from the audience on
empathy, what emerges is the idea of reciprocal empathy - and that makes
sense to me. In other words (and the video audience seemed a little
surprised by this idea when Carl voiced it), we rely upon our clients to
empathise with and understand our attempts to empathise with and
understand them. This might go some way towards clarifying not only the
notion of 'contact', but also the notion of the client receiving, at
least to a minimal degree, the empathy of the therapist. It also reminds
me of a question in the CORE (Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation)
forms, which are widely used in the UK within the NHS to try to measure
the effectiveness of counselling. The therapist is asked to rate the
'psychological mindedness' of clients. I guess that one of the ways in
which I might think about a client's 'psychological mindedness' is the
degree to which he or she is able to receive my striving to empathise
with and understand him or her - although I'm also aware as I speak that
an exceptionally rigid self-structure might be linked, for me, with
rating psychological mindedness at the lower end of the scale. As this
goes on, I realise that two perhaps separate issues are emerging for me.
One is the nature of contact, and reciprocal empathy ('the client
receives . . .'), and I feel okay about that. The other is this notion
of 'minimal', and I don't feel okay about that. If, say, a trainee
produces a transcript of a counselling session in which there are 25
counsellor communications, three of which demonstrate empathy and 22 of
which do not, are we to say that 12% adequately evidences a 'minimal
degree'? Probably not, yet in terms of simple arithmetic, my guess is
that 12% could accurately be described as minimal. So can someone who is
communicating empathy 12% of the time accurately describe themselves as
clientcentred? Or can we say that if all of a counsellor's
communications involve a minimal degree of empathy - yet also major
degrees of some other quality that falls outside the core conditions -
they are client-centred? Or is the client the sole determinant of
receiving to a minimal degree? Is it all about the client's
'psychological mindedness' or reciprocal empathy? I'd like to quickly
throw in another couple of ideas. I found it really liberating to hear
Carl say (in the Radio Telefis Eireann Dublin interview) that rather
than placing a condition upon oneself (he was actually talking about
unconditional positive regard) - which leaves the self wide open to
feelings of failure and

106

Being empathic

inadequacy if the condition is not met - we can instead think in terms
of being fortunate if the condition is met to some degree. I think that
I am more likely to succeed with empathy if I view achieving it as a
fortunate bonus, rather than striving to avoid failure. I also like the
idea of some being better than none, and more being better than some.
Again, I think that holding such a view is liberating, whereas striving
to meet ideal conditions is almost bound to lead to failure. Too much
empathy can be a bad thing, too. Carl wrote of counsellors who tried so
hard to be empathic (in order to impress themselves or others) that they
became insensitive to clients. It seems to me that if the third, fourth
and fifth necessary and sufficient conditions (congruence, unconditional
positive regard and empathic understanding on the part of the therapist)
are met, then defining the receiving of these with reference to the
client would seem to make some sense. At the same time, the second
necessary and sufficient condition is that the client is incongruent, so
we might ask what degree of denial and/or distortion of our empathic
communications is acceptable! I wonder if this links in any way with
Carl's changes to the sixth necessary and sufficient condition.
Sometimes Carl wrote of the therapist communicating unconditional
positive regard and empathy, and at other times he wrote about the
client receiving unconditional positive regard and empathy. My
understanding is that Carl preferred the client receives version on the
grounds that the therapist communicating empathic understanding could
represent a regrettable pathway towards the teaching of skills,
something he was most keen to avoid. So maybe there is no link there.
However, we could make one if we so choose. 21 What are your views on
therapist self-disclosure and the process of empathy, or empathising?
And earlier you mentioned material that arises from the hyphen in the
l-thou relationship . . . I guess that it will come as no surprise that
my views on therapist self-disclosure are much the same as those that
Carl Rogers expressed on many occasions. Let me try the kind of 'glib,
by the book' response first. Rogers said that if a therapist experienced
a personal feeling or thought persistently, then it probably belonged in
the counselling relationship. Maybe we can break this down somewhat,
though. What does 'persistent' mean? Two or three times in one session,
or over a period of sessions, or what? Rogers was very clear about
congruence not meaning that the therapist 'impulsively blurts out every
passing feeling', so there is another link with the idea of a feeling or
thought being persistent or occurring over a prolonged period of time.
So it is my view that if over a period of time (and for me that would be
perhaps two or three sessions) a feeling, thought or meaning is
persistent, then I have plenty of time to reflect and explore along the
way. Now let us assume that I have decided, either as a result of
self-reflecting or as an outcome of supervision, that this persistent
feeling or thought does belong in the therapeutic relationship. This
does not mean that I will begin the next session with it! Nor will I be
'biding my time' until it comes up! If I introduce the feeling or
thought, then the therapy is no longer client-centred and directed by
the client. If I am simply 'treading water', eager for my opportunity,
then I am not as fully present for the client as I could be. For me,
this process is more about being open to sharing this persistent feeling
or thought should it occur

Empathising in action: an inter-view

107

again naturally in the course of the therapy. I trust that if there is
any significance and relevance to my persistent feeling or thought, then
I can anticipate that it will occur again as a matter of course. I need
be in no hurry! And I am open to the feeling or thought not recurring,
too. As I think about it, I realise that what I have just said is not
entirely truthful. I think, if I'm honest, that there have been times
when a feeling or thought has been persistent within a single therapy
session, and that I have voiced such feelings or thoughts on occasions.
As I said that, I wondered if there might be a further link with
intuitive moments, or with empathic guessing or inference. If there is
persistence within one therapy session, I think that I tend to perform
an 'internal check' in order to satisfy a few questions, such as 'Is
this my stufi or the client's?' and 'Am I able to access unconditional
positive regard and empathy to the full?', and so on. If my feeling or
thought seems to be acting as a barrier to empathic understanding, then
I need to find a way to remove it. This may mean voicing it. It might
also mean that I 'make it recede' and empathy comes to the fore. I like
the visualisation of a sound recording mixing desk, with several sliding
volume controls - I can lower the volume of my own thought or feeling
and pump up the empathy! We could also look at how the therapist's
persistent feeling or thought is introduced to the counselling
relationship. Rogers said that he would usually accompany any such
communication with his own feelings or thoughts about his disclosure. I
wonder if I can think of an example of this. I know that at times I
might say something like 'I'm not at all sure where this is coming from,
yet. . .' or 'I'm a little unsure whether I've understood you
correctly - there would seem to be something around . . .'. Maybe they
are not such good examples. I feel a little reluctant to share this,
because I think that it is a real exception rather than some kind of
'rule' that I follow. I remember one client I found myself disliking
pretty intensely. This feeling persisted. In the end (and after a great
deal of agonising and exploring), I voiced something of how I did not
look forward to meeting with him. In some respects, he seemed quite
relieved to have this out in the open. Clients ain't daft! They sense
things. It transpired that on this occasion my disclosure that I was
really struggling to experience unconditional positive regard was quite
helpful both to the client and to the therapeutic relationship. My
disclosure was not said in a blaming way, and I was very careful to own
my words (while at the same time being aware that no matter how much I
own my words, that isn't necessarily how they will be heard). Carl
Rogers also felt that the owning of words was important. There is a
difference between saying T am experiencing boredom' and 'You are a
boring person', although I still think that the former is often
nevertheless heard as the latter - one excellent reason for caution
around self-disclosing, in my view. Anyway, it turned out that this
particular client had no friends at all, and was 'disliked by
everybody' - that was his problem as he saw it. So having someone
voicing their experiencing of dislike, yet in a compassionate and
respectful way (doesn't that sound strange?) actually gave him an
opportunity to explore how he was experienced by others - the real
'nitty-gritty' of why he was there in the first place. I feel
uncomfortable now. I do want to stress that this example is exceptional,
in my experience. I do not regularly experience dislike for clients and
then voice it! I have just thought of another example, but it feels
pretty exceptional again. Some years ago I recall a client who I
experienced as powerfully exuding two

108

Being empathic

things from every single pore in her body - sex and vulnerability. It
was not just sex, but 'raw sex' - a real sexy sexiness. And not just
vulnerability, but a really raw fragility. Now bearing in mind that I
was at that time being investigated under a professional complaints
procedure, I understandably felt that I had to be pretty careful about
anything I said. As a professional sanction, I was required to change to
an accredited supervisor, who was psychodynamic. 'What are you worried
about?', he said, 'I frequently say things like "I'm having sexual
thoughts about you and I'm wondering where they're coming from" - it's
all part of transference and counter-transference'. Thanks a lot - very
helpful! Fortunately, I always tape recorded sessions with this client,
and I think that this was a significant factor in my eventually 'going
for it' and voicing something of how I experienced her. Let me take a
step back a moment. One outcome for me was that I realised that a
simultaneous mixture of vulnerability and sex was a pretty powerful
cocktail for me to experience. I reflected on this a great deal,
including exploring my issues in personal therapy. I learned a great
deal about myself and grew through this process. So to an extent, I can
say that my experiencing of this client represented 'my stuff', and I
don't think that stuff that is purely mine has any place in therapy (at
least, not when I am the therapist!). On the other hand, there was
something about this client. It was she who was exuding the sex and
vulnerability, not me. It was not 'my fantasy' -I was absorbing signals
from her. So clearly there was also an element that was not simply 'my
stuff'. I felt some kind of 'charge' or 'energy' in the space between
us. I was pretty confident that she experienced this, too, although I
was less confident as to how conscious this experiencing was to her.
Anyway, in the end I 'went for it'. It was very scary for me and it felt
as if my only security was the tape recording. As it happened, it turned
out to be good. It was therapeutic. This client had repeatedly
experienced dissatisfying liaisons and constantly asked herself the
question 'Why me?'. I want to be absolutely clear here that we didn't
get into some kind of 'she was asking for it' scenario. However, what
did unfold was a real opportunity for this client to explore how the
'signals' that she emitted might have consequences for her. In other
words, she became more self-aware and as a result became more empowered,
more able to make choices. I'm not sure that I've done justice here, yet
I hope that you catch something of my meaning. You know, given that to
me both of the above examples feel exceptional, you can probably
conclude from this that only very rarely do I personally self-disclose.
Like Rogers, I believe that being congruent or 'transparent' or
'genuine' does not mean 'impulsively blurting out every passing feeling'
or that 'anything goes'. I also believe that there is an absolute,
direct link between 'transparency' and the degree to which unconditional
positive regard and empathic understanding are deeply embedded as
natural aspects of my way of being. By this I mean that impulsively
blurting out every passing feeling does not necessarily have to mean
that I am incongruent in that moment. However, to me it would mean that
I have yet to deeply incorporate unconditional positive regard and
empathy in my therapeutic way of being. It might mean that perhaps I
have more self-exploring to undertake, too. Can I think of a less
extreme example? Let us say that a client 'has a go at me', saying that
I don't really understand and, after all, that I am being paid to just
sit and listen. One of my inner reactions is of righteous indignation
and defensiveness (this is an affront to my self-concept, so I feel a
need to protect it), so I gently

Empathising in action: an inter-view

109

let the client know that truly I am trying really hard to enter their
world of feelings and personal meanings. Am I being congruent? No,
because I am denying myself access to those respectful and empathic
capacities that I hold so dear. Okay, so I respect this client and
empathise with the frustration, or anger, or feelings of hopelessness
that are being expressed. Am I being congruent now? No, because I am
denying myself access to my feelings of indignation, and they are real
enough, too. Congruence means allowing myself access to all significant
parts of me in the moment, and making choices based on this accessing.
Thus, for me, any self-disclosure involves choice on my part - what I
will choose to disclose and what I will not choose to disclose, why and
when and what . . . I'm reminded of reading a transcript of an interview
that Carl Rogers gave a month or two before he died. He was asked if he
had any regrets. He replied that as he himself was a disciplined person,
he had mistakenly assumed that other client-centred therapists were
self-disciplined practitioners, too. He realised that this was far from
always being the case, and he wished that he had placed greater emphasis
on client-centred therapy being a disciplined approach. For me, the
therapist who regularly self-discloses lacks the discipline to put the
commitment to stay within the client's frame of reference fully into
practice. Having stated that Rogers believed that any persistent feeling
or thought that arose within a therapeutic relationship probably
belonged in that relationship, this reminds me a little of applying the
Two Circles' diagram to frames of reference as we did earlier. There is
'material' that is clearly the client's, material that is clearly mine
(these two would be in the outer segments), and material that has arisen
between us (in the overlap segment, or in the hyphen of the I-thou
relationship). I feel okay about voicing anything that is the client's
or that has arisen in the space between us, yet I am more cautious about
anything that is clearly in my segment. However, if it is persistent and
I have checked it out, then I may well share it. I guess that if I were
to dredge up my most important agenda here, it would be about not
'letting it all hang out' and 'in your face' self-disclosing - this was
never what was intended by 'transparency' or congruence or authenticity
or being genuine. So I come back to the degree to which unconditional
positive regard and empathic understanding are deeply embedded, and a
self-aware way of being that does not deny or distort significant
experiencing. 22 How does your process of empathising link with what
Dave Mearns has written about configurations of self? Hmm, well, I don't
want to be disrespectful to Dave Mearns, but just to set the record
straight, Carl Rogers used the term 'configurations of self as early as
1959, so I don't think it is accurate to consider this term wholly as a
creation of Dave's! Incidentally, Carl also said that he didn't
particularly care for configurations of self theory, but that he was
fine with those who did (he stated that he was more interested in the
process of becoming than in somewhat fixed self-structures).
Nevertheless, I personally find the idea of configurations of self
pretty helpful, although whether or not the use I make of this theory is
quite what was intended I do not know. There are a couple of things that
occur to me, and one of these is an issue that I am still in the process
of working through, so it feels like unfinished processing to me.

110

Being empathic

The first issue (one that I feel is pretty sorted for me) concerns how
helpful I find looking at configurations of self in supervision,
specifically with a view to exploring the nature of my unconditional
positive regard and empathic understanding. An example that I have used
before is that of the client who self-injures. In this instance, there
is a 'client self' who is doing the cutting, a 'client self' who is
being cut, and a 'client self' who is 'overseeing' the action between
the 'hurter' and the 'hurt'. Once a self (or a configuration of self)
has been symbolised, it becomes a self-as-object - something identified,
something named - something that can be broken down into its component
parts and examined and explored. The self-as-process is doing the
exploring. I find it helpful in supervision to explore the degree to
which I am engaging with each of these aspects of the client's whole.
For instance, I might discover that I feel somehow 'seduced' into
empathising with the victim and the hurt, and as a consequence I may be
neglecting the hurter or the self-as-process. alternatively, I might
believe that the hurter, the perpetrator, is more in need of the core
conditions if change is to be generated, so the hurt and the processor
become neglected. Or I might be so in awe of the client's motivation to
change that I engage with the processor and neglect the hurter and the
hurt. Whatever, what I appreciate is the opportunity a framework or
strategy, if you like - to explore the depth and extent of my engagement
with clients. And if I discover that I am neglecting certain
'configurations of self in a client's self-structure, I can also explore
whether or not there might be links with configurations within my own
self-concept. So I do find the notion of configurations of self very
helpful as a strategy or process that I can use to try to maximise the
extent to which the whole of me is open to the whole of the client,
including maximising the unconditional nature of my positive regard and
striving to ensure empathy with and understanding of all significant
aspects of the client. The second issue I'm not so sure about. I'm not
so sure about it because it feels maybe directive, or it seems as if the
therapist is taking the lead, or something, yet I don't want these
thoughts to get too much in the way of exploring the issues. Let me
stray into an anecdote. There is a large international gathering of
personcentred people. Some are known to all (the 'big names', the 'A
list'), others are known to many (the 'B list'), some are known to some
(the 'C list', the 'minor celebrities'), and yet others are not known at
all, or certainly did not feel known (the 'D list'). Some people were
very evident - visible and speaking out. Others were somewhat hidden in
the outer rings of the circles, saying nothing. I asked if Venya was
present. Venya had come from Russia and we had exchanged emails but had
never met 'in the flesh', so to speak. We connected. I later approached
several people and engaged with them, and as a consequence they engaged
with me and moved on to engage with others. There was another person
from Poland, and I recall saying something like T realise that this is
my need and I don't want to pressure you. I want to say that I feel I'm
really missing out through not hearing you speak'. This person then
spoke for some time - and in part expressed gratitude for feeling
welcomed for the first time. I thought about these experiences, and
wondered whether such community processes might in any way be relevant
to experiencing a group of configurations of self - a community of
selves that make up a whole person. If I think about clients, there are
certain self-aspects that are equivalent to 'A list celebrities' - being
very visible and outspoken. There are also hidden, coy or silent aspects
of self, and

Empathising in action: an inter-view

111

often a good many in between. Might these (or some of these) hidden or
silent selves appreciate some kind of recognition or welcome? Might
these selves be wondering whether or not it is safe to come out and
play, and yearn for an invitation? I'm reminded of another international
person-centred gathering at which the first few hours were spent
negotiating seating arrangements. Many people engaged meaningfully with
this (it triggered all kinds of feelings and thoughts about inclusion
and exclusion, power and equality, for instance). Others tolerated the
process, and two social workers who were interested in the personcentred
approach left within the first 24 hours of what was a five-day meeting.
Why? Because they didn't know the rules. They didn't know what to
expect. Most of all, they didn't feel either acknowledged or welcomed.
Could this apply to configurations of self within an individual's
self-concept? If an aspect of self feels neglected, ignored or
unwelcome, might it just go away? I'm really not sure about this one. To
welcome a self that is barely visible feels somewhat directive - no, it
doesn't feel somewhat directive, it feels directive. Welcoming a barely
visible self could be received by the client as ignoring, sabotaging or
hijacking the self in full flow at that moment, for instance, and it is
my choice to do so. Yet just before he died, Rogers reiterated (here I'm
thinking of the chapter he wrote with Nat Raskin for Current
Psychotherapies) that from time to time he would tentatively venture his
sensing of feelings and personal meanings of which the client seemed
only dimly aware, or even complely unaware - 'edge of consciousness'
material. And it seems to me that such 'hidden' selves could be regarded
as 'lurking at the edge of awareness'. I don't want to come across as
too patronising or arrogant here, but I can honestly say that over the
years my trust in venturing such tentative 'feelers' (tentative
tentacles!) has grown somewhat. I have followed my client's lead when I
have done so, and, whatever it sounds like, it has usually proved to be
both relevant and helpful. Perhaps I should also mention that, fairly
often in fact, clients identify their own 'configurations of self and
want to explore them, sometimes also wanting to explore the nature of
the inter-relationships between their selves. That is okay they sing, I
accompany. I want to return to a more specific focus on my process of
empathising, and say something about the links between empathic
understanding, congruence and unconditional positive regard. 23 What,
then, do you see as being the relationship between empathic
understanding and congruence and unconditional positive regard? I have a
dim recollection that I said I would answer the question on therapist
selfdisclosure in two ways, and only answered it in the glib one. Maybe
here is my opportunity to give the other version. Let us assume that we
are right at the start of a training course in client-centred therapy.
Let us also assume for the moment that there is not a stunningly high
degree of unconditional positive regard or empathic understanding being
experienced or communicated - otherwise why the need to embark on a
training programme? Now for me this does not have to mean that course
members are necessarily being incongruent. However, it may well be that
unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding are not as
deeply embedded as fundamental and integral aspects of the self as they
could be. For instance, if I respond to your

112

Being empathic

communication with a 'This is how it is for me'-type response, this does
not have to mean that I am denying or distorting anything. My hope would
be that as person-centred learning progresses, so unconditional positive
regard and empathic understanding do become more deeply embedded as
integral, fundamental and authentic aspects of the therapist. As this
happens, so disclosure to clients from the internal frame of reference
of the therapist becomes less and less likely. In other words, I am more
likely to respond to your disclosure with an authentic attempt at
letting you know that I am respectfully striving to understand your
world of feelings and meanings. Another way of saying this is that
unless empathic understanding is authentic, it is less likely to be of
value. At the same time, Rogers stated that the best way to communicate
unconditional positive regard is via empathy. 24 Do you see each of the
core conditions as having different relevance or importance to different
phases of the therapeutic process? Gosh - yes and no, I suppose! Now why
did I say that? I guess that the 'Yes' feels kind of heady - something
about clients entering therapy being vulnerable, anxious and defensive.
The theory - and my experience as both therapist and client - is that
the client's receiving of unconditional positive regard serves to
dissolve conditions of worth and serves to dissipate defensiveness. Very
often it seems to me that unconditional positive regard features very
highly in the early stages of therapy. Yet very often therapy moves into
a real searching for meaning, and here maybe empathy and understanding
feel somehow more significant. Neither respect nor empathy are likely to
be of much value if they lack authenticity, so I guess I'd see
congruence as vital throughout. Yet I have a strong 'No' response, too.
This is based on the artificiality of breaking down the core conditions
into component parts. I don't want to lose sight of the whole person.
although we break things down into manageable portions in order to
digest them, let us not forget that a spark plug sure ain't the whole
engine, and the car won't run if we don't put the motor back together
again! So if we do take things apart in order to examine them, let's not
forget to put them back together. 25 How do you empathise with silence,
or the client who says very little? Is it true that the client-centred
therapist should never be the one to break a silence? How do I empathise
with silence? Well, as I have said, there's far more to the universe of
communication than just the solar system of the spoken word. Thus
although in silence there is no verbal communicating, there might still
be some paraverbal communication (such as sighing, or specific fast or
slow or deep or shallow breathing) and lots of non-verbal communication.
So I guess that mostly I use my eyes. For instance, facial expressions
can tell us a great deal. I know that sometimes I shift my body shape to
approximate to that of the client's in the hope that this will give me
some insight into their possible sensations. Sometimes I might actually
shift, and sometimes I just imagine sitting that way and what it would
feel like. Sometimes I also stare at my hands or imagine my face being
set in the same way. I don't have any rules or set techniques other than
to strive to

Empathising in action: an inter-view

113

get into the client's world of feelings and meanings in whatever way
feels appropriate at the time. I recall someone asking Carl Rogers about
the client who seemingly doesn't say very much, and he replied that most
clients don't say very much! He reckoned that most clients say only a
few things of central or deep significance in a therapy session. Some
surround these significant disclosures with many other words, and some
surround them with silence. Where does The client-centred therapist
should never be the one to break a silence' come from? Was it something
you were told on your skills course? My guess is that this was justified
on the grounds of not intruding into the client's space or something.
Yes? Okay. 'Empathic guessing' and 'empathic inference' have been
referred to a few times already. Rogers wrote about these in (among
other places) a chapter called 'The Silent Young Man', and in the
transcripts you will see that Carl Rogers broke just about every
silence. So wherever the idea came from that client-centred therapists
don't break silences, it didn't come from Rogers! I guess that not being
intrusive would be based on a notion of respect for a client's space,
which on the face of it sounds okay. Yet venturing an empathic guess
could be respectful, too. Perhaps there could be something about
maintaining and enhancing the 'two persons in contact' element through
empathic inference as well. I would estimate that I probably speak first
after half or more of the silences that I meet with in therapy, and
almost always with some attempt at empathy - either empathic
understanding if the non-verbal and paraverbal signals are fairly clear
(for instance, I might say something like 'You're feeling really fidgety
right now'), or with an empathic guess if the signals are less clear.
Very occasionally I might even self-disclose! I have sometimes said
something like 'I really can't sense with any accuracy what's going on
for you right now, but I am interested if or when you're ready to speak
. . .'. There's something about this how to empathise that I feel
uncomfortable with, at least sometimes. I think that this is about
feeling okay with the core conditions being stipulated - it being
necessary (and sufficient) to be congruent, respectful and empathic -
yet feeling ill at ease when it comes to stipulating how. So the fact
that Rogers broke nearly all silences doesn't have to mean that you
should do so, too. And the fact that I break half or more of the
silences doesn't mean that this has to be an objective for you. So by
all means be authentically and respectfully empathic, but be so in your
own way. 26 Do you ever not experience empathy, or experience a loss of
empathy, and if so, what do you do about it? Who, me? Of course not,
never! Yes, of course I do. Maybe I can reframe the question to ask why
I might not experience empathy, or why I might lose it. The first
thought that occurs to me is that I might lose empathy if one of my own
thoughts, feelings or sensations is getting in the way, in which case I
need to deal with it. I have already talked about this - maybe whatever
it is recedes as I pump up the empathy volume, or maybe I voice
something. I find it more difficult to sustain empathy if I'm extremely
tired or distracted, so I need to take care of myself if I'm striving to
be fully present for clients. It seems to me that a crucial factor here
is therapist self-awareness. Sometimes loss of empathy feels quite
sudden, a kind of surprised realisation - 'where did

114

Being empathic

that go?'. In such instances it feels quite easy to become empathic once
again. I simply refocus on striving to sense what the client is
experiencing in this moment. At other times there is a kind of creeping,
growing awareness of feeling less connected with either the client or my
empathy, or with both, although again internal monitoring and accessing
feels like the crucial factor in reconnecting. Then there is the
question of how to reconnect. Very often it really is as simple as
turning my attention to what the client is feeling and what meanings
might be present in the moment. There has been something in the
background here that feels really embarrassing - 'aw shucks' and all
that. I have a framed picture of Carl Rogers on my wall, and sometimes
when I realise that I need to reconnect, I glance at it. This feels
embarrassing because maybe it sounds like hero worship or something
'sad'. Well, I clearly have great admiration for Carl Rogers, but that's
not it. The picture acts as a kind of instant trigger for me. To me, the
picture symbolises what Carl stood for, like the necessity and
sufficiency of the core conditions. So one quick glance and bam -- it
all comes flooding back! I believe that I can undertake this instant
reconnecting with my capacity to strive to be the core conditions with
or without a picture - it just happens to be there and it helps. I guess
that almost anything could be used to symbolise the core conditions - a
plant, the clock, the box of tissues, my own awareness, my mind . . . So
maybe something common to all of us is an awareness that empathy has
been lost or is fading. However, how we reconnect with our empathic
selves and our clients might be more personal. 27 Isn't there something
about setting aside your own feelings and thoughts or, better still,
shouldn't your baggage be left outside the room? Not for me, no. To me,
that doesn't make much sense. You look taken aback. Okay, let me try and
explain. First of all I'm not entirely happy with the word 'baggage', as
it doesn't exactly feel like unconditional acceptance - rather, it feels
somewhat derogatory and dismissive. I'm sure we wouldn't dismiss a
client's baggage so readily, so maybe we can afford ourselves the same
respect that we offer to clients. Secondly, how is it possible to speak
of therapists being whole persons in the relationship if they leave
chunks of themselves outside? I'm reminded of the earlier theme about
client-centred discipline, too - the discipline to live out my stated
commitment to striving to be the therapist conditions, that includes
staying within the client's frame of reference as much as I am able to.
also I wrote a piece relatively recently in which I came up with the
idea of an empathy muscle. Don't use your empathy muscle and it will
atrophy and wither. Use and exercise your empathy muscle regularly and
it will easily be strong enough to carry baggage with no problem. I
don't mean to sound too abrupt, but it's late and I'm feeling a bit worn
out. As we only have a few minutes left, I'd like to make copies of the
article on 'Setting Aside Or Erupting?' available to those who would
like to explore this theme further, which might make it more acceptable
to move quickly on. Would that be okay?

Empathising in action: an inter-view

115

28 I'm really interested in the use of imagery and metaphor. Do you use
them? Yes. I realise that I responded with a spontaneous and definite
'yes', yet it occurs to me that my use of imagery, analogy and metaphor
is something that has very much grown over the years. I guess there
might even have been a time when I didn't use them at all. Maybe I've
grown in confidence, or something. Maybe I've just grown! Or I am
growing . . . One thing I love is the diversity of communication
available to us. Why not exploit all of the rich ways of communicating
at our disposal? 29 Can you give any examples? Okay, I can think of two
examples from the last couple of days that I feel quite pleased with!
Now that's interesting - why do I say 'pleased'? I guess it might sound
as if I feel smug about having 'done my job well' or something, but
that's not it. It might be part of it, but I think it's much, much more
to do with feeling pleased with the reaction from the clients - like
their response to me let me know that I really was with them in their
world, and that feels really enriching, meaningful (to both of us) and
worthwhile. Anyway, one client is a shop worker, and she had described
(several sessions previously) how she would be at work and her mother
would appear peering pleadingly through the front window, and just how
difficult the client found this. This week she was reflecting on how her
relationship with herself in relationship to her mother had changed over
the course of her therapy. I recall saying something like: It doesn't
feel like there are shutters or walls between you any more. It feels
more like the glass shop window. Sometimes you just wave at her because
you are very busy, and that feels okay now. Sometimes you are busy
serving someone else, and it feels okay for mom to wait in the queue.
Hell, sometimes you even shut up shop - and even that feels okay now,
too. The client became quite excited - it seemed as if I had captured
her feelings and meanings in a way that really made sense to her. It
felt right to her. Now if I try to access my own process of empathising,
then it seems clear to me that although my mind wasn't lost in words and
experiences my client had talked about several weeks before, my
concentrated focus on her world as she experienced it clearly involved
the specific area of my memory as it pertained to that client, and I
could readily access this part of me. It feels a bit like being primed
again - when I am with a particular client, I am primarily modulated to
access memories that relate to my knowledge of that client. Of course I
can access other memories if need be, yet they are maybe further removed
from my immediate experiencing. So it feels as if when the client
communicates to me, what I absorb 'floats around' in my knowing of that
client, and sometimes connects with something that seems to have meaning
from within her own experience that I have absorbed and retained. I
realise that I am speaking off the cuff, but it feels as if something
like that was going on within me. As I was speaking, I was thinking
ahead, too, and it occurs to me that my second example is different, and
that feels good and interesting. It feels good because it

116

Being empathic

illustrates diversity, and it interests me because this time the
metaphor came from within me, not from my recall of the client's
experience. This second client had been talking about how in some ways
she resented her husband and felt disappointed because he didn't really
understand her. She also spoke of how she didn't want to expose herself
fully to him because he might feel hurt, so she was protecting his
feelings. At one point (and I'm aware that this is only a small part of
our total communication) I said something like: It feels a bit like a
question in a maths paper - on the one hand you give him the numbers and
the equals sign, but on the other hand you omit the plus, minus,
multiply and divide signs because he might feel hurt by them. Then you
feel disappointed when he doesn't come up with the right answer . . .
You know, as I said those words just then they sounded very judgemental!
It really wasn't like that at all at the time, with the client. I'm
feeling defensive! In context, my communication was fine, and the client
responded with something along the lines of 'Wow! What a brilliant way
of putting it! Yes, that's it exactly!'. And you know, I feel pretty
confident that this enhanced awareness will make a real difference, if
only at times, to the client's experiencing of herself and the way that
she relates to her partner. Now if I think about what my processing was
at the time, it feels as if I was again trying my hardest to absorb all
that she was communicating, and again what I absorbed was 'floating
around' my mind seeking some kind of referent. What emerged might have
been from me, but it was very much related to trying to sense and feel
how the client experienced herself and her relationship with her
partner. I've just remembered another example. I said to a client (I'll
call her Jane for now) something like: It feels like you're in a tug of
war with yourself. On one end of the rope there's all these big, hefty
Janes and at the other end one tiny Jane. Yet somehow Baby Jane seems
able to hold her ground. This had real meaning for the client, and it
seemed to really capture 'where she was at'. Anyway, yes, I think that
when it seems to be an accurate way of communicating empathic
understanding, I make use of metaphor and imagery quite a lot. It occurs
to me that the examples I have given don't quite do justice to the full
process, as more often than not there is a follow-up to the use of
metaphor. Even if, from the client's reaction, I am confident that I
have accurately sensed the feeling, I need to determine whether
('perception check') I have also caught the meaning accurately, and vice
versa. As with most if not all empathic communications, clients seem to
take my words and then self-reference, and if we have established a
therapeutic working alliance, they will feel free to come back with 'No,
that's not quite it. . . . It's more like . . .'. Indeed, they may even
choose to ignore my offering if it is not relevant or appropriate to
them, in which case I believe that they nevertheless very much
experience me as striving my hardest to sense how they experience
themselves and their world, which is therapeutic in itself.
Incidentally, I also believe that they feel safe and secure enough in
our relationship to know that I will not take umbrage if they do ignore
my metaphor.

Empathising in action: an inter-view

117

In summary, I guess that the congruent and respectful use of metaphor
(by which I mean that I am not simply using a technique, and am humble
and tentative enough not to be adamant about appropriateness) is one of
many effective ways of letting a client know that I really am committed
to trying to empathically sense their feelings and meanings. 30 One last
question? On the subject of being worn out, you spoke a while back about
empathy being hard work. How do you avoid burnout? Funnily enough,
although I hear quite a few people talking about it, the prospect of
'burnout' is not something that bothers me personally. And you know, as
I think about it, the people who talk about burnout tend to be teachers,
lecturers, social workers, and so on - I don't recall too many
counsellors talking about it. Maybe right now could be a good example.
I've been talking for quite a while and I feel pretty tired, yet I also
feel a sense of energy because I have enjoyed engaging with you, I have
enjoyed and appreciated your engaging with me, and I also hope that I'll
get some useful material out of this session! So I guess I'd say I'm
something like 80% tired, fatigued or exhausted (because I've talked a
lot and given out a lot) and 20% energised, invigorated or excited. When
I have been with clients it usually feels different - perhaps nearer to
fifty-fifty. There's something about being empathic (and congruent, and
respectful) that is simultaneously draining but also edifying, or
nourishing. It is draining because I put a great deal of effort into it.
It is energising because it really is a privilege and honour to be
allowed or welcomed into the private world of feelings and meanings of
another person - I grow through this, too. So I experience both fatigue
and exhilaration at one and the same time. It reminds me a little of
what Rogers said about entropy and syntropy. Entropy is the ongoing
decay of the universe, and there has been a long-held belief that ever
since the Big Bang our universe has been dying. Yet ongoing trends
towards growth, development and ever-increasing complexity have been
acknowledged, too, and this is syntropy. So maybe the effort I put into
empathising is like entropy, and the privilege and personal growth is
like syntropy. I thank you all.

Chapter 4

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions For
what we are about to receive In Chapters 1, 2 and 3 we have to some
degree looked at what empathic empathic understanding is, in greater
length have looked at what empathy is not, and have shared an interview
about the process of empathising. Perhaps we can now place empathy back
in the context of the necessary and sufficient conditions for
therapeutic personality change as a whole. Over the years, there has
been much debate over just how many conditions there actually are -
four, five, six, seven or eight. For instance, there would be only four
conditions if conditions one and two (contact and client incongruence)
were to be seen as pre-conditions, and only five conditions if condition
one was regarded as a pre-condition. If either 'spirituality' or
'intuition' were to be seen as an additional condition, there would be
seven in all, and if both were to be added, there would be eight. As
Carl Rogers spoke of 'spirituality' (a term he viewed with some caution)
as falling within conditions four and five and of 'intuition' as falling
(mostly) within the realms of empathic understanding, these are not
treated as separate or additional conditions in this book. although
there is truth in the statement that Carl Rogers sometimes wrote of
condition one and sometimes of conditions one and two being
pre-conditions in some senses, he nevertheless retained them within the
entire version - likewise here. although Although there is, as we shall
see, a logical rationale for the conditions appearing in the order that
they do, it is worth remembering the rich interface between them. Just
as Natalie Rogers was fearful of the essence of the I-thou relationship
being lost through a nit-picking focus on minutiae, let us retain the
essence of a client-centred relationship as a complex whole as we strive
to place empathic understanding back within the context of this
therapeutic interweave.

Empathy and contact I was trying to think about myself as a therapist in
the therapeutic hour - as I seem to myself, and as I seem to be seen by
others. I think one of the outstanding things is that I'm very much
present to the client. I'm not sure entirely what I mean by that, but
the main thing that's going on in me is my concern with, and attention
to, and listening to the client. I'm very much present; nothing else
matters much. That's why I can do a demonstration interview - it doesn't
matter how many other people are around; for me there's just this one
person that exists. What develops is a feeling of connectedness, and
this is often very strongly felt by the client as well as by me, as
though

120

Being empathic

there is some kind of a real bond between us. That grows out of the fact
that I do enter so fully into the client's personal world. (Rogers and
Russell 2002: p. 280) We shall now take a brief sidetrack of sorts. In
his 1957 paper 'The necessary and sufficient conditions of
psychotherapeutic personality change' (Rogers 1957a), Carl used the term
psychological contact, and in his 1959 chapter 'A theory of therapy,
personality, and interpersonal relationships, as developed in the
clientcentered framework' (Rogers 1959) he used the term contact. There
has since been much academic debate as to why the word 'psychological'
was dropped. Well, it wasn't. For the sake of historical accuracy if for
no other reason, let it be known that Carl Rogers wrote the 1959
chapter: much earlier than when it was published. I think it was written
about 1953. (Frick 1989: p. 90) So the 1959 version was penned before
the 1957 paper. It was the slow process between authorship and
publication of a chapter in a book (to which other psychologists were
also contributing chapters) that meant that the 1959 version appeared
after the 1957 paper was presented and published in a journal. Thus the
debate about Carl 'dropping' the word 'psychological' makes no sense at
all - the more accurate detail is that he added the word! 'In which
case', you might ask, 'why did Carl Rogers add the word "psychological"
to his definition of two persons being in contact?'. The answer is that
no one really seems to know for sure, although some speculate that it
was because the 1957 paper was prepared for the Journal of Consulting
Psychology! The main reference used in this book is the 1959 version,
which Carl himself said: was a very strenuous effort on my part to make
some sense out of all my professional experience and personal experience
up to that point. (Frick 1989: p. 90) although in the definitions that
follow the use of the term 'psychological' would seem, in context, to
make sense, sometimes for the sake of brevity and to avoid needless
repetition only the word 'contact' is used. The meaning in each instance
remains the same. Look - no couch! The counselling process begins before
therapist and client actually meet. In my own practice, for instance,
all would-be clients receive a leaflet that explains something about me
together with a basic overview of client-centred therapy. Rogers said:
In the kind of therapeutic approach that makes sense to me, the more the
individual knows of the climate I want to create, and of the principles
that I believe to be operative, the more intelligently he can
participate in the experience of therapy . . . For me, that is one
reason for feeling that it is a more potent or widely useable theory:
that it is not destroyed by people becoming aware of what is happening.
(Rogers 1989: pp. 124-5)

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

121

Now imagine having a time machine and travelling back to the era when
clientcentred therapy was first being formulated. What might have been
the norms at that time? Imagine that you arrive for your first
appointment to be instructed by your analyst to lie: Tve always found
the notion of sitting behind a person who's lying on a couch and can't
see \[me\] somewhat repugnant . . . I guess I felt this way because of
many of the psychological connotations: I'm the expert; I'll observe
what's going on in you, but I don't want to be present as a person; you
adopt an unusual posture because this is now a very unusual situation,
and it should produce all kinds of material you don't understand. all of
that seemed a bit repugnant to me . . . (Rogers and Russell 2002:
p. 246) In client-centred therapy, however, even before the counsellor
and the client meet, the therapist believes that: the opportunities for
new learning are maximized when we approach the individual without a
preconceived set of categories which we expect him to fit. (Rogers 1951:
p. 497) We probably take it pretty much for granted that we both sit, at
even heights, face to face, yet this in itself is a statement about
power sharing even as contact begins. Therapist values, attitudes and
beliefs have great significance both prior to and at the beginning of a
therapeutic relationship, for it: can be initiated by one party, without
waiting for the other to be ready. (Rogers 1961: p. 336) The therapist
needs to be ready.

Look, listen and learn! Sitting upright, face to face, at an even height
communicates the therapist's respect for equality - the counsellor is
not in sole control or in a superior position. This 'simple' or basic
first impression gathers substance as the client-centred therapist
refrains from taking a client case history, engaging in assessment or
diagnostic procedures, or otherwise testing the client in some way. Nor
is the therapist firing questions at the client. Rather, the
client-centred therapist focuses their attention and their respectfully
empathic capacities on striving to sense the client's world of feelings
and meanings: Both client and therapist are implicitly directed to fix
their attention on the client. This means that the therapist
characteristically looks, listens, and otherwise attends to the client;
the client characteristically looks into space or at some object in the
room so as to focus on himself. The client, then, is in the spotlight,
directed by the total situation and the power of the therapist's steady
attentiveness to be conscious of himself. This kind of attention to the
client and waiting for his initiative . . . energizes the situation, is
an enormously powerful living out of the

122

Being empathic

belief in the organismic self, and casts the client steadily back on
himself. (Barton 1974: p. 186) Thus statements such as 'This reminds me
of or 'It seems to me' or 'Have you considered . . .?' or T think t h a
t . . .' or 'This is clearly . . .' are not characteristic of
client-centred therapy, in part because they shape the relationship
around the therapist. Rather, the client-centred therapist guards
against external intrusions into the client's world of feelings and
meanings - the underlying message is that you and only you matter to me.

Relationship In actual fact, Carl Rogers and his colleagues initially
defined this first necessary and sufficient condition as neither
'contact' nor 'psychological contact' - the term used was
'relationship'. However, this soon changed to 'two persons are in
contact' due to the term relationship being experienced as too open to
confusion and misunderstanding. For instance, some people seemed to
interpret 'relationship' as meaning deep relationship, or good
relationship, or therapeutic relationship, whereas: The present term has
been chosen to signify more clearly that this is the least or minimum
experience which could be called a relationship. (Rogers 1959: p. 207)
Carl Rogers never entirely abandoned the term relationship, though. In
his later years, he often referred to Martin Buber and the notion of an
'I-thou' relationship: When there is a real trendless immediacy in the
relationship, when you're aware of nothing but this person and he's
aware of nothing but you, and there is a deep sense of communication and
unity between the two of you, that's the thing I refer to as I-Thou
relationship. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 25) What, then, of such issues
as age, gender, race, and social status? Rogers wrote that: . . . it
would appear that such elements as the sex, appearance, or mannerisms of
the counselor play a lesser role than might be supposed. When the
counselor is favorably perceived, it is as someone with warmth and
interest for the client, someone with understanding. (Rogers 1951:
p. 69) In effect, the therapist striving, and achieving to a significant
degree, to be the 'core' client-centred conditions is more significant
than social factors. When looking at empathy we saw that our own frames
of reference contain within them counterparts to the perceptions of
others, which enabled Carl to say: As human beings trying to cope with
life, to understand it and learn from it, we have vast pools of
commonality to draw on. It makes no difference that I am an older white
middle-class American male, and you may be yellow or black or communist
or Israeli or Arab or Russian

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

123

or young or female. If we are openly willing to share, then there is a
large area in which understanding is possible. (Rogers 1978: p. 122)
Bearing in mind that the sixth necessary and sufficient condition is
that the client perceives, at least to a minimal degree, the
unconditional positive regard and Empathic understanding of the
therapist, it made sense to Rogers to define 'relationship' in minimal
terms, thereby avoiding assumptions and value judgements about good,
deep, and so on (and note, incidentally, the interconnection between
conditions one and six). Returning to, clarifying and expanding on this,
Carl wrote: This difference may be quite minimal and in fact not
immediately apparent to an observer. Thus it might be difficult to know
whether a catatonic patient perceives the therapist's presence as making
a difference to him. But it is almost certain that at some physiological
level he does sense or subceive this difference. (Rogers and Truax 1967:
p. 99) Two fundamental characteristics of relationship or
(psychological) contact were deemed to be safety and (especially as the
encounter progresses) free communication. How, then, might a safe and
free relationship come about? And this basic security is not something
the client believes because he is told, not something about which he
convinces himself logically, it is something he experiences, with his
own sensory and visceral equipment. (Rogers: 1951: p. 209) Rogers wrote:
We know that if the therapist holds within himself attitudes of deep
respect and full acceptance for this client as he is, and similar
attitudes toward the client's potentialities for dealing with himself
and his situations; if these attitudes are suffused with a sufficient
warmth, which transforms them into the most profound type of liking or
affection for the core of the person; and if a level of communication is
reached so that the client can begin to perceive that the therapist
understands the feelings he is experiencing and accepts them at the full
depth of that understanding, then we may be sure that the process is
already initiated. (Rogers 1961: pp. 74-5) Carl gave us several models
of client-centred therapeutic process (see Chapter 5). In the
'seven-stage' version he stated that when in the first stage a client is
unlikely to enter therapy, as there is a fixity and remoteness to the
client's experiencing and an unwillingness to communicate the self
(communicating instead only externalised feelings and meanings). In such
a condition, clients do not embrace, recognise or own feelings and
meanings due to their rigid selfconcepts (rigid 'personal constructs' or
'configurations of self) and, as a defence, 'close and communicative
relationships are construed as dangerous' and internal

124

Being empathic

awareness is blocked. The client therefore does not experience in
awareness any desire to change: In a deeply defended person . . . change
is difficult to bring about. Change tends to occur more in the person
who is already somewhat open-minded and searching in his approach to
life. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 73) (Again, then, we can see the
potential in open-minded seekers prior to them even entering therapy.)
For the deeply defended client, life tends to be perceived through the
past rather than the present (so there is little or no 'immediacy'), and
thinking is 'black and white' rather than gradational. Everything is
everyone else's problem. It is unlikely that persons will either enter
or benefit from therapy at this stage: We seem to know very little about
how to provide the experience of being received for the person in the
first stage, but it is occasionally achieved in play or group therapy
where the person can be exposed to a receiving climate, without himself
having to take any initiative, for a long enough time for him to
experience himself as received. (Rogers 1961: p. 133) Carl wondered,
very tentatively, whether it might be more helpful to try to establish
contact with very young clients, or 'extremely immature or regressed'
people with conditional rather than unconditional positive regard: It
seems clear that some immature or regressed clients may perceive a
conditional caring as constituting more acceptance than an unconditional
caring. (Rogers 1989: pp. 14-15) Readers interested in stage-one
characteristics might find some of the more recent work on pre-therapy
helpful, such as Pre-Therapy by Garry Prouty, Dion van Werde and Mariis
Portner (Prouty et al 2002). On several occasions Rogers pointed out
that the condition that two persons are in contact could in fact be
considered a pre-condition, for without this engagement in a
relationship the predictions about establishing a therapeutic
relationship that in turn would have predictable consequences in terms
of personality change would be unlikely to follow. In terms of
establishing whether or not contact exists: The simplest method of
determination involves simply the awareness of both client and
therapist. If each is aware of being in personal or psychological
contact with the other, then this condition is met . . . The first
condition of therapeutic change is such a simple one that perhaps it
should be labeled an assumption or a precondition in order to set it
apart from those that follow. Without it, however, the remaining items
would have no meaning, and that is the reason for including it. (Rogers
1957a: pp. 95-103)

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

125

This could be restated using the 'If-then' formula of client-centred
theory, wherein necessary and sufficient condition one is the first 'if.
If two people make a perceived difference to one another, then the
actualising of a potential becomes possible. (This formulaic version
would continue 'and if one person is incongruent and if the other is
congruently respectful and empathic, and if conditions four and five are
perceived by the client in this relationship, then a client-centred
therapeutic relationship ensues, and if this relationship exists, then
predictable outcomes in client personality change occur'.) Carl Rogers
wrote that only when clients experience themselves as fully received can
they move on to stage two, wherein expression (albeit about non-self
topics) begins to flow: I believe I can state this assumed condition in
one word. . . . I shall assume that the client experiences himself as
being fully received. By this I mean that whatever his feelings - fear,
despair, insecurity, anger; whatever his mode of expression - silence,
gestures, tears or words; whatever he finds himself being in this
moment, he senses that he is psychologically received, just as he is, by
the therapist. There is implied in this term the concept of being
understood, empathically, and the concept of acceptance. It is also well
to point out that it is the client's experience of this condition which
makes it optimal, not merely the fact of its existence in the therapist.
(Rogers 1961: pp. 130-31) In stage two the client still externalises and
feels little or no personal responsibility. Feelings may be exhibited
but are disowned or are seen as past objects, rigid constructs are seen
as facts, differentiation of feelings and meanings is limited or
over-generalised; and, although contradictions may be expressed, they
are not seen by the client as contradictions. If communication is not
blocked that is, if the client again feels fully received - then there
is movement towards stage three. Having stated that one aspect of a
client being received is free communication, Carl Rogers believed that a
major factor in impeding interpersonal communication 'is our very
natural tendency to judge, to evaluate, to approve or disapprove . . .'.
This tendency becomes more sharp or 'heightened' when feelings and
emotions are deeply involved: So the stronger our feelings the more
likely it is that there will be no mutual element in the communication.
There will just be two ideas, two feelings, two judgments, missing each
other in psychological space . . . This tendency to react to any
emotionally meaningful statement by forming an evaluation of it from our
own point of view is, I repeat, the major barrier to interpersonal
communication. (Rogers 1961: pp. 331--4) Here, then, is a direct link
between contact (or relationship, or receiving) and empathic
understanding, for Rogers gives us his solution to this major
communication barrier: Real communication occurs, and this evaluative
tendency is avoided, when we listen with understanding. (Rogers 1961:
pp. 331-4)

126

Being empathic

although writing about group tensions at the time, there might
nevertheless be a link with the client-centred therapist striving to
receive clients fully and the place of supervision, personal therapy and
peer networking, for Rogers stated that a third party can be of great
help. If the third party is able to be non-evaluative and listen with
understanding, like the supervisor clarifying the therapist's views and
attitudes with an empathic acceptance, then the therapist will
experience this acceptant understanding and be less prone to
exaggeration, less defensive, less critical and more self-accepting. As
a result the therapist is less inhibited about openly exploring how best
to get as close as possible to being the therapist conditions. The
situational context is that clients arrive for therapy with an
expectation that this wise healer will be of help. They feel distressed
at what they perceive as their inability to cope with life. What have
clients reported as being helpful in terms of the establishment of
contact (or the beginning of a therapeutic relationship)? How might
clients feel received? Rogers found that two words summarised this,
namely impersonal and secure. How could a client-centred therapist be
experienced as impersonali Carl clarified as follows: This is obviously
not intended to mean that the relationship was cold or disinterested. It
appears to be the client's attempt to describe this unique experience in
which the person of the counselor - the counselor as an evaluating,
reacting person with needs of his own - is so clearly absent. . . the
relationship is experienced as a one-way affair in a very unique sense.
The whole relationship is composed of the self of the client, the
counselor being depersonalized for purposes of therapy into being 'the
client's other self. It is this warm willingness on the part of the
counselor to lay his own self temporarily aside, in order to enter into
the experience of the client, which makes the relationship a completely
unique one, unlike anything in the client's previous experience. (Rogers
1951: p. 208) Clearly, in 1951 Carl took the view that therapist focus
was entirely towards the client. While the construct of congruence
developed over the years to include greater emphasis on therapist
self-awareness too, Rogers never lost (as we shall see) his
'disciplined' attention to the client (usually to the extent of
elimination of awareness of even an audience of hundreds). Turning now
to clients feeling safe and secure, Carl Rogers highlighted the
importance of all three therapist conditions. With reference to
unconditional positive regard, he maintained that a 'thoroughly
consistent acceptance' was not at all linked with approval. Rather, it
is an absolute assurance that the therapist will not evaluate,
interpret, probe or foist personal opinion upon clients. As a
consequence, clients feel less need to be defensive or to pretend
anything in order to please their counsellor. Acceptance may be
experienced by the client as supportive, yet it is not the therapist's
intent to offer support. The therapist is alongside the client, not
pushing from behind or towing - he or she is 'permitting' clients to
choose any direction that they wish to take. The client does not feel
that the therapist Tikes' him, in the usual sense of a biased and
favourable judgment, and he is often not sure . . .

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

127

whether he likes the therapist . . . There is simply no evidence upon
which such a judgment could be based. But that this is a secure
experience, in which the self is deeply respected, that this is an
experience in which there need be no fear of threat or attack - not even
of the subtlest sort - of this the client gradually becomes sure.
(Rogers 1951: pp. 208-9) However, Carl linked client feelings of
security in the therapeutic relationship with empathy, too: It is this
which provides the ultimate in psychological safety, when added to the
other two. If I say that I 'accept' you, but know nothing of you, this
is a shallow acceptance indeed, and you realise that it may change if I
actually come to know you. But if I understand you empathically, see you
and what you are feeling and doing from your point of view, enter your
private world and see it as it appears to you and still accept you -
then this is safety indeed. In this climate you can permit your real
self to emerge, and to express itself in varied and novel formings as it
relates to the world. This is a basic fostering of creativity. (Rogers
1951: p. 358) Opening channels Most clients want to enter therapy,
although they would of course prefer not to be in a position where
seeking therapy becomes necessary. When clients do feel in need of help,
they go for it. In the context of education and student-centred
learning, Rogers wrote: I think that you pick up a book or you go to a
person because you want to learn something, which is quite different
from teaching in the ordinary sense . . . teaching usually does mean the
imparting of information, which is quite different from seeking what you
want to learn . . . it is different from being visited by a seeker. . .
. I can tell you it's a very different experience to be asked by a class
to lecture on some given topic that they think I'm expert on, than it is
to be pouring that same lecture on to them when they haven't asked for
it. . . . I favor much more being visited by seekers than seeking to put
something across. (Rogers 1989: p. 195) The phrase 'you can read me like
a book' comes to mind. In client-centred therapy, the client picks up
their own book, and the book is them. The therapist is alongside clients
as they compose, decompose and recompose themselves. Clients may well
have been 'squashed by the system' and expect their counsellor to be the
equivalent of a teacher, delivering didactic lectures and filling them
full of knowledge. However, the therapist knows that the natural
curiosity driven by their actualising tendency can be reawakened.
Perhaps the beginning of therapy could be characterised by the
counsellor inviting the client to begin reading the book that is the
client:

128

Being empathic

I have found it enriching to open channels whereby others can
communicate their feelings, their private perceptual worlds, to me.
Because understanding is rewarding, I would like to reduce the barriers
between others and me, so that they can, if they wish, reveal themselves
more fully. (\[Rogers 1961: p. 19) Carl was keen to meet people as human
beings in a process of becoming, rather than seeing people as bound up
in the past (his or the client's) or through having his own aims to
impose upon or guide the client's future. Perhaps the most extensive
guidance with regard to the client-centred therapist establishing
contact in a relationship in which the client feels received is to be
found in the section entitled 'How can I create a helping relationship?'
in On Becoming A Person (Rogers 1961: pp. 50-57). In these extracts,
Carl Rogers offers ten questions that he had asked of himself when
reflecting upon how he could be of most therapeutic help: a. Can I be in
some way which will be perceived by the other person as trustworthy, as
dependable or consistent in some deep sense? (Rogers 1961: p. 50) In
part this could be to do with aspects such as keeping appointments,
being on time and respecting confidentiality. However, to act as
consistent when inner experience is not in harmony with outer expression
would, in the longer term, be perceived as inconsistent and
untrustworthy. Thus Carl preferred to think in terms of being
'dependably real' rather than being 'rigidly consistent' (although once
again it can be stressed that if inner experiencing is to match outer
expression, the client-centred therapist will have conditions four and
five unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding - deeply
integrated within this congruence). In summary, Carl said that when he
was a unified and integrated person: I can be whatever I deeply am.
(Rogers 1961: p. 51) b. Can I be expressive enough as a person that what
I am will be communicated unambiguously? (Rogers 1961: p. 51) In other
words, if the therapist is in denial of (or is distorting to awareness)
inner experiencing - that is, if the therapist is incongruent - then the
client will perceive mixed or contradictory messages. This could be
linked with the notion of reciprocal empathy. If the therapist's words
are somehow out of synchronisation with paraverbal or non-verbal
communicating, the client will sense this at some level. One way of
putting this which may seem strange to you is that if I can form a
helping relationship to myself - if I can be sensitively aware of and
acceptant towards my own feelings - then the likelihood is great that I
can form a helping relationship toward another. (Rogers 1961: p. 51)
Rogers believed that it is tremendously difficult to transparently be
that which one is, and one consequence is that the facilitation of the
growth of others

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

129

through the therapist means that the therapist must grow, too. While
this may be enriching, it is often also painful. Thus one characteristic
that could be deemed necessary for the client-centred therapist is
courage, for the therapist might fear being changed or influenced, or
becoming lost in the world of the other. Carl believed the experience of
client-centred therapy to be so wonderful, and yet quoted the
possibility of personal change for the therapist as being a reason why
it is not more widespread. c. Can I let myself experience positive
attitudes toward this other person - attitudes of warmth, caring,
liking, interest, respect? (\[Rogers 1961: p. 52) If I allow myself to
freely experience such positive feelings toward another, might they
somehow trap me? Might demands be made of me or might I be disappointed
as an outcome of trusting? Carl Rogers believed that fears such as these
are one explanation for a tendency to be 'professionally aloof' and to
work in diagnostic, 'objective' ways. Yet: It is a real achievement when
we can learn, even in certain relationships or at certain times in those
relationships, that it is safe to care, that it is safe to relate to the
other as a person for whom we have positive feelings. (Rogers 1961:
p. 52) d. Can I be strong enough as a person to be separate from the
other? (Rogers 1961: p. 52) Carl stated that the therapist needs to be
able to embrace self-respect as well as respect for clients, owning (and
if needs be, communicating) personal feelings and meanings yet being
clear that they belong to the therapist and not to the client. Is the
therapist personally 'together' enough to be able to enter the world of
client feelings and meanings without identifying with them, without
drowning in or becoming depressed or engulfed by them? The therapist
needs to be strong enough to really receive a client's anger or rage
without being 'destroyed' by it, or to accept a client's feeling of love
without becoming entrapped by that love, or somehow enslaved by it. When
therapists experience and own their personal power, then they can engage
with clients at deeper levels due to not being afraid of losing
themselves. e. Am I secure enough within myself to permit him his
separateness? (Rogers 1961: pp. 52-3) Clearly linking with the last
question, Rogers really needed to know whether he could permit people
the freedom to be - and if therapists believe that clients should follow
their advice or be dependent upon them, then clearly this is not so. He
quoted a small, unpublished study conducted by Richard Farson, in which
it was discovered that: The less well adjusted and less competent
counselor tends to induce conformity to himself, to have clients who
model themselves after him. (Farson 1955)

130

Being empathic

However, better-adjusted (that is, more congruent) counsellors do not
interfere with the freedom of clients to be themselves. f. Can I let
myself enter fully into the world of his feelings and personal meanings
and see these as he does? (Rogers 1961: p. 53) Carl Rogers experienced
an immersion in the world of clients so deep that all desire to evaluate
or judge them dissipated. Sensitive and accurate empathic understanding
is not just of the obvious, but also of implicit, dimly perceived and
confused meanings, and on an ongoing basis. g. Can I receive him as he
is? Can I communicate this attitude? Or can I only receive . . .
conditionally? (Rogers 1961: p. 54) Disapproval of some feelings,
whether openly or silently, is not a hallmark of client-centred therapy.
Ideally, the therapist is open to and accepting of each and every facet
or aspect that the client chooses to be in therapy. Carl Rogers, if he
experienced evaluative feelings, would explore where they might have
come from: And when - afterward and sometimes too late -I try to
discover why I have been unable to accept him in every respect, I
usually discover that it is because I have been frightened or threatened
in myself by some aspect of his feelings. If I am to be more helpful,
then I must myself grow and accept myself in these respects. (Rogers
1961: p. 54) We see once again, then, the value of personal growth
activities for the therapist (or trainee therapist), the value of good,
person-centred supervision, and the value of networking with like-minded
peers. h. Can I act with sufficient sensitivity in the relationship that
my behavior will not be perceived as a threat? (Rogers 1961, p. 54)
Rogers explained that this was not about being hypersensitive to
clients, although physiological research evidence indicates that even
communicating a word only slightly stronger in meaning than that which
the client used does produce a threat reaction. Rather: It is simply due
to the conviction based on experience that if I can free him as
completely as possible from external threat, then he can begin to
experience and to deal with the internal feelings and conflicts which he
finds threatening within himself. (Rogers 1961: p. 54) i. Can I free him
from the threat of external evaluation (Rogers 1961: p. 54) Related to
the previous question, this one is specifically to do with the
punishment and reward systems that nearly all (if not all) people meet
with from birth to death --good or bad, pass or fail, worthy or
shameful, and so on. Rogers believed that

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

131

such evaluations are not at all facilitative of personal growth and
therefore play no part in a client-centred therapeutic relationship -
and this includes positive judgements, for as we have already seen, the
right to praise (to cite just one example) implies the right to chastise
or withhold praise. So I have come to feel that the more I can keep a
relationship free of judgment and evaluation, the more this will permit
the other person to reach the point where he recognizes that the locus
of evaluation, the center of responsibility, lies within himself.
(Rogers 1961: p. 55) The client-centred therapist strives to reach a
state of congruence wherein there is no inner evaluation of clients, let
alone communicated judgements. Ideally, there is not even any desire to
be evaluative - the optimum desire is to authentically and respectfully
understand. j.

Can I meet this other individual as a person who is in a process of
becoming, or will I be bound by his past and my past? (Rogers 1961:
p. 55)

Any preconceived ideas or notions that the therapist holds about a
client serve to limit what that client can be in the therapeutic
relationship. Rogers quoted Martin Buber, who wrote about confirming the
other: Confirming means . . . accepting the whole potentiality of the
other . . . I can recognize in him, know in him, the person he has been
. . . created to become . . . I can confirm him in myself, and then in
him, in relation to this potentiality that . . . can now be developed,
can evolve. (Rogers and Buber 1957) As Carl stated, if the client is
perceived as someone already bound by the past, already categorised and
fixed in time, this is very, very different from receiving a person who
is in a process of becoming. In summary, Carl Rogers wrote of his
exploration of personal characteristics relevant to entering or
initiating therapeutic contact: . . . the optimal helping relationship
is the kind of relationship created by a person who is psychologically
mature. Or to put it another way, the degree to which I can create
relationships which facilitate the growth of others as separate persons
is a measure of the growth I have achieved in myself. In some respects
this is a disturbing thought, but it is also a promising or challenging
one. It would indicate that if I am interested in creating helping
relationships, I have a fascinating lifetime job ahead of me, stretching
and developing my potentialities in the direction of growth. (Rogers
1961: p. 56)

Contact - chocks away! It is perhaps to be regretted that almost
inevitably the six necessary and sufficient conditions for therapeutic
personality change are represented as a vertical yet linear hierarchy -
a top-to-bottom list with each aspect following the one above it.

132

Being empathic

although there is a rationale for certain conditions preceding others
(for instance, without relationship there is no process or outcomes, and
unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding need to be
perceived as authentic), when placing empathy back in the context of all
six necessary and sufficient conditions, it will become evident that all
six conditions interweave, very much relating to and being integrated
with one another. A slightly less linear diagrammatic representation
might be that within the context of two individuals who are in
psychological contact.

Figure 4.1 An illustration of the interface between counsellor and
client in the process of client-centred therapy. Thus the counsellor is
congruent in this therapeutic relationship. Integral to this congruence
is the experiencing of unconditional positive regard towards and
empathic understanding of an incongruent client, who perceives this
empathic understanding (at least to a minimal degree, and in part
through a process of reciprocal empathy) and, via that understanding,
the unconditional positive regard of the therapist. Experience will be
defined (in different ways) shortly. As Rogers wrote of contact meaning
that the therapist and client 'each make a perceived or subceived
difference in the experiential field of the other', it might be helpful
to explore briefly the meaning of some of the terms used. We can begin
with 'each makes a perceived . . .'.

Carl Rogers (and others, such as Hebb and Riesen) believed that the
'impingement of stimuli' and the 'meaning given to the stimuli' are
'inseparable parts of a single experience' (that is, the instant we
experience something we attach a meaning to it): perception is a
hypothesis or prognosis for action which comes into being in awareness
when stimuli impinge on the organism. When we perceive 'this is a
triangle', 'that is a tree', 'this person is my mother', it

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

133

means that we are making a prediction that the objects from which the
stimuli are received would, if checked in other ways, exhibit properties
we have come to regard, from our past experience, as being
characteristic of triangles, trees, mother. (Rogers 1959: p. 199) Thus
Carl reckoned that the terms perception and awareness were more or less
synonymous, although he tended to use the term perception in the more
detailed sense that emphasised the stimulus (that which is being
perceived), whereas awareness included the symbolisations and meanings
associated with that which is being perceived, as well as memory traces
and physiological changes connected to the perception. With regard to
the meaning of 'each makes a perceived or subceived . . .', Rogers drew
on the work of McCleary and Lazarus, who stated that: even when a
subject is unable to report a visual discrimination he is still able to
make a stimulus discrimination at some level below that required for
conscious recognition. (McCleary and Lazarus 1949: pp. 171-9) Carl
incorporated the process of discrimination without awareness, known as
subception, into client-centred personality theory, stating that: It is
this capacity which, in our theory, permits the individual to
discriminate an experience as threatening, without symbolization in
awareness of this threat. (Rogers 1959: p. 200) One of the capacities of
human beings that distinguishes us from many other animals is that we do
have a significant capacity for awareness: We have a rich capacity for
symbolization, which I believe is synonymous with awareness. We have the
capacity for a rich subjective living. We have the capacity for an
organismic valuing process. That is, we are able to test objects and
events in terms of our own experiencing and can gauge the values they
have for enhancing us or for being destructive in our experience.
(Rogers 1989: p. 120) Carl Rogers saw symbolisation and awareness (and
indeed consciousness) as meaning essentially the same thing:
consciousness (or awareness) is the symbolization of some of our
experience. Awareness is thus seen as the symbolic representation (not
necessarily in verbal symbols) of some portion of our experience. This
representation may have varying degrees of sharpness or vividness, from
a dim awareness of something existing as ground, to a sharp awareness of
something which is in focus as figure. (Rogers 1959: p. 198) When asked
by Richard Evans whether his own view of consciousness paralleled the
theory promulgated by Sigmund Freud, Carl Rogers replied:

134

Being empathic

I feel that whether or not I totally agree or disagree (with Freud's
concept of the unconscious) is, in itself, not very helpful. I'd rather
point out the way I conceptualize . . . (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 7)
And Carl did point out the way he thought of awareness when he said: I'd
prefer to think of a range of phenomena: first, those in sharp focus in
awareness right now - the height of consciousness; secondly, a range of
material which could be called into consciousness, that you really know
and can call into consciousness but you don't have in 'figure' right
now - it is in the 'ground' or background; then, finally, some phenomena
which are more and more dimly connected with awareness, to material that
is really prevented from coming into even vague awareness because its
coming into awareness would damage the person's concept of himself.
(Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 6) When there is an absence of psychological
defensive processes, experience can be symbolised freely and is hence
deemed to be available to awareness. In defining accurate symbolisation,
Rogers wrote: The symbols which constitute our awareness do not
necessarily match, or correspond to, the 'real' experience, or to
'reality'. Thus the psychotic is aware of (symbolizes) electrical
impulses in his body which do not seem in actuality to exist. I glance
up quickly and perceive a plane in the distance, but it turns out to be
a gnat close to my eye. It seems important to distinguish between those
awarenesses which, in common-sense terms, are real or accurate and those
which are not. (Rogers 1959: p. 198) Stating that the examples given
above are, effectively, perceptual hypotheses that can be checked (for
instance, by brushing at the speck it might become more clear that it
was a gnat and not an aeroplane), and while acknowledging this link
between symbolisation and perception, Rogers nevertheless was able to
state that: when we speak of accurate symbolization in awareness, we
mean that the hypotheses implicit in the awareness will be borne out if
tested by acting on them. (Rogers 1959: p. 199) The notion of two people
being in contact will be examined again when we look at the sixth
necessary and sufficient condition (the client perceiving, at least to a
minimal degree, the fourth and fifth conditions, namely the
unconditional positive regard of the therapist, and the empathic
understanding of the therapist). For the moment, let us note a subtle
yet significant difference. Person A (who is relatively incongruent) and
person B (who is relatively congruent) are in contact. However, person A
is unable or unwilling (for whatever reason) to perceive (even to a
minimal degree) the authentic unconditional positive regard and Empathic
understanding of person B. In this scenario, it is far less likely that
a therapeutic relationship will be a consequence of their contact.

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

135

As we relocate empathic understanding within all six necessary and
sufficient conditions, let us also note, in summary, that integral to
the nature of this contact, this psychological contact, this
relationship between two people, is the commitment of the therapist to
experience genuine respect and empathy for and of the client's world of
feelings and personal meanings.

Empathy and client incongruence One meaning of congruence and
incongruence relates to geometric shapes. If two shapes can be exactly
superimposed they are said to be congruent; if they do not exactly fit
over one another and match, they are said to be incongruent. Carl Rogers
believed that the human organism has one, and only one, basic
motivation - to maintain and enhance itself. This 'function' is
'undertaken' by the actualising tendency: This is the inherent tendency
of the organism to develop all its capacities in ways which serve to
maintain or enhance the organism. . . . It should also be noted that it
is the organism as a whole, and only the organism as a whole, which
exhibits this tendency . . . The self, for example, is an important
construct in our theory, but the self does not 'do' anything. It is only
one expression of the general tendency of the organism to behave in
those ways which maintain and enhance itself. . . . It might also be
mentioned that such concepts of motivation as are termed need-reduction,
tension-reduction, drive-reduction, are included in this concept. It
also includes, however, the growth motivations which appear to go beyond
these terms: the seeking of pleasurable tensions, the tendency to be
creative, the tendency to learn painfully to walk when crawling would
meet the same needs more comfortably. (Rogers 1959: p. 196)

Carl Rogers and human nature What it means to be a human being is of
central significance in client-centred theory. When asked about where he
would place himself in a continuum stretching from humanistic to
psychoanalytic and behavioural, Rogers said of psychoanalytic thinking
and practice: I think that it really is a damaging cultural influence,
as it gets spread more widely in an oversimplified form. I think Freud's
view that man is by nature evil and that the id is a terrible force
which, if released, would play havoc, could lead to damage. (Rogers and
Evans 1975: p. 71) In response to where Rogers would locate himself, his
view was that: there is a flavor of existentialism developing which is
definitely positive in its view of man, and I certainly would have to
place myself there. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 71)

136

Being empathic

Carl Rogers would not say, though, that he was a 'pure' existentialist
because he thought that: some of the existentialists take the point of
view that man really has no nature, but it seems to me that he has -I
have taken the point of view that man belongs to a particular species.
He has species characteristics. One of those, I think, being the fact
that he is incurably social; I think he has a deep need for
relationships. Then I think that simply because man is an organism he
tends to be directional. He's moving in the direction of actualizing
himself. So, for myself, I really feel man does have a describable
nature. (Rogers 1989: p. 66) Returning to the theme of psychoanalysis,
Carl Rogers despised the view that at the 'heart' of human beings lie
instincts and impulses that must be controlled, because his own
experience led him to believe that: if we can release what is most basic
in the individual, it will be constructive . . . when you get to what is
deepest in the individual, that is the very aspect that can be most
trusted to be constructive or to tend toward socialization or toward the
development of better interpersonal relationships. (Rogers 1989: p. 58)
He stated many times that of course 'negative' feelings will be
disclosed in psychotherapy, and that each and every one of us has the
capacity for 'evil' behaviour. However: It is well to bear in mind that
I also have a capacity to vomit, for example. Whether I, or anyone, will
translate the impulses into behavior depends, it seems to me, on two
elements: social conditioning and voluntary choice. (Rogers 1989:
p. 254) So the fact that we all have the potential to behave in
antisocial ways does not have to mean that such ways are our base
nature. On the contrary: I find in my experience no . . . innate
tendency toward destructiveness, toward evil . . . if the elements
making for growth are present, the actualizing tendency develops in
positive ways. In the human these elements for growth are not only
proper nutrition etc., but a climate of psychological attitudes. (Rogers
1989: pp. 253-4) In terms of the 'nature versus nurture' debate, Rogers
said that: I see members of the human species . . . as essentially
constructive in their fundamental nature, but damaged by their
experience. (Rogers 1981: p. 238) Some years later: Viewed from the
external, scientific, objective perspective, man is determined by
genetic and cultural influences. I have also said that

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

137

in an entirely different dimension, such things as freedom and choice
are extremely real. (Rogers 1989: p. 132)

Growth is not a balancing act! Very often, mental health is seen as
trying to achieve balance. Yet the actualising tendency is not seeking
balance - far from it. Balance in this sense would stem, thwart or
stifle evolution and growth: I think the organism is definitely not
trying to achieve stasis. I think that even organisms as low as the
flatworm are always trying to look for more enriching stimuli, more
complicated stimuli . . . (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 3) Richard Evans
queried whether Carl meant that actually at some deep level human beings
seek rather than strive to avoid tensions. Rogers replied: always. I
think there is plenty of evidence now that this is true. In man, we call
it curiosity. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 3) It was fundamental to Carl's
belief system that the central motivating aspect of every person is a
tendency toward maintaining the entire organism and, whenever possible,
enhancing the organism, too - and given the right conditions, growth
will be in a constructive not a destructive direction: I've said
sometimes that my generally optimistic point of view could be glandular;
I don't know. One facet of this is certainly true - there's no doubt
that my interest in growth is positive. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 71)

The self As a human being grows, a portion of the whole organism (and
both Carl Rogers and Sigmund Freud were in agreement that this was a
relatively small fraction of the whole) becomes differentiated as the
self. The actualising tendency now 'gets to work' on the self, or
self-concept - so the self now strives to maintain and enhance itself,
often at the expense of the organism as a whole. Following the
development of the self-structure, this general tendency toward
actualization expresses itself also in the actualization of that portion
of the experience of the organism which is symbolized in the self. If
the self and the total experience of the organism are relatively
congruent, then the actualizing tendency remains relatively unified. If
self and experience are incongruent, then the general tendency to
actualize the organism may work at cross purposes with the subsystem of
that motive, the tendency to actualize the self. (Rogers 1959:
pp. 196-7) I confess to 'having an agenda' here, for it alarms me that
so many practitioners who undertook client-centred training seem unaware
of the fundamental distinction between the actualising tendency and
self-actualising. Imagine, if

138

Being empathic

you will, the self being akin to a small yolk in a large egg. The egg is
the entire organism, and the yolk is but a differentiated part. The
actualising tendency is a motivational force for the whole egg,
self-actualising for the yolk only (examples to illustrate this follow
soon). Going back to geometric shapes, incongruence means that there is
a mismatch between one shape, the entire human organism, and the other
shape, that portion of the whole organism that has become differentiated
as the self. Another way of illustrating this might be to see the two
shapes as experience and our perception of that experience. If our
perception of our experiencing is at odds with organismic experiencing
(that is, experiencing by the total organism and not just the
differentiated part of it known as the self), we are in a state of
incongruence. When exploring and defining experience, Carl Rogers
differentiated between experience as a noun, experience as a verb, and
experiencing a feeling. Experience as a noun means: all that is going on
within the envelope of the organism at any given moment which is
potentially available to awareness. It includes events of which the
individual is unaware, as well as all the phenomena which are in
consciousness. Thus it includes the psychological aspects of hunger,
even though the individual may be so fascinated by his work or play that
he is completely unaware of the hunger; it includes the impact of sights
and sounds and smells on the organism, even though these are not in the
focus of attention. It includes the influence of memory and past
experience, as these are active in the moment, in restricting or
broadening the meaning given to various stimuli. It also includes all
that is present in immediate awareness or consciousness. It does not
include such events as neuron discharges or changes in blood sugar,
because these are not directly available to awareness. It is thus a
psychological, not a physiological definition. (Rogers 1959: p. 197)
Stating that in the past he had used phrases for experience (as a noun)
like organismic experiencing and sensory and visceral experiences (the
viscera are the large cavities and organs in the body), Rogers stated
that other synonyms included experiential field or phenomenal field. It
was the 'totality' of the concept of experiencing that he wished to
convey - that experience means more than simply conscious experiencing.
He also clarified that experience in this sense refers to here and now
experience rather than an accumulation of historic experiencing. Thus as
a noun, experience refers to an experience. Experience as a verb means
simply that sensory or physiological events happening in the moment are
received (or impact upon) the organism. Again Rogers clarified: Often
this process term is used in the phrase 'to experience in awareness',
which means to symbolize in some accurate form at the conscious level
the above sensory or visceral events. Since there are varying degrees of
completeness in symbolization, the phrase is often 'to experience more
fully in awareness', thus indicating that it is the

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

139

extension of this process toward more complete and accurate
symbolization to which reference is being made. (Rogers 1959: pp. 197-8)
In other words, experiencing may be denied symbolisation in awareness
altogether. However, if experiencing is granted conscious recognition
yet only in a distorted fashion, there are clearly degrees of
distortion. Another way of putting this is to consider that rather than
an individual either being totally aware or totally unaware, there is a
continuum between these two extremes, different degrees of conscious
awareness (again, examples follow shortly). Finally, there is Carl's
definition of experiencing a feeling: This is a term which has been
heavily used in writings on clientcentered therapy and theory. It
denotes an emotionally tinged experience, together with its personal
meaning. Thus it includes the emotion but also the cognitive content of
the meaning of that emotion in its experiential context. It thus refers
to the unity of emotion and cognition as they are experienced
inseparably in the moment. It is perhaps best thought of as a brief
theme of experience, carrying with it the emotional coloring and the
perceived meaning to the individual. Examples would include T feel angry
at myself ', T feel ashamed of my desires when I am with her', Tor the
first time, right now, I feel that you like me'. This last is an example
of another phenomenon which is relevant to our theory, and which has
been called experiencing a feeling fully, in the immediate present.
(Rogers 1959: p. 198) Where does all of this experiencing take place,
especially experiencing that the individual is aware or conscious of
(experience that is symbolised)? Originally, Carl Rogers was not
particularly interested in a concept as 'woolly' or meaningless or
ambiguous as the self. However, as client after client after client kept
referring to being aware of experience and meanings in this thing they
called a 'self, he eventually thought that to honour them he had best
acknowledge it in some way: I think I'll talk a little bit about the
concept of self, because that's a very central aspect of my theory. It
seemed to me that self could be defined in many, many different ways,
and many of them acceptable, but what definition would be most
profitable for consideration in research and in thinking? It seemed to
me that the most useful definition was that the self was composed of the
perceptions that the individual had of the T or the 'me', the
perceptions of the self in relationship to others and to the
environment, and the values that were attached to those perceptions. So
it was a definition which was all based on perceptions by the
individual, and those could be determined - could conceivably be
measured, though for a long time I didn't see how they could be
measured. (Rogers and Russell 2002: pp. 247-8) Rogers also said that
although social conditioning was undoubtedly a factor in the building of
a self, the self was more fluid than a fixed, built construction. He
came

140

Being empathic

to this conclusion in part through his experiencing of clients and in
part through being a client himself. On being a client, Rogers said: I
could go away from an interview feeling, 'I really am a worthwhile
person; I do like myself; I'm okay'; but then some little incident could
flip that feeling over while it was still tentative and newborn, and I
would feel, 'I'm really no good; I'm a fraud; I'm not much good'. It was
quite fascinating to me - not very comfortable, but fascinating - to
look back a little bit and see how, in a moment of time, that whole
gestalt could shift. And that happened in my clients, too. Very
definitely. (Rogers and Russell 2002: pp. 247-8) Unlike many other
psychologists, however, Rogers opted not to tread the path of trying to
predict or determine physical brain structures (for instance, Freud
believed that it was only a matter of time before the physical locations
of the id, ego and superego would be found in the human brain), or to
relate human psychological development to specific phases or ages (such
as Freud's psychosexual theories or Piaget's 'life-span' stages). Nor
was Rogers overly engaged with colleagues and students working on the
notion of different selves, and configurations of self: It should be
mentioned that some students of mine stressed too much, perhaps, the
notion of different selves, although I don't quarrel with that idea
particularly. This idea hasn't had as much meaning for me as the notion
of a more complex unified picture of self which keeps expanding to
include new experiences, even though some experiences may be shut out as
being too threatening. It seems that each of us endeavors to preserve
the concept or picture that he has of himself and that a sharp change in
that picture is quite threatening. Any change destroys some of the
security that we feel we need. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 17) It might
be that evidence from neuroscience comes close to corroborating Carl's
notion of a shifting or fluid self. Professor Susan Greenfield wrote:
There is no 'centre' for consciousness - after all, that would mean we
have a complete mini-brain in a brain. (Greenfield 2000: p. 176)
Likewise, there is no single centre (or 'mini-brain') for
unconsciousness, or for being non-conscious. With regard to a sense of
self, Greenfield thinks in terms of what she calls a transient self - in
other words, the kind of fluid self that Carl Rogers wrote and spoke of.
According to Greenfield: At some global level of organization, then,
beyond a single cell and beyond any rigidly demarcated edifice in the
brain, we might imagine an assembly of neurons so large that it does not
respect any particular anatomical boundary, and at the same time one
that is fast and evanescent enough to permit the formation of another,
different and dominant assembly a moment later. (Greenfield 2000:
p. 176)

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

141

It could just be, then, that a personal construct (George Kelly) or a
configuration of self (Rogers, then Mearns) is analogous to an assembly
of neurons that at any given time can become dominant. At the same time,
the sense of self might be transient, a constant and complex flow within
the brain. Perhaps the notion of rigidity of constructs could be linked
with the notion that: Connectivity between and among assemblies of
neurons creates in advance a dominant assembly that prevents competing
assemblies from forming. (Greenfield 2000: p. 181) Incidentally, such
neuroscientific thinking might also be linked with Carl's notion of the
client-centred therapist being disciplined and the idea of the therapist
being modulated for receiving clients empathically. Of modulation: We
know that neurotransmitters can say more than just yes or no they can
'modulate' a target cell, not giving a signal directly but, more subtly,
putting the cell on red alert. (Greenfield 2000: p. 100) Furthermore, it
may even be possible that unless cells have a modulated status, they may
not react at all, and: when we speak of modulation, it is always with
reference to two events occurring one after the other within a limited
timeframe. (Greenfield 2000: p. 100) Might this relate to a client
disclosing, followed by the therapist's perception of that disclosure,
followed by the therapist's attempt to understand that disclosure,
followed by the therapist communicating the outcome of this process?
Anyway, Carl Rogers thought very much in terms of an ongoing process of
becoming a person, yet this did not prevent the research and development
of a client-centred theory of personality. Having explored the notion of
a self, we can now turn to definitions of selfexperience, self, concept
of self and self-structure. Self-experience was considered to be the raw
data out of which the concept of self is formed and organised. In
defining self, concept of self and self-structure, Rogers wrote: These
terms refer to the organized, consistent, conceptual gestalt composed of
perceptions of the characteristics of the T or 'me' and the perceptions
of the relationships of the T or 'me' to others and to various aspects
of life, together with the values attached to these perceptions. It is a
gestalt which is available to awareness though not necessarily in
awareness. It is a fluid and changing gestalt, a process, but at any
given moment it is a specific entity which is at least partially
definable in operational terms . . . The term self or selfconcept is
more likely to be used when we are talking of the person's view of
himself, self-structure when we are looking at this gestalt from an
external frame of reference. (Rogers 1959: p. 200)

142

Being empathic

Carl Rogers also wrote of the ideal self, which denotes the self-concept
that is valued most highly and that a person would most like to have. So
the human infant is born with an actualising tendency, a motivational
force akin to the inherent potential of an acorn to become a flourishing
oak tree (and an acorn does strive to become a flourishing oak tree -
and given the right conditions, it will become all that it can be). This
actualising tendency is constructive and tends towards growth and
complexity. As Carl wrote, we are less likely to actualise our potential
for migraine than our potential for tasty food. Thus the actualising
tendency, striving to maintain and enhance the whole human organism, is
positive and trustworthy in nature. However, a portion of the whole
organism becomes differentiated, through interaction with the
environment, as the self. This led Rogers and his colleagues to think
about how this self might develop and be constructed, and a key emergent
idea was the notion of a regard complex'. The regard complex is a
construct defined by Standal as all those selfexperiences, together with
their interrelationships, which the individual discriminates as being
related to the positive regard of a particular social other. This
construct is intended to emphasize the gestalt nature of transactions
involving positive or negative regard, and their potency. Thus, for
example, if a parent shows positive regard to a child in relationship to
a specific behavior, this tends to strengthen the whole pattern of
positive regard which has previously been experienced as coming from
that parent. Likewise specific negative regard from this parent tends to
weaken the whole configuration of positive regard. (Rogers 1959:
pp. 208-9) As the self is becoming differentiated from the organism as a
whole, certain human needs become evident. The need for positive regard
is a need to feel liked, loved, valued, appreciated, and considered as
being of worth, especially by 'significant others' (such as close family
or carers initially, and later by friends, teachers, and so on). First
we shall consider the meaning of positive regard, then the need for
positive regard: In general, positive regard is defined as including
such attitudes as warmth, liking, respect, sympathy, acceptance. To
perceive oneself as receiving positive regard is to experience oneself
as making a positive difference in the experiential field of another. It
is postulated by Standal that a basic need for positive regard, as
defined above, is a secondary or learned need, commonly developed in
early infancy. Some writers have looked upon the infant's need for love
and affection as an inherent or instinctive need. Standal is probably on
safer ground in regarding it as a learned need. By terming it the need
for positive regard, he has, it is believed, selected out the
significant psychological variable from the broader terms usually used.
(Rogers 1959: p. 208) Client-centred theorists believe that most human
relationships are conditional. Conditional relationships involve values
and judgements, as in 'I like you when . . .',

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

143

7 love you when . . . ', 7 value you most when . . .', 7 really
appreciate it whenyou you. . .', and so on. The reverse, of course, is
also true: 7 don't like it when you . . .', 7 hate it when you . . .',
and so on. Now due to the desire (or need) for positive regard from
significant others, the young human being quickly learns that it is
usually best to adapt to the values and judgements of others, to behave
in ways that are more likely to result in positive, not negative,
regard - better to be loved than to be hated . . . Another development
is the need for positive self-regard'. This term is used to denote a
positive regard satisfaction which has become associated with a
particular self-experience or a group of selfexperiences, in which this
satisfaction is independent of positive regard transactions with social
others. Though it appears that positive regard must first be experienced
from others, this results in a positive attitude toward self which is no
longer directly dependent on the attitudes of others. The individual, in
effect, becomes his own significant social other. (Rogers 1959: p. 209)
In other words, we value ourselves via the values that we have taken on
(or 'introjected') from others. Thus the young girl might learn that
caring for dolls and pleasing others is very acceptable to a parent, as
is being seen but not heard. Due to this child's need to feel liked and
loved by and acceptable to that parent, she mostly behaves in a way that
elicits responses from the parent that feel internally pleasurable,
rather than risking the likelihood of unpleasant internal feelings that
are a consequence of parental disapproval. However, if 'being seen but
not heard' is internalised (or introjected) by this young girl as a
'good' value - albeit based on the evaluative attitudes of a parent and
not on her own, direct, organismic valuing - then she may come to value
herself for being seen and not heard even when the relevant parent is
not around. Consider another example. How often do we (in the UK, at
least) come across the perception that men are less adept than women at
expressing their feelings? The answer is very often. Does the aphorism
'big boys don't cry' also 'ring a bell'? Suppose that a young boy
injures himself while playing, and hears a significant adult remark 'big
boys don't cry'. Needing to be valued, the boy therefore doesn't weep.
This value may then be introjected as if it were direct organismic
valuing, so that the next time he suffers an injury while playing, the
boy feels good about himself for holding back his tears even though
there are no significant adults around. He thus satisfies his need for
positive self-regard. The organismic experience (based on an internal
locus of evaluation) of the young girl is that sometimes it feels good
to smash up a doll and scream. The organismic valuing (again based on an
internal locus of evaluation) of the boy is that sometimes it feels good
to sob and get cuddled. In both instances, however, their perceptions of
their experiencing come to include introjected values, and organismic
valuing is therefore denied or distorted. The individual still
experiences a positive feeling about self through feeling that they have
lived up to their introjected values - values that have effectively
become independent of significant others (in effect, the individual has
become his or her own significant other). Two further dimensions
complete the gestalt of an individual's regard complex:

144

Being empathic

Need for self-regard. It is postulated that a need for positive
self-regard is a secondary or learned need, related to the satisfaction
of the need for positive regard by others. Unconditional self-regard.
When the individual perceives himself in such a way that no
self-experience can be discriminated as more or less worthy of positive
regard than any other, then he is experiencing unconditional positive
self-regard. (Rogers 1959: p. 209) Other definitions relevant to the
preceding scenario are of locus of evaluation and organismic valuing. We
shall begin with locus of evaluation'. This term is used to indicate the
source of evidence as to values. Thus an internal locus of evaluation,
within the individual himself, means that he is the center of the
valuing process, the evidence being supplied by his own senses. When the
locus of evaluation resides in others, their judgment as to the value of
an object or experience becomes the criterion of value for the
individual. (Rogers 1959: p. 210) Organismic valuing refers to: an
ongoing process in which values are never fixed or rigid, but
experiences are being accurately symbolized and continually and freshly
valued in terms of the satisfactions organismically experienced; the
organism experiences satisfaction in those stimuli or behaviors which
maintain and enhance the organism and the self, both in the immediate
present and in the long range. The actualizing tendency is thus the
criterion. The simplest example is the infant who at one moment values
food, and when satiated, is disgusted with it; at one moment values
stimulation, and soon after, values only rest; who finds satisfying that
diet which in the long run most enhances his development. (Rogers 1959:
p. 210) We have learned, though, that self-actualising (maintaining and
enhancing the self-concept, formulated around our conditions of worth) -
despite feeling good within the self - can nevertheless serve to thwart
the actualising tendency (based on organismic valuing processes). In
such instances, the individual is in a state of incongruence: It seems
to me that the infant is not estranged from himself. To me it seems that
the infant is a whole and integrated organism, gradually individual, and
that the estrangement that occurs is one that he learns - that in order
to preserve the love of others, parents usually, he takes into himself
as something he has experienced for himself, the judgments of his
parents: just like the small boy who has been rebuked for pulling his
sister's hair goes around saying, 'bad boy, bad boy'. Meanwhile, he is
pulling her hair again. In other words, he has introjected the notion
that he is bad, where actually he is enjoying the experience, and it is
this estrangement between what he is experiencing and the

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

145

concepts he links up with what he is experiencing that seems to me to
constitute the basic estrangement. (Rogers 1989: p. 70) all of our
introjected values, derived from our regard complex, combine to form
what Carl Rogers and his colleagues termed our conditions of worth.
Conditions of worth are the values and attitudes that have become part
of the way in which we see ourselves - our self-concepts. If
self-actualising thwarts the actualising tendency, this may generate
tension or anxiety that, if it is admitted to conscious awareness or
comes close to being admitted to conscious awareness, may result in the
individual seeking counselling. Rogers credited Stanley Standal with
developing the idea of conditions of worth. Just as Standal coined the
term unconditional positive regard as an alternative to acceptance, so
he replaced 'introjected values' with conditions of worth: The
self-structure is characterized by a condition of worth when a
selfexperience or set of related self-experiences is either avoided or
sought solely because the individual discriminates it as being less or
more worthy of self-regard . . . A condition of worth arises when the
positive regard of a significant other is conditional, when the
individual feels that in some respects he is prized and in others not.
Gradually this same attitude is assimilated into his own self-regard
complex, and he values an experience positively or negatively solely
because of these conditions of worth which he has taken over from
others, not because the experience enhances or fails to enhance his
organism. (Rogers 1959: p. 209) If unconditional positive regard is
experienced, then valuing may be based on an internal locus of
evaluation (that is, on whether or not the experiencing maintains or
enhances the organism). However, if valuing is based on values 'adopted'
from others, then there is no reference to organismic valuing. This in
turn links with symbolisation, for if I value an experience (as positive
or negative) as if it were referenced to my own actualising tendency
when in fact my referencing is 'second hand' (that is, to values
introjected from others), then my symbolisation is inaccurate. In other
words: An experience may be perceived as organismically satisfying, when
in fact this is not true. Thus a condition of worth, because it disturbs
the valuing process, prevents the individual from functioning freely and
with maximum effectiveness. (Rogers 1959: p. 210) When there is a
discrepancy between organismic experiencing and the self as perceived,
the individual is in a state of incongruence - that is, the
physiological organism and conscious awareness are not coexisting in
harmony: When such a discrepancy exists, the state is one of
incongruence between self and experience. This state is one of tension
and internal confusion, since in some respects the individual's behavior
will be regulated by the actualizing tendency, and in other respects by
the

146

Being empathic

self-actualizing tendency, thus producing discordant or incomprehensible
behaviors. (Rogers 1959: p. 203) Note again the crucial distinction
between the actualising tendency and self-actualising. When the
individual is incongruent, the term vulnerability is used to describe
the potentialities of this state, and when individuals are not
consciously aware of this incongruence, they are: potentially vulnerable
to anxiety, threat, and disorganization. If a significant new experience
demonstrates the discrepancy so clearly that it must be consciously
perceived, then the individual will be threatened, and his concept of
self disorganized by this contradictory and unassimilable experience.
(Rogers 1959: p. 204) A consequence of experiencing anxiety because the
concept of self and actual experience are incongruent is the defensive
psychological processes of denial or distortion. Self-actualising
demands that we maintain and enhance the way that we see ourselves - the
tendency is to both maintain and enhance the self-concept. So the
concept of self must be defended against anything that is potentially
threatening to it. Carl Rogers defined anxiety as: a state of uneasiness
or tension whose cause is unknown. From an external frame of reference,
anxiety is a state in which the incongruence between the concept of self
and the total experience of the individual is approaching symbolization
in awareness. When experience is obviously discrepant from the
self-concept, a defensive response to threat becomes increasingly
difficult. Anxiety is the response of the organism to the 'subception'
that such discrepancy may enter awareness, thus forcing a change in the
self-concept. (Rogers 1959: p. 204) Threat, on the other hand, occurs
when there is an experiencing (a perception or anticipation) of
incongruence: If we think of the structure of the self as being a
symbolic elaboration of a portion of the private experiential world of
the organism, we may realize that when much of this private world is
denied symbolization, certain basic tensions result. We find, then, that
there is a very real discrepancy between the experiencing organism as it
exists, and the concept of self which exerts such a governing influence
on behavior. This self is now very inadequately representative of the
experience of the organism. Conscious control becomes more difficult as
the organism strives to satisfy needs which are not consciously
admitted, and to react to experiences which are denied by the conscious
self. Tension then exists, and if the individual becomes to any degree
aware of this tension or discrepancy, he feels anxious, feels that he is
not united or integrated, that he is unsure of his direction. (Rogers
1951: pp. 510-11)

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

147

Thus self-actualising demands that the concept of self be defended
against any perceived threats to it: Defense is the behavioral response
of the organism to threat, the goal of which is the maintenance of the
current structure of the self. This goal is achieved by the perceptual
distortion of the experience in awareness, in such a way as to reduce
the incongruity between the experience and the structure of the self, or
by the denial to awareness of an experience, thus denying any threat to
the self. Defensiveness is the term denoting a state in which the
behaviors are of the sort described. (Rogers 1959: pp. 204-5) The two
main processes of defence in client-centred personality theory are those
in which experiences may be denied accurate symbolisation in our
awareness, and those in which they may be granted only a distorted
symbolisation. (Incidentally, another way of understanding what is meant
by 'symbolisation' might be to consider the notion of pre-symbolisation!
You know that feeling you get when there is something niggling away yet
you 'can't quite put your finger on it'? Well, when it feels evasive or
illusive it has yet to be accurately symbolised in awareness - and when
you have put your finger on it, you have symbolised it in your
awareness.) If an experience is threatening to the concept of self, it
may be denied entry to conscious awareness as a way of defending the
self, and the more important our self-beliefs are to us, the more rigid
and tough will be our defences against any threats to them. Another
defensive option that the self has is to permit experiencing into
awareness, yet only in a distorted fashion. In other words, the organism
cannot deny crying because the tears felt real, wet and salty enough.
However, they were shed because someone nearby must have been peeling
onions or some grit had found its way into the eye socket, or the person
has a cold coming on - they were not due to any distress: I gradually
came to realize that one denies awareness - which seemed to me a better
term than repression - to those feelings which do not fit into the
current concept of self. If I see myself in such and such a fashion - as
poor at mathematics, for example - and I find myself solving a
mathematical problem, well, that was luck, or chance. That wasn't me. I
have to deny or distort in my awareness things that don't fit my concept
of self. . . The self-concept becomes a sort of screening device,
determining what is admitted to awareness. (Rogers and Russell 2002:
p. 248) There is also a notion of psychological defence known as
pre-perception or 'subception', which is the non-conscious denial of
experience to awareness. Experimental support for this notion arose from
the flashing of subliminal images in front of volunteers who were wired
up to various physiological measuring devices. If, for instance, an
individual was scared of spiders, there was a measurable physiological
reaction to the image of a spider even though the picture was flashed on
screen more quickly than the eye could see. In other words, an
experience that is subceived (or pre-perceived) as threatening to the
self

148

Being empathic

may be denied to awareness without the individual even being consciously
aware of threats to their self-concept or their defensive psychological
processes. We feel internally threatened when we recognize that
something we're experiencing - anger or hatred or positive feelings,
something that we're denying to awareness - is getting close to
awareness. And there, the concept of subception, which was to my mind
pretty well confirmed by our research, was a very valuable concept.
Without any conscious awareness, one can subceive certain things in the
environment. That's true physically; it's also true psychologically: one
could subceive the fact that T am unhappy in my marriage' or that T
don't like my mother', or whatever. And it's then that a person feels
anxious because the experience one is having is almost breaking through
into the concept of self. (Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 252) Carl Rogers
summarised much of this when he wrote: It may help to clarify this basic
concept of incongruence if we recognize that several of the terms we are
defining are simply different vantage points for viewing this
phenomenon. If an individual is in a state of incongruence between self
and experience and we are looking at him from an external point of view,
we see him as vulnerable (if he is unaware of the discrepancy) or
threatened (if he has some awareness of it). If we are viewing him from
a social point of view, then this incongruence is psychological
maladjustment. If the individual is viewing himself, he may even see
himself as adjusted (if he has no awareness of the discrepancy) or
anxious (if he dimly subceives it) or threatened or disorganized (if the
discrepancy has forced itself upon his awareness). (Rogers 1959: p. 204)
Another fundamental aspect of client-centred personality theory is that
experiencing remains available to conscious awareness given the right
conditions, and especially given the relative absence of threat to the
self-concept (there therefore being less need to defend the self). When
writing of this, Carl Rogers mentioned that he was aware of the pressure
of the seat on his buttocks. Say this in a group and suddenly everyone
will become aware of the pressure on their own buttocks (and indeed you
may well have become aware of the pressure on your own buttocks as you
read this last sentence). Thus the organismic experience of sitting is
being experienced and although not necessarily in awareness, it is
nevertheless available to awareness. There are those who argue that
because Carl was so passionate about clientcentred therapy (and the
person-centred approach) as a way of being, learning and understanding
theory is therefore not really necessary at all - that if the individual
can be (or strive with some success to be) the therapist (or core)
conditions, client-centred theory is almost an irrelevance. Such
arguments are sometimes supported by comments written by Rogers early in
his career, such as the following: I might at \[this\] point say a word
or two about theory. I remember very clearly telling my students at Ohio
State, T have no use for psycho-

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

149

logical theory'. Later I came to change that point of view, but I
realized eventually that I had no use for psychological theory which was
not my own . . . So I really thought that I had no use for psychological
theory. Later I came to realize its significance. (Rogers and Russell
2002: pp. 246-7) Please note the phrase 'Later I came to change that
point of view . . . Later I came to realize its significance'! These
very same people who dismiss theory often also claim that they engage as
whole persons with other whole persons, yet somehow see no contradiction
whatsoever when omitting a significant part (that is, theory) from the
whole that is client-centred therapy. Yet how do we understand or
empathise with another person? It is very clear indeed that to Rogers
both unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding need to be
integrated and deeply held beliefs and values residing within the
client-centred therapist, and that congruence means the absence of
denial or distortion with regard to any significant aspects of
self-experience. To perceive another person means to filter the
'stimuli' from them through our own feelings and meanings - and if a
clientcentred way of being is deeply integrated, those sensations and
meanings will include cognitive as well as emotional and physiological
dimensions. So many students of Rogers have made comments along the
lines of T was searching for something, and when I picked up and read a
book by Carl Rogers, it spoke to me. Here, at last, was someone who
seemed to understand what it feels like to be me, what it means to be
me'. Perhaps this kind of comment is only to be expected. After all, we
taught Carl Rogers all that he knew. Client-centred theory grew out of
listening to and striving to understand hundreds upon hundreds of
clients, and in turn that theory can now inform how we continue to
strive to understand one another. Lest there be any misunderstanding, it
is not the contention here that clientcentred therapists are fully aware
of theory when meeting with clients. The client-centred therapist
experiencing 'Aha! - that sounded like an introjected value' or 'Hmm,
this subceived threat to the concept of self is clearly distorted in
symbolisation' would hardly be paying extraordinary attention to the
client's world of feelings and personal meanings! Rather: There needs to
be an intellectual context into which what he or she is doing fits.
(Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 272) This is not to say, though, that such
issues as introjection, subception, threat, selfconcept, distortion,
symbolisation and so on are altogether irrelevant, for it might be
useful and appropriate to make links with theory in supervision or in
discussion with colleagues. However, our knowledge (hopefully or ideally
derived from experiential, person-centred learning) is unarguably a
significant part of our whole being, guiding and informing us even if in
non-conscious ways, or in ways that are less prominent than or secondary
to our integrated embodiment of the therapist conditions. In
illustration of the relevance of client-centred theory to client-centred
practice, person-centred supervision has as a primary focus the extent
to which the therapist is able to be the core conditions in the
counselling relationship. It might, for example, be helpful for the
therapist to reflect upon the nature of a particular

150

Being empathic

client's defensive processes, to explore whether significant client
experiencing might be denied to or distorted in awareness. After all,
clients are unlikely even to seek therapy unless they are incongruent.
Thus person-centred supervision is an opportunity to give more
prominence to client-centred theory than would be the case in therapy
itself, and through doing so the therapist might just become more open
to experiencing that client more fully. The therapist is usually (and
ideally) so closely attuned to client experiencing in the moment, and
moment by moment, that self-reflecting activities and supervision are a
wonderful opportunity to explore more deeply the therapist's own
experiencing and underpinning values, attitudes, beliefs and practices,
with a view to maintaining and enhancing the quality of presence of the
therapist conditions. An understanding of incongruence is invaluable and
indispensable in terms of maximising therapist congruence, more deeply
experiencing unconditional positive regard, and empathically
understanding the nature of the whole person that is the client - and
the therapist.

Empathy and therapist congruence The order in which these therapeutic
conditions are described has some significance because they are
logically intertwined. In the first place, the therapist must achieve a
strong, accurate empathy. But such deep sensitivity to the
moment-to-moment 'being' of another person requires that the therapist
first accept, and to some degree prize, the other person. That is to
say, a sufficiently strong empathy can hardly exist without a
considerable degree of unconditional positive regard. However, since
neither of these conditions can possibly be meaningful in the
relationship unless they are real, the therapist must be, both in these
respects and in others, integrated and genuine within the therapeutic
encounter. Therefore, it seems to me that genuineness or congruence is
the most basic of the three conditions. (Rogers 1989: p. 11) The third,
fourth and fifth necessary and sufficient conditions (congruence,
unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding) became known
as the core conditions of client-centred therapy; others have called
these the therapist conditions. At various times in his career Carl
Rogers was asked which of these core conditions was the most important.
Here is one version he gave about congruence in 1975: In the ordinary
interactions of life - between marital and sex partners, between teacher
and student, employer and employee, or between colleagues, it is
probable that congruence is the most important element. Such genuineness
involves letting the other person know 'where you are' emotionally. It
may involve confrontation, and the personally owned and straightforward
expression of both negative and positive feelings. Thus congruence is a
basis for living together in a climate of realness. (Rogers 1975: p. 9)
One definition of congruence is that the two shapes of the whole
organism and that differentiated part of it which is known as the self
correspond (the actualising

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

151

tendency and self-actualising being as one) - that is, when our
experiencing and our perceptions of that experiencing are in harmony.
Congruence, then, is described as a state - the 'state' is that either
the two shapes do overlap exactly, or they do not. Some writers have
defined this 'accurate overlap' of organism and self, or experience and
the perceiving of that experience, as meaning that the congruent
therapist's 'outward' communications are consistent with their inner
sensations and meanings. although this makes sense and is to some extent
true, it is also only part of the whole picture. For instance, if
therapist A's inner feeling is a fatigued disinterest linked with
personal meanings (including values) about boredom, and the outward
expression of this is to say 'I am bored', then therapist A could be
deemed to be being congruent. However, it would also be true to say that
the congruence of therapist A does not evidence a great deal of
unconditional positive regard or empathic understanding as deeply
embedded and integrated personal characteristics. For therapist A to
voice boredom without having accessed (that is, in denial of)
client-centred attitudes, beliefs and values could be deemed to be more
representative of a state of incongruence. Now therapist B steps in and
does not communicate any feeling of boredom because to do so would
hardly be client-centred. Is therapist B congruent? Not necessarily! If
the feelings and meanings of fatigued disinterest through boredom are
denied access to awareness (and hence cannot be voiced) because they
would be too threatening to therapist B's self-concept (therapist B's
self-concept is of being a good clientcentred practitioner), then
therapist B is also incongruent. Therapist C has an awareness of feeling
tired and losing interest, yet also accesses a deeply held
client-centred way of being, and will make a choice about whether or not
to voice boredom depending upon the outcome of processing both
significant experiences and their meanings. Again, there are those who
seem to see congruence as meaning 'harmony' because the two shapes of
organism and self correspond. In fact, being congruent might mean
embracing conflict - conflict that is usually avoided through
psychological processes of denial and distortion. Gradational rather
than 'black-and-white' thinking (pertinent to extensionality, which as
we shall see shortly was considered by Rogers to be one of the five
ingredients of congruence) might mean being many things simultaneously:
It is not simple to achieve such reality. Being real involves the
difficult task of being acquainted with the flow of experiencing going
on within oneself, a flow marked especially by complexity and continuous
change. (Rogers 1989: pp. 11-13) Returning to the theme of the therapist
voicing to a client a feeling of boredom in that client's presence, Carl
stated that during such moments he would strive to remain in ongoing
touch with his own changing feelings and meanings. For instance, he
would own his feeling of boredom ('own' in the sense that he would view
his feeling as his own feeling, and not as some putative 'fact' about
the client). Nor is this feeling of boredom fixed, rigid or permanent,
nor does it exist in isolation. (This might be an example of what is
meant by extensionality as a feature of congruence - boredom is an
abstraction from the whole. This is not a boring client and nor is the
boredom continuous.) Rogers would include in his

152

Being empathic

verbalisation his discomfort in expressing his feeling of boredom and
his distress at even feeling it and, as he does so, he realises that
actually 'behind' this apparent boredom is a feeling of distance between
himself and the client, and that he would wish for greater proximity.
This, too, is voiced, and he would most definitely not feel bored as he
eagerly (and with some apprehension) awaited the client's reactions to
such disclosures: I also feel a new sensitivity to him now that I have
shared this feeling which has been a barrier between us. I am far more
able to hear the surprise, or perhaps the hurt, in his voice as he now
finds himself speaking more genuinely because I have dared to be real
with him. I have let myself be a person - real, imperfect - in my
relationship with him. (Rogers 1989: p. 12) While ideally it might be
considered best if the therapist experienced no (apparently) negative
feelings at all towards clients (although Rogers was honest enough to
say that he thought all therapists did experience negative feelings or
thoughts about their clients from time to time), Carl Rogers believed
that when they are present it can be more harmful to keep them hidden
than to voice them. although such negative feelings might at first
glance seem potentially harmful or damaging to clients, congruence is a
better policy than dishonesty, pretence and false posturing. It is not
easy for a client, or for any human being, to entrust his most deeply
shrouded feelings to another person. It is even more difficult for a
disturbed person to share his deepest and most troubling feelings with a
therapist. The genuineness of the therapist is one of the elements in
the relationship that make the risk of sharing easier and less fraught
with dangers. (Rogers 1989: p. 13) We shall see when we explore
therapeutic process in Chapter 5 that one phase is the discovery that
the core of the personality is positive - likeable. If we can trust that
at heart clients are inherently positive, perhaps congruent therapists
can have a similar faith in themselves. If I know myself and am aware of
what lies within me, I can come to know that fuelling my apparently
negative or hostile feelings are more understandable and acceptable
features of my being. Thus the more I have engaged in my own
self-development activities, the less likely it is that I will have to
discover my potential through and with clients. Being many things
simultaneously might be illustrated by looking at the notions of
self-as-object and self-as-process. George Kelly (Kelly 1955) wrote
about personal constructs, and more recently Dave Mearns (Mearns 2002)
has written about configurations of self - a phrase coined by Carl
Rogers in his 1959 paper. Just as Rogers differentiated between
self-concept (how individuals see themselves) and self-structure (how
individuals see themselves viewed by another person), so individuals can
view aspects of themselves. Suppose that person A is a mother of two
children who is training to become a client-centred therapist. One
'personal construct' that she may have is composed around parenting.
Another configuration of self is constructed around being a student.
Person A can look at each of

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

153

these constructs, and in doing so they become somewhat objectified -
hence selfas-object. Indeed, she could draw diagrams of each of these
constructs, mapping and charting their relevant components. Now suppose
that on a training day one of her children feels a little ill - not
dramatically ill, just slightly poorly. The 'good mother' personal
construct tells her to miss out on a day's training in order to care for
her child, yet her 'good student' configuration tells her to attend her
course. Thus there is a conflict between two of the self-structures of
person A. Every individual is made up of far more than just two personal
constructs or configurations - and let us not forget organismic valuing
either! However, there is also the self-as-process to consider. If it is
possible to identify and examine aspects of the self-structure, what
about the self that is doing the exploring? In the previous example of
therapists A, B and C, only therapist C really utilised self-as-process.
Therapist A was influenced only by a tired, bored aspect of self, and
therapist B was influenced only by client-centred conditions of worth.
It is the self-as-process that enables access to all significant
configurations of self and organismic valuing, and the self-as-process
that is free to make informed choices based on the sensory and visceral
evidence available to it. I have learned that my total organismic
sensing of a situation is more trustworthy than my intellect . . . I
have found that when I have trusted some inner non-intellectual sensing,
I have discovered wisdom in the move . . . As I gradually come to trust
my total reactions more deeply, I find that I can use them to guide my
thinking . . . I think of it as trusting the totality of my experience,
which I have learned to suspect is wiser than my intellect. It is
fallible I am sure, but I believe it to be less fallible than my
conscious mind alone. (Rogers 1961: pp. 22-3) Two other common
misunderstandings occur, both concerning the 'communication' of
congruence. all too often it seems to be 'forgotten' that therapist
communication of congruence (or client perception of therapist
congruence, even to a minimal degree) was not one of the original (1957
or 1959) necessary and sufficient conditions. It is necessary (and
sufficient) only that the client perceives the unconditional positive
regard and empathic understanding of the therapist as being genuine. The
crucial importance of congruence is that the unconditional positive
regard and empathic understanding of the therapist are real - that is,
authentic and genuine. There can be nothing more inaccurate or
misleading than the notion of 'communicating congruence' for, as we have
seen, congruence means a state of being wherein there is no denial to
awareness or distorted symbolisation in awareness of significant sensory
or visceral experiencing. Imagine therapist D 'communicating congruence'
(and think about how therapeutic it might be for the client) by saying
to that client 'Right now I am neither denying symbolisation of
significant sensory or visceral experience to my awareness, nor granting
only a distorted symbolisation in my awareness of significant sensory or
visceral experiencing'! Personally, I would rather see a different
counsellor! Maybe therapist C. Yet none of this is intended to detract
from the following: Being genuine also involves the willingness to be
and to express, in my words and my behavior, the various feelings and
attitudes which exist

154

Being empathic

in me. It is only in this way that the relationship can have reality,
and reality seems deeply important as a first condition. It is only by
providing the genuine reality which is in me, that the other person can
successfully seek for the reality in him. I have found this to be true
even when the attitudes I feel are not attitudes with which I am
pleased, or attitudes which seem conducive to a good relationship. It
seems extremely important to be real. (Rogers 1961: p. 33) It may be
worth remembering that a congruent communication of an attitude with
which the therapist does not feel pleased could well include the feeling
of displeasure that accompanies the attitude. Carl Rogers defined
congruence as a cluster of factors that included congruence of self and
experience, openness to experience, psychological adjustment,
extensionality and maturity. The first aspect of congruence is
congruence of self and experience, typified by individuals who
constantly revise and reorganise their concept of self to include
characteristics that would previously have been inconsistent with self:
Thus when self-experiences are accurately symbolized, and are included
in the self-concept in this accurately symbolized form, then the state
is one of congruence of self and experience. If this were completely
true of all self-experiences, the individual would be a fully
functioning person . . . If it is true of some specific aspect of
experience, such as the individual's experience in a given relationship
or in a given moment of time, then we can say that the individual is to
this degree in a state of congruence. Other terms which are in a general
way synonymous are these: integrated, whole, genuine. (Rogers 1959:
p. 206) Openness to experience, the second factor, occurs when the
self-structure experiences no threat to itself. In other words, openness
to experience is the exact opposite of defensiveness: whether the
stimulus is the impact of a configuration of form, color, or sound in
the environment on the sensory nerves, or a memory trace from the past,
or a visceral sensation of fear, pleasure, or disgust, it is completely
available to the individual's awareness. In the hypothetical person who
is completely open to his experience, his concept of self would be a
symbolization in awareness which would be completely congruent with his
experience. There would, therefore, be no possibility of threat. (Rogers
1959: p. 206) In other words, complete and total openness to experience
would only be possible if there was also a complete absence of denial
and distortion. Thirdly, psychological adjustment means that: the
concept of the self is such that all experiences are or may be
assimilated on a symbolic level into the gestalt of the self-structure.
Optimal psychological adjustment is thus synonymous with complete

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

155

congruence of self and experience, or complete openness to experience.
On the practical level, improvement in psychological adjustment is
equivalent to progress toward this end point. (Rogers 1959: p. 206) If
there is a complete absence of denial and distortion, the individual
experiences no threat and there is therefore no need to feel either
vulnerable or anxious. Extensionality is the fourth ingredient of
congruence, and it is a term derived from general semantics, meaning
that the individual is aware that any experience is an abstraction from
the whole and not the whole itself (the map is not the territory, for
instance), and thus abstractions are by their very nature limited and
differentiated (a fairly comprehensive and novel view of general
semantics can be found in the 'Null-A' science fiction books written by
AE van Vogt). The extensional individual will give 'pride of place' to
facts rather than concepts, and will be aware that such facts are
'anchored' in space and time (as in 'what is true today might not be so
true tomorrow'), evaluation is multiple and varied (gradational, not
simply 'left or right' or 'black or white' or 'right or wrong'), and
inferences and abstractions will be constantly tested against reality.
The fifth and final component in this congruence cluster is maturity,
defined by Carl Rogers as meaning that the person: perceives
realistically and in an extensional manner, is not defensive, accepts
the responsibility of being different from others, accepts
responsibility for his own behavior, evaluates experience in terms of
the evidence coming from his own senses, changes his evaluation of
experience only on the basis of new evidence, accepts others as unique
individuals different from himself, prizes himself, and prizes others.
If his behavior has these characteristics, then there will automatically
follow all the types of behavior which are more popularly thought of as
constituting psychological maturity. (Rogers 1959: p. 207) In summary,
Rogers wrote: Congruence is the term which defines the state. Openness
to experience is the way an internally congruent individual meets new
experience. Psychological adjustment is congruence as viewed from a
social point of view. Extensional is the term which describes the
specific types of behavior of a congruent individual. Maturity is a
broader term describing the personality characteristics and behavior of
a person who is, in general, congruent. (Rogers 1959: p. 207) So
congruence is a state of being comprised of several factors. If the
direct communication of congruence is utterly irrelevant, might there
nevertheless be issues about congruent communications? The answer is
yes, because in terms of the 'core' conditions for client-centred
therapy, congruence was originally placed first of the three because of
the critical importance of both unconditional positive regard and
empathic understanding being authentic and being perceived by the client
as genuine. We have seen that when writing of psychological adjustment,
Carl Rogers stated that 'On the practical level, improvement in
psychological

156

Being empathic

adjustment is equivalent to progress toward this end point'. The
would-be clientcentred therapist, then, is likely to engage in processes
that aim to optimise the likelihood of therapist congruence in
counselling relationships. The therapist who passes judgements,
evaluates, diagnoses, praises, gives opinions, reassures and problem
solves (and so on) may well be being congruent. However, unconditional
positive regard (in particular) and empathic understanding do not
feature as prominent or primary components of this particular
congruence. Therapists who, for instance, tell their clients what they
would do if faced with a similar situation may well be being 'real' and
genuine. However, 'transparency' in client-centred therapy means that
the client will see unconditional positive regard and empathic
understanding residing at the heart of the therapist's presence. In
client-centred therapy there is no professional counselling façade or
mask. The 'naked' or 'uncovered truth' reveals unconditional positive
regard and empathy as deeply embedded and integrated aspects of the
therapist's way of being. Within this client-centred way of being,
congruence is described as a state (whereas unconditional positive
regard is seen as an attitude, and empathic understanding as a process).
Congruence can be viewed as a state of being because at any given moment
the person either is or is not congruent, or more accurately, could be
located somewhere along the continuum between absolute congruence and
total incongruence. However, this does not have to mean that congruence
is a fixed or static state. Indeed Carl Rogers said that if this were so
there would be no client-centred therapists at all! Another point worth
noting is that the stress is upon the experience in the relationship. It
is not to be expected that the therapist is a completely congruent
person at all times. Indeed if this were a necessary condition there
would be no therapy. But it is enough if in this particular moment of
this immediate relationship with this specific person he is completely
and fully himself, with his experience of the moment being accurately
symbolized and integrated into the picture he holds of himself. Thus it
is that imperfect human beings can be of therapeutic assistance to other
imperfect human beings. (Rogers 1959: p. 215) It is a condition, then,
that during the therapy session client-centred counsellors strive to be
as congruent as it is possible for them to be, to come as close to the
ideal of congruence as is possible. Concluding that in terms of any
given moment congruence is a state, and that client-centred therapists
strive to maximise and be in that state during counselling sessions,
does not have to mean that there are no process dimensions to
congruence. We might ask, for example, what factors and activities might
be conducive to maximising congruence during the therapy session.
Perhaps a few possibilities might be worth mentioning here. If therapist
A in the recent example could be seen as congruent but not especially
client-centred, and if therapist A would like to work towards becoming
more client-centred, then looking for ways of developing authentic (that
is, congruent) attitudes and beliefs that value the dignity, capacity
and potential resources of the client (as explored further when looking
at unconditional positive regard) might make sense. Carl Rogers wrote
that we need to permit

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

157

ourselves to be empathic with another, adding that the word 'permit' may
seem strange to many, for: Our first reaction to most of the statements
which we hear from other people is an immediate evaluation, cause or
judgment, rather than an understanding of it. When someone expresses
some feeling or attitude or belief, our tendency is, almost immediately,
to feel 'That's right', or 'That's stupid', 'That's abnormal', 'That's
unreasonable', 'That's incorrect', 'That's not nice'. Very rarely do we
permit ourselves to understand precisely what the meaning of his
statement is to him. I believe this is because understanding is risky.
If I let myself really understand another person, I might be changed by
that understanding. And we all fear change. So as I say, it is not an
easy thing to permit oneself to understand an individual, to enter
thoroughly and completely and empathically into his frame of reference.
It is also a rare thing. (Rogers 1961: p. 18) Thus a link between
congruence and empathic understanding is danger, for personal (that is,
therapist) change will in all likelihood be a consequence of accurate
empathic understanding of clients. Unless therapists are open to the
possibility of personal change to themselves through engaging in
counselling as the counsellor, empathic understanding would be
threatening to the concept of self (and hence the self would strive to
defend itself against this threat). Thus we can see the vital importance
of therapist self-development, for Rogers wrote of being empathic: In
some sense it means that you lay aside your self; this can only be done
by persons who are secure enough in themselves that they know they will
not get lost in what may turn out to be the strange or bizarre world of
the other, and that they can comfortably return to their own world when
they wish. (Rogers 1980: p. 143) Rogers saying that in some sense
therapists 'set aside their self may well be significant. Perhaps it is
symptomatic of the shift from a 'total' laying aside of the self (1951),
to greater therapist transparency (during the 'intervening years'), to
eventual modification into the self being disciplined around respect and
empathy (1987). In other words, the congruence of a client-centred
therapist includes both an openness to the possibility of being changed
oneself through offering therapy and the personal strength and inner
security to boldly (yet sensitively) go where no one has gone before -
often not even the client - safe in the knowledge that there is a way
back. I know that I have some knowledge of who I am, so I can let myself
go into the world of this other person - even though it's a frightening,
crazy, bizarre world - because I know I can come back to my world and be
myself. When one is not very secure in oneself, one can get tangled into
the world of the other and not know who's who. That's a very painful
situation. (Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 281)

158

Being empathic

There are many ways in which Carl Rogers linked therapist congruence and
empathic understanding with a journey of personal growth for the
therapist. For instance, empathic understanding is a quality that the
therapist offers, rather than something that is drawn from the therapist
by specific types of clients or concerns. If empathy comes more easily
with certain clients or problems, the therapist is evaluating and
judgemental (and certainly not unconditional), so becoming nonevaluative
is a major aspect of the journey towards becoming a congruent
clientcentred therapist. How might someone learn to become less
judgemental? It is perhaps the case that each and every (trainee)
client-centred therapist needs to find ways of achieving both broad
(social, political and cultural, for instance) and personal (through
receiving therapy or engaging in equivalent activities themselves and
through counselling practice) understanding of human nature - and
although Carl Rogers shunned the mantle of 'guru', there is nevertheless
much to learn from studying his work. It is also helpful if the
therapist is authentically interested in the other person, demonstrating
'an extraordinary kind of concentrated attention' (Rogers 1951: p. 349).
So often in training groups, for instance, student A speaks and student
B says something about their own experience or thoughts, with the
consequence that student A feels completely unheard, and wonders whether
it was worth saying anything at all in the first place. Students C and D
then pitch in with their own thoughts, feelings and experiences, so
actually no one feels heard or that there is even an attempt to value
the speakers by striving to understand them. As Rogers said, 'Without
attention there can be no understanding and hence no communication'
(Rogers 1951: p. 349) - and this means paying attention to the client's
world offeelings and meanings. Yes, congruence does include therapists
being aware of their inner flow of sensations and meanings. However, if
the therapist's attention is either focused on one specific point that
has significance to the therapist or is devoted to how the therapist
will respond, then he or she is not attending as fully as possible to
the client, and 'this is not communication in any sense of the word'
(Rogers 1951: p. 349). Linked with therapist unconditional positive
regard, the client-centred therapist conveys an authentic valuing of
clients in part through this precious attention to the client's world of
feelings and personal meanings. The accuracy of the therapist's empathic
understanding has often been emphasised, but more important is the
therapist's interest in appreciating the world of the client and
offering such understanding with the willingness to be corrected. This
creates a process in which the therapist gets closer and closer to the
client's meanings and feelings, developing an ever-deepening
relationship based on respect for and understanding of the other person.
(Rogers and Raskin 1989: p. 171) Thus the journey towards becoming a
client-centred therapist involves the development of a genuine desire to
respect others through paying attention to them - not 'laying aside your
own self because Carl Rogers or a facilitator says that this is how it
should be. A genuine desire will be integrated and fully present and
will be based upon the internal locus of evaluation of the therapist
rather than being a value that is introjected from some significant
other - not even Rogers. Another way of putting this is that therapist
needs for positive regard and positive

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

159

self-regard based on introjected values are not the sole determinants of
clientcentred therapist behaviour. However, respect goes two ways, for
Carl Rogers believed that therapist selfrespect was an important factor,
too. Having stated the importance of being able to enter the private
world of another without becoming Tost' in it, he furthered this
thinking when he wrote: Can I be strong enough as a person to be
separate from the other? Can I be a sturdy respecter of my own feelings,
my own needs, as well as his? Can I own and, if need be, express my own
feelings as something belonging to me and separate from his feelings? Am
I strong enough in my own separateness that I will not be downcast by
his depression, frightened by his fear, nor engulfed by his dependency?
Is my inner self hardy enough to realise that I am not destroyed by his
anger, taken over by his need for dependence, nor enslaved by his love,
but that I exist separate from him with feelings and rights of my own?
When I can freely feel this strength of being a separate person, then I
find that I can let myself go much more deeply in understanding and
accepting him because I am not fearful of losing myself. (Rogers 1961:
p. 52) Client-centred therapist congruence therefore includes personal
strength and robust self-respect - a capacity to absorb the strong
feelings of another without either being threatened by or drowning in
them, or being 'seduced' into meeting the needs of the other. Carl
continued: The next question is closely related. Am I secure enough
within myself to permit him his separateness? Can I permit him to be
what he is honest or deceitful, infantile or adult, despairing or
over-confident? Can I give him the freedom to be? Or do I feel that he
should follow my advice, or remain somewhat dependent on me, or mould
himself after me? In this connection think of the interesting small
study by Parson which found that the less well-adjusted and less
competent counsellor tends to induce conformity to himself, to have
clients who model themselves after him. On the other hand, the
better-adjusted and more competent counsellor can interact with a client
through many interviews without interfering with the freedom of the
client to develop a personality quite separate from that of his
therapist. I should prefer to be in this latter class, whether as parent
or supervisor or counsellor. (Rogers 1961: pp. 52-3) If an element of a
therapist's self-concept is 'knowing the way' for clients, then that
therapist is likely to lead clients, advise them, foster dependency or
even see him- or herself as a role model to be copied, followed and
admired. Therefore a crucial factor in client-centred therapist
congruence is not only the strength and self-respect that enables
'uncluttered' entry to the world of the other, but also the strength to
permit the other person the dignity of being whoever it is that they
are.

160

Being empathic

To the therapist, it is a new venture in relating. He feels, 'Here is
this other person, my client. I'm a little afraid of him, afraid of the
depths in him as I am a little afraid of the depths in myself. Yet as he
speaks, I begin to feel a respect for him, to feel my kinship to him. I
sense how frightening his world is for him, how tightly he tries to hold
it in place. I would like to sense his feelings, and I would like him to
know that I understand his feelings. I would like him to know that I
stand with him in his tight, constricted little world, and that I can
look upon it relatively unafraid. Perhaps I can make it a safer world
for him. I would like my feelings in this relationship with him to be as
clear and transparent as possible, so that they are a discernible
reality for him, to which he can return again and again. I would like to
go with him on the fearful journey into himself, into the buried fear,
and hate, and love which he has never been able to let flow in him. I
recognise that this is a very human and unpredictable journey for me, as
well as for him, and that I may, without even knowing my fear, shrink
away within myself from some of the feelings he discovers. To this
extent I know I will be limited in my ability to help him. I realise
that at times his own fears may make him perceive me as uncaring, as
rejecting, as an intruder, as one who does not understand. I want fully
to accept these feelings in him, and yet I hope also that my own real
feelings will show through so clearly that in time he cannot fail to
perceive them. Most of all I want him to encounter in me a real person.
I do not need to be uneasy as to whether my own feelings are
'therapeutic'. What I am and what I feel are good enough to be a basis
for therapy, if I can transparently be what I am and what I feel in
relationship to him. Then perhaps he can be what he is, openly and
without fear.' (Rogers 1961: pp. 66-7) As well as self-respect as a
constituent of therapist congruence, self-understanding is absolutely
crucial, too. To be authentic means that: no inner barriers keep him
from sensing what it feels like to be the client at each moment of the
relationship; and that he can convey something of his empathic
understanding to the client. It means that the therapist has been
comfortable in entering this relationship fully, without knowing
cognitively where it will lead, satisfied with providing a climate which
will permit the client the utmost freedom to become himself. (Rogers
1961: p. 185) Carl Rogers wrote of intercultural work, stating how T
understand your feelings but I've never personally oppressed you' or T
can understand because I've been oppressed, too' may be natural
responses to disadvantaged people, but such expressions are of no help
whatsoever. Effectiveness for Rogers needed to include: the realisation
and ownership of T think white'. For men trying to deal with women's
rage, it may be helpful for the man to recognise T think male'. In spite
of all our efforts to seem unprejudiced, we actually carry

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

161

within us many prejudiced attitudes. Rage needs to be heard. This does
not mean that it simply needs to be listened to. It needs to be
accepted, taken within, and understood empathically. While the diatribes
and accusations appear to be deliberate attempts to hurt the whites - an
act of catharsis to dissolve centuries of abuse, oppression, and
injustice - the truth about rage is that it only dissolves when it is
really heard and understood, without reservations. Afterwards, the
blacks or other minority members change in what seems a miraculous way,
as though a weight has been lifted from their shoulders. To achieve this
kind of empathic listening the white needs to listen to his own
feelings, too, his feelings of anger and resentment at 'unjust'
accusations. At some point he too will need to express these, but the
primary task is to enter empathically the minority world of hate and
bitterness and resentment and to know that world as an understandable,
acceptable part of reality. (Rogers 1978: pp. 133-4) There is also a
'practice makes perfect' element to therapist personal growth, as Rogers
believed that: Experienced therapists offer a higher degree of empathy
to their clients than those less experienced . . . Evidently, therapists
do learn, as the years go by, to come closer to their ideal of a
therapist and to be more sensitively understanding. (Rogers 1980,
p. 148) Stating that this journey of personal growth 'puts a heavy
demand on the therapist as a person', Rogers, albeit with some
discomfort, reluctantly concluded (as had Bergin and Jasper, and Bergin
and Solomon) that those therapists who felt relaxed and confident in
interpersonal relationships offer greater empathic understanding than
therapists who are less well integrated. Rogers wrote of counsellor
training (Bergin and Jasper 1969; Bergin and Solomon 1970): If the
student is to become a therapist, the more he has been able to achieve
of empathic experiencing with other individuals, the better will his
preparations be. There are undoubtedly countless avenues to this end.
(Rogers 1951: p. 437) Thus the process of becoming more congruent can be
a broad-ranging activity, including the study of anthropology,
sociology, cultural studies, gender studies, politics, literature, role
taking in dramatic productions ('method acting'), and humanistic
psychology courses. However, Carl Rogers also wrote that only rarely
does reading something change behaviour to a significant degree, and
that study was therefore not the only way of learning to become more
integrated: It can come simply through the process of living, when a
sensitive person desires to understand the viewpoint and attitudes of
another. (Rogers 1951: p. 437)

162

Being empathic

'Have an open mind', 'try out something client-centred (or
personcentred) experientially, if only in a small way, or even to try
and prove it wrong - and judge the consequences for yourself . . .'. But
if you try them at all, you open yourself to visceral learnings that may
change your behavior and change you. (Rogers 1978: p. 103) There has in
some instances been a regrettable tendency only to define congruent as
meaning transparent, real, genuine, authentic, and being without front,
professional mask or façade, without mentioning the absolute necessity
(and sufficiency) of the primary place of unconditional positive regard
and empathic understanding within client-centred therapist congruence.
Yet just about any practice could be justified in the name of congruence
if the fundamental necessity of the other two core conditions is
omitted: T was just being congruent . . .'. Empathy and therapist
unconditional positive regard In the last section, we saw that Carl
Rogers believed congruence to be the most important element of the
'core' conditions 'in the ordinary interactions of life'. At the same
time, he said of unconditional positive regard: But in certain other
special situations, caring or prizing may turn out to be the most
significant. Such situations include non-verbal relationships - parent
and infant, therapist and mute psychotic, physician and very ill
patient. Caring is an attitude which is known to foster creativity - a
nurturing climate in which delicate, tentative new thoughts and
productive processes can emerge. (Rogers 1975: p. 9) Unconditional
positive regard is placed second in the sequence of the three therapist
conditions because a 'prerequisite' is that the respect of the
counsellor for a client is authentic (that is, congruent), and one of
the most effective ways of communicating (or indeed of the client
perceiving) unconditional positive regard is through the process of the
therapist striving to empathise with and understand the client from
within that client's internal frame of reference. Carl Rogers did not
commence his career in psychology with a particularly strong belief in
the capacity of clients: The more I have worked with people, both in
individual therapy and in encounter groups, the more respect I've come
to have for man as a person worthy of respect and a person of dignity.
This value that I've come to place on the human being is something that
really grows out of my experience. I didn't start with that high a
regard for the individual person. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 74) In
terms of becoming client-centred, there would appear to be a process
along the lines of the more client-centred attitudes and beliefs are put
into practice, the more meaning and strength those beliefs come to have.
What might begin as a 'leap of faith' moves toward being a more solid
belief which moves toward trusting

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

163

in that belief, which moves toward a knowing - and client-centred
therapists implement their faith-belief-trust-knowing not by doing, but
through a way of being. It may well also be that the client needs to
feel fully received in each phase of development in order to move on to
the next one. As they enter counselling courses, trainees tend to be
rather passive. As experience is gained they gradually become more
inclined to listen to their clients and display some willingness to
allow their clients autonomy (self-direction). However, in the early
stages this passivity may be characterised by the trainee counsellor
attempting to 'keep out of the way' of clients by trying to avoid any of
their own feelings or thoughts straying into the session. Sometimes
clients perceive this passivity as indifference rather than prizing -
they might even feel rejected as they perceive their counsellor as not
caring much about them, hardly seeing themselves as individuals worthy
of their therapist's respect. Sadly, some counsellor training seems to
be built around passivity and counsellors 'keeping out of the way', and
Rogers wrote: This misconception of the approach has led to considerable
failure in counseling - and for good reasons . . . Hence the counselor
who plays a merely passive role, a listening role, may be of assistance
to some clients . . . but by and large his results will be minimal, and
many clients will leave, both disappointed in their failure to receive
help and disgusted with the counselor for having nothing to offer.
(Rogers 1951: p. 27) We have learned that clients entering therapy are
likely to be psychologically defensive because they are vulnerable and
anxious. They are vulnerable and anxious because their ability to deny
or distort experiencing that is threatening to their self-concept is no
longer entirely successful, so there is a perceived or subceived state
of tension - the client is incongruent. Denied or distorted experience
is most likely to be permitted access to conscious awareness (and
therefore be open to expression, exploration and ownership) if there is
an absence or relative absence of perceived threat. Yet empathic
understanding by a therapist might in itself (that is, without
authenticity and respect) feel very threatening to clients. If the
therapist might be thought of as an 'alter ego mirror' for a moment,
then no matter how 'magical' the mirror, the client might not want to
see or meet with their 'reflection' or 'doppelganger' (as stated in
Chapter 2, in some sense there is nothing more 'confrontational' than
accurate empathic understanding). If, for instance, a therapist senses
that underlying a client's anger is deep pain, the client might at that
moment be willing to engage with their rage yet feel really fearful of
connecting with their hurt. although it may be true that profound,
sensitive and delicate empathic understanding would in this instance
include a sensing of the client's fear of the pain that lies behind
their anger, there is another crucial factor, too, namely that the
therapist respects the client's defensive needs (prizing not prising
again). When Rogers defined congruence as a state, he defined
unconditional positive regard as an attitude. This respectful attitude
means a variety of things at a variety of levels. The importance of
congruence is that unconditional positive regard is genuine. The
importance of empathic understanding is that it is the best way to
communicate unconditional positive regard and be respectful. What
different

164

Being empathic

meanings, then, can be ascribed to this precious and rare (because most
relationships are conditional) attitude of unconditional positive
regard? First, the client-centred therapist holds a deep belief in the
actualising tendency as the motivating force in human beings.
Furthermore, the actualising tendency is viewed as trustworthy and
positive, for given the right conditions people are by nature
co-operative, social, constructive, trustworthy, creative, responsible,
complex and fluid forward-moving entities. This fundamental acceptance
of the actualising tendency as the primary human growth factor enables
the clientcentred therapist to see the positive potential in anyone and
everyone. For sure, not everyone does meet with the 'right' conditions
(that is, the conditions most conducive for growth), yet everyone has
within them the potential to become all that they could be - and given
the right conditions that 'becoming' will be in a positive direction.
Carl Rogers stated that his belief in the positive nature at the heart
of all human beings was the single most revolutionary and radical aspect
of client-centred therapy. For so long, feelings and thoughts (or at
least, feelings and thoughts deemed to be antisocial, harmful, negative
or just plain wrong) were considered as things to be managed,
controlled, suppressed, changed, repressed, altered or influenced. From
most religions through to Freudian psychoanalysis, human beings were
viewed with notions of 'original sin', and unless the 'raging id' was to
be controlled, the consequence would be brutal mayhem. Likewise
behaviour was also something to be evaluated (by those who knew best, of
course) and either encouraged (or reinforced), controlled (or managed)
or eliminated altogether, depending upon the social, political and
psychological mores and norms of the time. The revolutionary view of
psychologist Carl Rogers that in fact the underlying motivational
tendency in human beings was positive and trustworthy met - and still
meets - with a great deal of scepticism, disbelief and scorn. On many,
many occasions Rogers was asked how anyone could be so naive as to
believe that human beings are inherently 'good' when there is clearly so
much 'bad' happening in the world around us. He tended to respond to
such scepticism, disbelief and scorn in two ways. He acknowledged that
of course there was the possibility that the human race would eventually
destroy itself and even the planet earth in one way or another - for
instance, the proliferation of weaponry and environmental damage hardly
bodes well. However, he pointed out that there was also the possibility
that we would not destroy either ourselves or the planet, and in the
meantime he chose to put all of his energy into the potential for
positive growth rather than destruction. Secondly, he stated that of
course therapists encountered many of the more unpleasant and
unpalatable aspects of living. Indeed, this very difficulty with human
nature is why so many people seek counselling in the first place.
However, his experience over and over and over again was that if he
could be genuinely respectful and empathically understanding of the
apparently negative, aggressive and hostile aspects of human nature and
behaviour - if he could be a sensitive companion to such feelings and
thoughts without judging, condemning, and trying to control or change
them - then inevitably he discovered that 'behind' or 'beneath' them are
the positive attributes of the actualising tendency. This exactly
matches my own experience. In some 30 years as a counsellor I have met
with a high number (thousands) of clients who have disclosed anger,
hostility, hate, rage and aggression, yet without fail it has

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

165

transpired that behind their anger lies hurt and pain - and behind their
hurt and pain lies a desperate need to simply love and be loved, value
and be valued, like and be liked, and so on. Having said that given the
right conditions the human organism is essentially trustworthy,
co-operative, responsible, creative and forward moving, it is all too
apparent that very often people do not encounter conditions that are
fully conducive to healthy growth. As was stated earlier on when looking
at the notion of incongruence, all too often interpersonal relationships
are conditional there are strings attached. Unconditional positive
regard ideally has no strings attached, and it is this very
unconditional acceptance that, if experienced, tends to reduce feelings
of threat and therefore the need for defensiveness (as will be more
fully explored when we look at therapeutic process in Chapter 5).
Another link between unconditional positive regard and empathic
understanding is that the client-centred therapist understands (and
accepts) that were any human being to have the same history and
experience that this particular client has, they would in all likelihood
exhibit similar feelings, thoughts and behaviours. There is a kind of
'there but for the grace of fate go I' feel to it. In other words, get
the good breaks and chances in life and certain consequences are likely,
but get only bad breaks or be deprived of opportunities, and outcomes
might be equally predictable - and very understandable. Linking
congruence and unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding,
let us not forget the importance of therapists offering and being the
core conditions to and for themselves. If therapists can understand
themselves they are likely to be selfaccepting, too. One way of putting
this is that I feel I have become more adequate in letting myself be
what I am . . . It seems to me to have value because the curious paradox
is that when I accept myself as I am, I change. I believe that I have
learned this from my clients as well as within my own experience - that
we cannot change, we cannot move away from what we are, until we
thoroughly accept what we are. Then change seems to come about almost
unnoticed. (Rogers 1961: p. 17) We saw when looking at incongruence how
all too often our conditions of worth can be formulated around the
values and judgements of significant others, and that these conditions
of worth may thwart the positive nature of the actualising tendency. To
be congruent, client-centred therapists will have explored and
reappraised their conditions of worth, retaining and reintegrating those
introjected values that have personal meaning and discarding those
introjected values that do not. To be a client-centred therapist,
unconditional positive regard will have become deeply embedded within
the concept of self - not because Carl Rogers said so, but because both
the giving and the receiving of unconditional positive regard have been
personally experienced as meaningfully helpful. Unconditional positive
regard will be valued from an internal locus of experiential evaluation
and be a primary constituent of the therapist's self-concept as an
attitudinal way of being that ideally is in complete harmony with the
actualising tendency. If the client-centred practitioner holds an
unswerving faith in the primacy and positive nature of the actualising
tendency, other consequences follow. Many of

166

Being empathic

these repercussions could be deemed 'politicar in nature (and it was
only late in his career that Carl Rogers acknowledged the political
dimensions of clientcentred therapy), such as a belief in the right of
the individual to self-determination or autonomy. A belief in the
sanctity of the dignity of human beings follows, too. If the therapist
believes that it is the therapist who knows best what is good for the
client, then that therapist is blatantly not respectful of the capacity,
resources and potential within human beings for autonomy and dignity. As
already stated, Carl Rogers believed one of the most effective ways to
communicate unconditional positive regard is to be empathic, as: it
would appear that for me, as counsellor, to focus my whole attention and
effort upon understanding and perceiving as the client perceives and
understands, is a striking operational demonstration of the belief I
have in the worth and the significance of this individual client.
Clearly the most important value which I hold is, as indicated by my
attitudes and my verbal behaviour, the client himself. also the fact
that I permit the outcome to rest upon this deep understanding is
probably the most vital operational evidence which could be given that I
have confidence in the potentiality of the individual for constructive
change and development in the direction of a more full and satisfying
life. As a seriously disturbed client wrestles with his utter inability
to make any choice, or another client struggles with his strong urges to
commit suicide, the fact that I enter with deep understanding into the
desperate feelings that exist, but do not attempt to take over
responsibility, is a most meaningful expression of basic confidence in
the forward-moving tendencies in the human organism. We might say, then,
that for many therapists functioning from a client-centred orientation,
the sincere aim of getting 'within' the attitudes of the client, of
entering the client's internal frame of reference, is the most complete
implementation which has thus far been formulated, for the central
hypothesis of respect for and reliance upon the capacity of the person.
(Rogers 1951: pp. 35-6) Clients really are worth the therapist's efforts
in striving to understand them, and the fact that the 'non-directive'
counsellor respects clients' self-direction and selfresponsibility is
meaningful evidence of the therapist's trust in the inner capacity and
resources of clients, who thus perceive (to whatever degree) a very
precious and rare respect and trust in themselves. If the counsellor
maintains this consistently client-centred attitude, and if he
occasionally conveys to the client something of his understanding, then
he is doing what he can to give the client the experience of being
deeply respected. Here the confused, tentative, almost incoherent
thinking of an individual who knows he has been evaluated as abnormal is
really respected by being deemed well worth understanding. (Rogers 1951:
p. 44)

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

167

So the client perceives that the therapist holds and lives by an
attitude which indicates that the client is worth the effort of striving
to understand him or her. Again, this could be reformulated using an
'If-then' approach. If person A strives to the utmost to understand
person B, then person B is likely to perceive how respectful person A is
of person B. Acceptance does not mean much until it involves
understanding. It is only as I understand the feelings and thoughts
which seem so horrible to you, or so weak, or so sentimental, or so
bizarre - it is only as I see them as you see them, and accept them and
you, that you feel really free to explore all the hidden nooks and
frightening crannies of your inner and often buried experience. This
freedom is an important condition of the relationship. There is implied
here a freedom to explore oneself at both conscious and unconscious
levels, as rapidly as one can dare to embark on this dangerous quest.
There is also a complete freedom from any type of moral or diagnostic
evaluation, since all such evaluations are, I believe, always
threatening. (Rogers 1961: p. 34) The intertwined nature of
unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding comes across
very clearly in the following passage written by Carl Rogers in 1980. He
states that a consequence of empathic understanding is that: the
recipient feels valued, cared for, accepted as the person that he or she
is. It might seem that we have here stepped into another area, and that
we are no longer speaking of empathy. But this is not so. It is
impossible to accurately sense the perceptual world of another person
unless you value that person and his or her world - unless you, in some
sense, care. Hence, the message comes through to the recipient that
'this other individual trusts me, thinks I'm worthwhile. Perhaps I am
worth something. Perhaps I could value myself. Perhaps I could care for
myself. (Rogers 1980: pp. 152-3) Stating that The highest expression of
empathy is accepting and non-judgmental . . . because it is impossible
to be accurately perceptive of another's inner world if you have formed
an evaluative opinion of that person', Carl Rogers suggests an
experiential way of testing this: If you doubt this statement, choose
someone you know with whom you deeply disagree and who is, in your
judgment, definitely wrong or mistaken. Now try to state that
individual's views, beliefs, and feelings so accurately that he or she
will agree that you have sensitively and correctly described his or her
stance. I predict that nine times out of ten you will fail, because your
judgment of the person's views creeps into your description of them.
Consequently, true empathy is always free of any evaluative or
diagnostic quality. The recipient perceives this with some surprise: 'If
I am not being judged, perhaps I am not so evil or abnormal as I have

168

Being empathic

thought. Perhaps I don't have to judge myself so harshly.' Thus the
possibility of self-acceptance is gradually increased. (Rogers 1980:
p. 154) Quoting RD Laing (and likening Laing to Buber), Rogers agreed
with the notion that 'the sense of identity requires the existence of
another by whom one is known' (Laing 1965), and that our very existence
is affirmed or confirmed by interaction ('contact') with or being fully
received by another person. Authentic, respectful, empathic
understanding serves to give this 'needed confirmation that one does
exist as a separate, valued person with an identity' (Rogers 1980:
p. 155). Having spent so long exploring a necessary and sufficient
condition, the comments made by Carl Rogers when he was interviewed for
RTE Dublin television in 1985 might seem a little surprising. The
interviewer, John Masterson, said to him: One of the requirements you
place upon yourself is to unconditionally accept and have unconditional
positive regard for the person who you are trying to help. That
presumably must be very difficult in some cases . . . (Rogers 1985) To
which Carl Rogers replied: No, that's a slight misunderstanding. What I
have said is that I am very fortunate in the relationship if that
feeling and attitude exists in me. I am very fortunate and the client is
very fortunate if I can feel I really accept you fully just as you are.
(Rogers 1985) This comment was and is extremely liberating for me. For
many years my introjected value, my condition of worth, was that
experiencing and offering the conditions was both necessary and
sufficient, and if I failed I would give myself (or be given - maybe by
a supervisor or by peers) a hard time. The client-centred conditions had
become, at times at least, a stick with which to beat myself, or to be
beaten with, or, worse still, as a trainer a stick with which I would
beat trainees! Now, some 28 years after first postulating the necessary
and sufficient clientcentred conditions in 1957, here was Carl saying
'No, that's a slight misunderstanding'. Yet how qualitatively different
it is - how uplifting - to feel fortunate if I could succeed to some
degree as compared with feeling a failure if I did not. Rogers
continued: Sometimes that's very difficult. I held an interview with a
young man in South Africa. I didn't know anything about him. It turned
out he was an officer in the South African army. Now for me, that meant
a real . . . It meant that I stretched my empathic abilities to their
very limit, to try to be with him, to try to understand him, to try to
be caring toward him. I didn't feel I did too well - and yet I've
learned since that interview really changed the course of his life.
(Rogers 1985)

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

169

Once again, then, we see how it is that imperfect human beings can be of
help to other imperfect human beings - and actually what Rogers said in
1985 was not especially new, as he wrote eight years earlier (in 1978):
It is not, of course, possible to feel such an unconditional caring all
the time. A therapist who is real will often have very different
feelings, negative feelings toward the client. Hence it is not to be
regarded as a 'should' that the therapist should have an unconditional
positive regard for the client. It is simply a fact that unless this is
a reasonably frequent ingredient in the relationship, constructive
client change is less likely. (Rogers 1978: p. 10) To think (and
experience) in terms of it being fortunate if unconditional positive
regard frequently exists in the therapeutic relationship feels far more
conducive to developing such a respectful attitude than to experience a
sense of failure if a condition is not met. Now let us turn to empathic
understanding, the most effective medium through which clients are able
to perceive the deep respect of the therapist for them, this ongoing
desire of the therapist to understand, this caring and valuing of the
client, and this freedom to explore in a non-judgemental relationship.

Empathy and empathic understanding We know from our research that such
empathic understanding understanding with a person, not about him - is
such an effective approach that it can bring about major changes in
personality. (Rogers 1961: p. 332) We have learned that congruence is a
state and that unconditional positive regard is an attitude that is
authentic if congruent. The third of the therapist conditions, namely
empathic understanding, is a process through which congruent
unconditional positive regard is most effectively conveyed. Returning
again to what Carl Rogers had to say about the relative importance of
each of the therapist conditions: Then, in my experience, there are
other situations in which the empathic way of being has the highest
priority. When the other person is hurting, confused, troubled, anxious,
alienated, and terrified, or when he or she is doubtful of self-worth,
uncertain as to identity, then understanding is called for. The gentle
and sensitive companionship of an empathic stance - accompanied, of
course, by the other two attitudes - provides illumination and healing.
In such situations deep understanding is, I believe, the most precious
gift one can give to another. (Rogers 1975: p. 9) If the therapist is
client-centred, then unconditional positive regard and empathic
understanding will be deeply held and integrated personal
characteristics, especially evident in the therapy hour. If the
therapist experiences an authentic (that is, congruent) attitude of
unconditional positive regard towards a client, then the most effective
expression of this will be through the process of empathic under-

170

Being empathic

standing. This deep understanding is not an understanding about, but a
delicate sensing of the personal feelings and meanings that reside in
another person: My belief is that, by extending sensitive empathy to
another person, it enables him or her to come forth and gain a better
understanding of himself and what direction he is going. (Rogers and
Teich 1992: p. 55)

Empathy and client perception of therapist unconditional positive regard
and empathic understanding although a counselling relationship can be
initiated by the therapist providing the core conditions: Unless the
attitudes I have been describing have been to some degree communicated
to the client, and perceived by him, they do not exist in his perceptual
world and thus cannot be effective. Consequently it is necessary to add
one more condition to the equation . . . It is that when the client
perceives, to a minimal degree, the genuineness of the counselor and the
acceptance and empathy which the counselor experiences for him, then
development in personality and change in behavior are predicted. (Rogers
and Stevens 1967: p. 96) Two people are in contact (or psychological
contact, if preferred), each making a perceived difference in the
experiential (or perceptual, or phenomenological) world of the other. We
have already seen that: In a deeply defended person . . . change is
difficult to bring about. Change tends to occur more in the person who
is already somewhat open-minded and searching in his approach to life.
(Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 73) Thus clients entering therapy are likely
to be seekers - they will be in stage two of the process. The therapist
is congruent in the relationship and the client is incongruent, being
vulnerable or anxious. The therapist experiences unconditional positive
regard towards and engages in a process of empathic understanding of the
client. The notion of reciprocal empathy links with client perception of
the therapist's empathy. Rogers said: It seems to me that the moment
where persons are most likely to change, or I even think of it as the
moments in which people do change, are the moments in which perhaps the
relationship is experienced the same on both sides. (Rogers 1989: p. 53)
The therapist's perception of the client is motivated by an authentic
desire to continually respect and understand that client's world from
within the client's internal frame of reference. While therapists
'perception check' their sensing of clients' feelings and personal
meanings, the notion of reciprocal empathy indicates that, to some
degree, therapists rely on the capacity of their client to

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

171

empathise with and understand their therapist's attempts to empathically
understand that client. As Rogers wrote when reviewing various studies:
it is the attitudes and feelings of the therapist, rather than his
theoretical orientation, which are important. His procedures and
techniques are less important than his attitudes. It is also worth
noting that it is the way in which his attitudes and procedures are
perceived which makes a crucial difference to the client, and that it is
this perception which is crucial. (Rogers 1961: p. 44) Whether through
the therapist's ongoing desire to understand or via reciprocated
empathy, for a therapeutic relationship and engagement in a therapeutic
process to occur, the authentic unconditional positive regard and
empathic understanding of the therapist must be perceived by the client
at least to a minimal degree (or in terms of the therapist striving to
communicate respect and empathy, then at least to a minimal degree such
communication needs to be achieved): We know that if the therapist holds
within himself attitudes of deep respect and full acceptance for this
client as he is, and similar attitudes toward the client's
potentialities for dealing with himself and his situations; if these
attitudes are suffused with a sufficient warmth, which transforms them
into the most profound type of liking or affection for the core of the
person; and if a level of communication is reached so that the client
can begin to perceive that the therapist understands the feelings he is
experiencing and accepts them at the full depth of that understanding,
then we may be sure that the process is already initiated. (Rogers 1961:
pp. 74-5) What does 'at least to a minimal degree' actually mean? Does
it mean that if during a therapy session a therapist communicates, say,
20 times, and three or four of those communications could be deemed
authentically respectful and empathic, then the condition of at least to
a minimal degree has been met (despite 16 or 17 communications not being
respectful or empathic)? Does it mean that if the therapist is
authentically respectful and empathic for 5 minutes out of 50 this
condition has been met? Does it mean that if every therapist
communication is characterised by low levels of authentic unconditional
positive regard and empathic understanding, then at least to a minimal
degree the sixth condition has been achieved? Carl Rogers wrote that:
This struggle to achieve the client's internal frame of reference, to
gain the center of his own perceptual field and see with him as
perceiver, is rather closely analogous to some of the Gestalt phenomena.
Just as, by active concentration, one can suddenly see the diagram in
the psychology text as representing a descending rather than an
ascending stairway or can perceive two faces instead of a candlestick,
so by active effort the counselor can put himself into the client's
frame of reference. But just as in the case of the visual perception,
the figure occasionally changes, so the counselor may at times find
himself standing outside the client's frame of reference and looking as
an

172

Being empathic

external perceiver at the client. This almost invariably happens, for
example, during a long pause or silence on the client's part. The
counselor may gain a few clues which permit an accurate empathy, but to
some extent he is forced to view the client from an observer's point of
view, and can only actively assume the client's perceptual field when
some type of expression again begins. (Rogers 1951: p. 32) There are
nearly always 'some clues' that the therapist can absorb or sense.
Equally, while the therapist might constantly strive to empathically
understand, it is extremely unlikely that deep empathic understanding
will be experienced as constant. There may be some clues, too, as to how
training in client-centred therapy helps to bring about increased
empathy. When comparing types of counsellor communications in written
papers before and after training, even back in 1951 Carl Rogers found
that there was increased 'reflection' (from around 50% to around 85%),
and decreased interpretation (from approximately 19% to around 11%).
Support, and moralising were reduced to zero (from around 8% and 5%
respectively), and diagnosing fell from about 18% to 3 % . Studying
counselling practice produced similar results. 'Reflection' increased
(from around 11% to 59%), as did information giving (from 2.5% to 3.9%)
and 'innocuous' communications such as acceptance or silence (from
around 5% to 11%). There was reduced interpretation (from 22% to 15%),
support (from 15% to 5%), 'oughtness' (from 20% to 3%), information
seeking (from 16% to 2%) and personal opinion (from 9% to 1%) (Rogers
1951: p. 455). Degrees of empathy The notion of low, intermediate and
high levels of empathy was briefly introduced in Chapter 1. In summary:
At a relatively low level of empathic sensitivity the therapist responds
with clarity only to the patient's most obvious feelings. At an
intermediate level, the therapist usually responds accurately to the
client's more obvious feelings and occasionally recognizes some that are
less apparent, but in the process of tentative probing, he may
anticipate feelings which are not current or may misinterpret the
present feelings. At a higher level, the therapist is aware of many
feelings and experiences which are not so evident, but his lack of
complete understanding is shown by the slightly inaccurate nature of his
deeper responses . . . At a very high level of empathic understanding,
the therapist's responses move, with sensitivity and accuracy, into
feelings and experiences that are only hinted at by the client. It is
this sensitive and accurate grasp and communication of the patient's
inner world that facilitates the patient's self-exploration and
consequent personality growth. (Rogers and Truax 1967: p. 106) Yet
further clues about degrees of empathic understanding might be gained
from the work of Barrett-Lennard (quoted by Carl Rogers) who developed a
Relationship Inventory (Barrett-Lennard 1959) that in part tried to
measure the degree to

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

173

which clients felt empathically understood. Thus a scale from high to
low empathy looked like this: • • • • •

He appreciates what my experience feels like to me. He tries to see
things through my eyes. Sometimes he thinks that I feel a certain way
because he feels that way. He understands what I say from a detached,
objective point of view. He understands my words but not the way I feel.

Over the years, a variety of writers from a range of different
orientations have come up with a variety of empathy 'rating scales' or
other strategies for evaluating the degree of empathy (or empathic
understanding) deemed to be present in a (therapeutic) relationship.
While in person-centred counsellor training there may well be an
across-the-board agreement that developing empathy is a fundamental
aspect of the learning, there would appear to be little or no agreement
on measuring or evaluating the degree of empathy necessary as evidence
of practice good enough to merit the award of a diploma, despite the UK
Government's focus on 'benchmarking'. It is also true to say that, over
the years, there has been some resistance to empathy 'rating scales' in
person-centred circles. For instance, some evaluation mechanisms have
been perceived as overly mechanistic - 'add 0.5 to stage three if a
later element is present', 'subtract 0.25 if an earlier element is
missing', and so on. However, formulating some kind of structure for
exploring the degree of empathy that might (or might not) be present in
counselling relationships might still be helpful for two main reasons.
First, therapists in the UK (and maybe this is especially true of
'person-centred' counsellors or those in existential and 'humanistic'
schools) have tended to be rather 'anti-evaluation' because such
monitoring is reminiscent of 'Big Brother'-type meddling. Yet as
therapists perhaps we should be accountable - to our clients, to
ourselves, and to our profession (and to our employer, if we have one).
Secondly, any activity that has the potential to develop a
client-centred therapeutic way of being is worth engaging in. Ongoing
monitoring of the degree to which therapists are able both to experience
empathy and to communicate their sensing of client feelings and meanings
could be valuable in terms of personal and professional development.
Here, then, is an attempt to define some of the significant
characteristics of empathic understanding (this time from low to high)
(Vincent 2002c): • Level A: The therapist communicates some
understanding of what the client is experiencing in the moment, if only
in a somewhat diluted way. • Level B: The therapist communicates some
sensing of what the client is feeling in the here and now, if only in a
somewhat diluted way. • Level C: The therapist communicates some sensing
of what the client's present experiencing means to the client, if only
in a somewhat diluted way. • Level D: The therapist communicates some
understanding of what the client is experiencing in the moment, at
approximately the same intensity as the client's disclosure. • Level E:
The therapist communicates some sensing of what the client is feeling in
the here and now, at approximately the same intensity as the client's
disclosure.

174

Being empathic

• Level F: The therapist communicates some sensing of what the client's
present experiencing means to the client, at approximately the same
intensity as the client's disclosure. • Level G: The therapist
communicates some sensing of what the client is feeling in the moment,
and a degree of understanding why the client feels as she does, if only
in a somewhat diluted way. • Level H: The therapist communicates some
sensing of what the client is feeling in the here and now, some
understanding of why the client feels as she does, and a degree of
sensing what this experiencing means to the client, if only in a
somewhat diluted way. • Level I: The therapist communicates some sensing
of what the client is feeling in the moment, and a degree of
understanding why the client feels as she does, at approximately the
same intensity as the client's disclosure. • Level J: The therapist
communicates some sensing of what the client is feeling in the here and
now, some understanding of why the client feels as she does, and a
degree of sensing what this experiencing means to the client, at
approximately the same intensity as the client's disclosure. • Level K:
The therapist communicates some sensing of here-and-now client feelings
at an intensity similar to the client's disclosure, and feelings of
which the client seems only dimly aware. • Level L: The therapist
communicates some sensing of what the client is feeling in the here and
now, some understanding of why the client feels as she does, and a
degree of sensing what this experiencing means to the client, at
approximately the same intensity as the client's disclosure, together
with sensing feelings and meanings of which the client seems only dimly
aware. Anything presented as a hierarchy carries with it the danger
that, to give an example, empathy level L is far more desirable than
empathy level A- and the whole picture isn't as clear as that. For
instance, there can be a tendency (especially within person-centred
circles) to value feelings ('gut stuff') above thoughts ('head stuff').
Yet any valuing of one aspect of empathic understanding above another
hardly sits comfortably with unconditional positive regard of whatever a
client is experiencing from moment to moment. Suppose that in a first
session with a client I notice upon reflection that many of my
communications are characteristic of empathy level A. Does this mean
that I have to give myself a hard time and beat myself up? No, it
doesn't have to mean that I must come down really heavily on myself. It
could be, for instance, that if I replay the tape inserting alternative
communications at empathy level L, I realise that to have done so at the
time would have been inappropriate and insensitive in the extreme to
what the client was experiencing in that moment. Had I communicated at
empathy level L throughout, maybe my main intent would have been to
demonstrate my own cleverness or something - certainly not
client-centred! Something akin to this formulation of degrees of
empathic understanding might be of use to (trainee) therapists when
analysing a tape-recorded client session. The tape can be paused at any
point and the therapist's communication can then be explored, looking at
the degree to which empathy was experienced, the extent to which
empathic understanding was communicated, the links

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

175

between the levels of experienced and communicated empathy and where the
client and therapist are in terms of therapeutic process, and the level,
appropriateness and sensitivity of each and every spoken word. In the
previous example, it was stated that a constant striving for level L
empathic understanding in a first session might be more to do with a
therapist needing to prove their own cleverness than with demonstrating
respect for and sensitivity to the client. On the other hand, if a
therapist realises upon reflection that only understanding (level A) was
communicated when feelings and meanings were evident, then there is an
opportunity to explore why this might have been, and why at the time the
counsellor was unable to experience and offer, say, level C empathy.
Again, let this format come with a health warning. If this kind of
reflecting on practice becomes too mechanistic, the essence of the
I-thou relationship could well be lost. Carl Rogers seemed keen to take
a step back from rating each and every therapist communication on
empathy scales. Perhaps like his daughter Natalie he feared that a
microscopic obsession with detail ran the risk of losing the essence of
the I-thou relationship - and Rogers definitely feared (as we have
already seen) that a possible consequence of focusing too minutely on
counsellor responses could lead to a proliferation of cold, wooden
techniques and skills training. Perhaps it might make sense, then, to
transpose something that he wrote when asked how long counsellor
training should be. He said: some training is better than none, more
training is better than some. (Rogers 1951: p. 442) Our answer, then, to
the question 'What does at least to a minimal degree actually mean?'
could be: • Some unconditional positive regard is better than none. More
unconditional positive regard is better than some. • More unconditional
positive regard is better than some. and Some empathic understanding is
better than none. • More Some empathic empathic understanding
understanding is is better better than than some. none. • More empathic
understanding is better than some. Finally, Rogers wrote: And with
clients in therapy, I am often impressed with the fact that even a
minimal amount of empathic understanding - a bumbling and faulty attempt
to catch the confused complexity of the client's meaning - is helpful,
though there is no doubt that it is most helpful when I can see and
formulate clearly the meanings in his experiencing which for him have
been unclear and tangled. (Rogers 1961: pp. 53-4) In Chapter 5 we shall
explore the impact of some empathy being better than none and more being
better than some in relation to client-centred therapeutic process. The
journey of untangling begins . . .

176

Being empathic

Summary Contact Carl Rogers and his colleagues learned that a
describable, sequential and orderly process, similar for all clients,
was a predictable consequence of incongruent clients coming into contact
(that is, being in a relationship within which each person is aware of
the other) with a therapist for whom authentic respect and empathy were
key personal traits. When the therapist is client-centred and the client
is incongruent and contact has been established: then we may be sure
that the process is already initiated. (Rogers 1961: pp. 74-5) Client
incongruence We have seen that Carl Rogers believed it was essential for
therapists to understand the intellectual context of therapy, and this
includes an in-depth understanding of the concepts behind all of the
necessary and sufficient conditions for personality change, including
the nature of human beings and how they experience, and a concept of the
self - if only because it is so relevant to clients (and this is about
client- centred therapy). Incongruence, wrote Carl Rogers: results when
the individual's experience is quite discrepant from the way he has
organized himself. (Rogers and Evans 1975: pp. 19-20) The conditions of
worth embedded in a client's self-concept may well have served to thwart
his or her actualising tendency. Therapist congruence Congruence is a
construct composed of five main elements, namely congruence of self and
experience, openness to experience, psychological adjustment,
extensionality and maturity. It means that he is being himself, not
denying himself. No one fully achieves this condition, yet the more the
therapist is able to listen acceptantly to what is going on within
himself, and the more he is able to be the complexity of his feelings
without fear, the higher the degree of his congruence. (Rogers and
Stevens 1967: pp. 90-1) However, it is crucial to understand that: Being
real does not involve us doing anything we want to do; it means a
disciplined approach. (Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 284) Therapy cannot
be considered to be client-centred if therapist congruence does not as
the primary feature include deeply integrated and experienced respect
and empathy. As this too is so crucial, let us again read that:

Empathic understanding: in the necessary and sufficient conditions

177

For therapy to occur the wholeness of the therapist in the relationship
is primary, but a part of the congruence of the therapist must be the
experience of unconditional positive regard and the experience of
empathic understanding. (Rogers 1959: p. 215) Therapist unconditional
positive regard Unconditional positive regard is about valuing a person
without judging that person as good or bad, or as more or less worthy of
respect: Unconditional positive regard, when communicated by the
therapist, serves to provide the nonthreatening context in which the
client can explore and experience the most deeply shrouded elements of
his inner self. The therapist is neither paternalistic, nor sentimental,
nor superficially social and agreeable. But his deep caring is a
necessary ingredient of the 'safe' context in which the client can come
to explore himself and share deeply with another human being. (Rogers
1989: p. 14) Therapist empathic understanding Carl wrote that:

to enter deeply with this man into his confused struggle for selfhood is
perhaps the best implementation we now know for indicating the meaning
of our basic hypothesis that the individual represents a process which
is deeply worthy of respect, both as he is and with regard to his
potentialities. (Rogers 1951: p. 45) Entering deeply, sensitively and
delicately into a client's world means sensing their feelings and
personal meanings as if you were that client, yet having a strong enough
sense of your own selfhood to ensure that you remain a companion and do
not get lost in the other's world. The client perceives . . . The
client-centred therapist has presence in the relationship - so much so
that nothing other than the client's world of feelings and meanings
matters very much to the therapist during the client's time. There is a
very real sense of two people being deeply connected (or at least the
client senses that the therapist is striving towards a profound
engagement). In striving to enter fully the private world of another
individual, the therapist to some degree relies upon the client to
empathise with and understand this effort - hence the notion of
reciprocal empathy. So the client-centred therapist strives to be in a
state of congruence when with clients, a state that incorporates an
authentic (because it is congruent), deeply held attitude of
unconditional positive regard that is perceived by clients through a
process of empathic understanding.

178

Being empathic

If a person is incongruent, then they might seek counselling. If the
therapist is congruent, then unconditional positive regard will, in
harmony with the actualising tendency, be deeply embedded and integrated
within the therapist's self-concept. If the therapist is congruently
respectful, then the client will perceive this through the process of
being empathically understood by the therapist. If the client receives
congruent unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding, then
a therapeutic process will unfold. In other words, If the therapist can
be the core conditions, then the client will do the rest.

Chapter 5

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process Therapist be, client do
Carl Rogers wrote of empathy: We know from our research that such
empathic understanding understanding with a person, not about him - is
such an effective approach that it can bring about major changes in
personality. (Rogers 1961: p. 332) Having looked earlier at the notion
of two people coming into (at least minimal) contact, and how a
therapeutic relationship might be established in which the client feels
received, we can now begin to fathom what these 'major changes in
personality' might be and how they might come about. Rogers wrote that
client-centred therapeutic process is: \[a\] unique and dynamic
experience, different for each individual, yet exhibiting a lawfulness
and order which is astonishing in its generality. (Rogers 1961: p. 74)
Carl became increasingly disinterested in questions such as 'Does
client-centred therapy apply to this, that or the other, and will it
cure these ailments?'. While acknowledging that, for some individuals,
hospitalisation, drugs or other medical aid might well be appropriate,
he wrote: client-centered therapy is very widely applicable - indeed in
one sense it is applicable to all people. An atmosphere of acceptance
and respect, of deep understanding, is a good climate for personal
growth . . . This does not mean that it will cure every psychological
condition, and indeed the concept of cure is quite foreign to the
approach . . . Yet a psychological climate which the individual can use
for deeper selfunderstanding, for a reorganization of self in the
direction of more realistic integration, for the development of more
comfortable and mature ways of behaving - this is not an opportunity
which is of use for some groups and not for others. It would appear
rather to be a point of view which might in basic ways be applicable to
all individuals, even though it might not resolve all the problems or
provide all the help which a particular individual needs. (Rogers 1951:
p. 230) While Rogers was not in any way opposed to legitimate and
reasonable questioning of client-centred therapy, he also proposed that
the asking of such questions was akin to enquiring whether gamma rays
would be an appropriate

180

Being empathic

application or cure for chilblains! It is perhaps interesting to note
that the 'Ah yes, but does this type of therapy apply to or cure A, B
and C through to X, Y and Z?' type enquiry is only rarely encountered as
a critique of approaches other than client-centred therapy, when in fact
there is little or no evidence whatsoever to suggest that client-centred
therapy (or person-centred counselling) is any less effective than any
other approach. Indeed, there is a growing body of national and
international evidence (e.g. Friedli et al. 1977: pp. 1662-5; King et
al. 2000: pp. 1383-8) that in fact client-centred therapy is the most
effective approach. In Southampton Primary Care Trust, from 2003 to
2004, client-centred therapy proved to be the most effective therapeutic
approach, with over 90% of patients showing improvement (as measured by
CORE, Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation), less than 8% showing no
change, and 1% showing deterioration. Gestalt and transactional analysis
faired similarly. Psycho dynamic, structured/ brief and integrative
approaches all showed between 70% and 80% improvement, with 10-20% of
patients (approximately) showing no change and with 0-10% showing
deterioration. Cognitive-behavioural therapy showed less than 70%
improvement, with 30% of patients showing no change, and no patient
showing deterioration (Vincent 2004). Nevertheless, Carl Rogers
consistently remained disinterested in comparing client-centred with
other approaches, preferring instead to write and speak of his own view:
'I'll just speak about what you call my end of it' (Rogers and Evans
1975: p. 116) and 'rather than try to comment on such approaches . . .
I'd rather say something about my own view' (Rogers and Evans 1975:
p. 5). Rather than engage in such wrangling, he instead approached those
issues by stating that client-centred therapy is a describable process,
with a core of sequential orderly events that tend to be present for all
clients. The practice of person-centred therapy dramatizes its
differences from most other orientations. Therapy begins immediately;
with the therapist trying to understand the client's world in whatever
way the client wishes to share it. (Rogers and Raskin 1989: p. 172)
While some counsellors may begin by greeting clients and then launching
into taking case histories, or meeting some other administrative,
bureaucratic, 'professional' or 'therapeutic' needs, the client-centred
therapist begins immediately by authentically respecting and striving to
understand. Thus if clients look anxious and seem uncertain where to
begin, client-centred therapists are likely to voice something of their
sensing of where clients are, in the moment. So therapy begins
immediately - and provided that the necessary and sufficient conditions
exist, a process will unfold that has predictable outcomes. If the
necessary and sufficient conditions (A) are met, then a therapeutic
process (B) ensues, and if a therapeutic relationship (B) exists over
time, then there are predictable outcomes (C) in terms of personality
change. What, then, is the process, and what outcomes can be predicted?

Process models It has been the experience of many, counselors and
clients alike, that when the counselor has adopted in a genuine way the
function which

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

181

he understands to be characteristic of a client-centered counselor, the
client tends to have a vital and releasing experience which has many
similarities from one client to another. (Rogers 1951: p. 49) How can we
explore and understand the process of client-centred therapy? Carl
Rogers wrote that: Therapy has always been interesting to me as a
process of change . . . I realize I'm a person who is greatly interested
in process, and I don't know quite how to put this, but I know part of
my concern about philosophy of science grew out of the fact that there
is no objective way of testing process. You have to slice the process
and take a crosssection of it at point A and point B and see the
difference. That's the process. But there is no such thing as an
objective study of a longitudinal changing process; and that's just an
intriguing aspect about science - that. . . you can prove that change
takes place; you can prove the nature of that change, but you don't
study the process as it occurs. You study it by taking samples at
different points and investigating those. (Rogers and Russell 2002:
p. 270) Several 'models' of therapeutic process can be found within the
writings of Carl Rogers, mostly consisting of or constructed around
these 'slices' or cross-sections into the process, and hence there is a
marked tendency to present process as a sequence of stages or phases.
The earliest model of non-directive process was composed of just three
phases, namely release, insight, and positive action based on insight:
In the earliest description of client-centered therapy, I pictured the
process as composed primarily of three steps . . . first, in the release
of expression, the release of personal feelings . . . Following this
emotional catharsis, insight tended to develop into the origin and
nature of the difficulties being experienced by the client. Such insight
was followed by the making of positive choices and decisions in regard
to the problem elements of the client's life - an emotional re-education
involved in the practice of applying the newly gained insights in
reality. (Rogers 1989: p. 23) However, Carl soon learned from the data
gained through research that greater emphasis needed to be placed on
looking into the notion of the client's self and how clients experienced
processes of disorganisation and reintegration within the self. I think
those concepts were the first rather simple attempt to understand what
was going on. I suppose, in looking back on them, I feel they were
oversimplified but accurate so far as they went. That release of pent-up
feelings is important - there's much more to it than that:

182

Being empathic

the development of insight is important, and I don't feel therapy is
complete unless it evolves into some sort of positive action. (Rogers
and Russell 2002: p. 246) In 1951, Rogers published his findings on how
clients experienced the process. It seems in keeping with client-centred
philosophy that given the primacy of the belief and trust in the
dignity, resources and rights of clients (as compared with the authority
and knowledge of therapies or therapists), clients are placed at the
heart of describing and understanding how therapy is experienced.
Remember that it was through listening to and striving to understand
clients that Rogers learned much of what became formulated as
client-centred therapy and the person-centred approach - it could be
said that his clients taught Carl Rogersallthat he knew (or at least
much of what he came to know). A five-stage model emerged from
researching what clients had to report about their therapy. They tended
to experience: 1 2 3 4 5

responsibility the discovery of denied attitudes a reorganising of the
self progress ending.

Later, in 1961, a seven-stage model was developed that is included here
because it is still used by many programmes in the UK as the 'main'
training resource. People in stage 1 are unlikely to refer themselves
for therapy, as they are remote from their experience and in a 'fixed'
state of being. They are unwilling to communicate in personal depth
(instead referring only to external factors), and their inner
communications are also significantly blocked, so both feelings and
meanings are neither recognised nor owned. Relational depth is viewed as
dangerous and there is no desire to grow, as basically people at this
stage do not see themselves as having a problem. It is noteworthy that
throughout this model of process (other than between stages 6 and 7)
Rogers saw it as essential that the client must experience being fully
received in one stage prior to moving into the next. Again we see the
'If-then' nature of client-centred theory. If clients experience
themselves as fully received in one stage, then they can move into the
next. If clients do feel fully received in stage 1, stage 2 involves a
slight increase in disclosure, although issues are still viewed as
external to the self. Feelings are disowned and are sometimes seen as
belonging to the past, and there is little sense of responsibility for
them. The organisation of the self is still rigid or fixed and seen as a
static fact. Even if contradictory feelings and meanings are verbalised,
there is no awareness of their contradictory nature. If the client feels
fully received in stage 2, then there is a movement in stage 3 towards
talking about the self, although the self is still viewed as an object
and often only seen through the way in which others view that self.
Feelings and meanings may be described, but they are not felt as present
in the here and now and they are mostly unacceptable, being seen as
somehow 'bad', shameful or embarrassing. There is still a sense of
remoteness from experiencing, although some feelings are spoken of and
there may be some recognition of personal constructs within the self,
albeit still as objects. There is slightly less generalising and some
recognition of contradictions, although any choices that the client has
made are usually seen

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

183

as inadequate. If the client feels fully received in stage 3, then they
can move into stages 4 and 5, which according to Carl Rogers: constitute
much of psychotherapy as we know it. (Rogers 1961: p. 139) When clients
feel that they have been welcomed, received, and understood and accepted
just as they are, then in stage 4 personal constructs tend to become
slightly less rigid and feelings begin to flow more readily: The client
describes more intense feelings of the 'not-now-present' variety.
Feelings are described as objects in the present. Occasionally feelings
are expressed as in the present, sometimes breaking through almost
against the client's wishes. There is a tendency toward experiencing
feelings in the immediate present, and there is distrust and fear of
this possibility. There is little open acceptance of feelings, though
some acceptance is exhibited. Experiencing is less bound by the
structure of the past, is less remote, and may occasionally occur with
little postponement. There is a loosening of the way experience is
construed. There are some discoveries of personal constructs; there is
the definite recognition of these as constructs; and there is a
beginning questioning of their validity. There is an increased
differentiation of feelings, constructs, personal meanings, with some
tendency toward seeking exactness of symbolization. There is a
realization of concern about contradictions and incongruences between
experience and self. There are feelings of self-responsibility in
problems, though such feelings vacillate. Though a close relationship
still feels dangerous, the client risks himself, relating to some small
extent on a feeling basis. (Rogers 1961: pp. 137-8) Once clients feel
fully received in stage 4, yet further processing is set in motion,
characterised in stage 5 by freely expressed and experienced current
feelings, despite these often being accompanied by feelings of distrust
and fear, and hence often surprise. However, there is an increasing
desire to both own and be such feelings, as personal constructs move
toward reduced fixity and so can be questioned and explored. Clients
exhibit fewer generalisations and strive to be more precise when
differentiating between feelings and personal meanings, and begin to
face their incongruence and contradictions. As greater acceptance of
selfresponsibility accrues, so there are more meaningful internal
dialogues. At this point, Rogers stepped aside from his narrative to
clarify that this is not necessarily a smooth, even process - clients
might 'take two steps forward, one step back', and can journey back to
previous stages as new disclosures occur. The idea is more of a general
trend and movement towards greater self-actualisation which, if the
client feels fully received in stage 5, enters stage 6. Carl stated that
this stage was frequently dramatic and very distinctive: A feeling which
has previously been 'stuck', has been inhibited in its process quality,
is experienced with immediacy now. A feeling flows to its full result. A
present feeling is directly experienced with immediacy and richness.
This immediacy of experiencing, and the feeling which constitutes its
content, are accepted. This is something which is not

184

Being empathic

something to be denied, feared, struggled against. There is a quality of
living subjectively in the experience, not feeling about it. Self as an
object tends to disappear. Experiencing, at this stage, takes on a real
process quality. Another characteristic of this stage of the process is
the physiological loosening which accompanies it. The incongruence
between experience and awareness is vividly experienced as it disappears
into congruence. The relevant personal construct is dissolved in this
experiencing moment, and the client feels cut loose from his previously
stabilized framework. The moment of full experiencing becomes a clear
and definite referent. Differentiation of experiencing is sharp and
basic. In this stage, there are no longer 'problems', external or
internal. The client is living, subjectively, a phase of his problem. It
is not an object. (Rogers 1961: pp. 145-50) Carl also believed that
there was almost an irreversibility about such moments of immediacy of
experience that are fully accepted. As there is a sense of the outcomes
of this process by now being irreversible, it is no longer so necessary
(although it is still very helpful) for the client to feel fully
received prior to entering stage 7, in which experiencing of new
feelings is both rich and immediate, both inside and outside of
counselling. Clients access, own and directly trust their inner
experiencing, and are more process than object beings, becoming more
here-and-now oriented. As there is less need for defensive denial or
distortion, self-configurations may be reformulated and loosely held, in
that they will be constantly checked against ongoing experiencing: He
has changed, but what seems most significant, he has become an
integrated process of changingness. (Rogers 1961: p. 158) In summary,
then, within this model, clients were deemed to experience a 'loosening'
of feeling, changes in their manner of experiencing, shifts from
incongruence to congruence, changes in the manner and extent to which
they communicated the self in a receptive climate, a 'loosening' of the
'cognitive maps' of experience, changes in their relationship to 'their
problems', and changes in their manner of relating. A ten-point overview
(that included much of the personality theory covered in Chapter 4 of
this book) of what clients bring to client-centred therapeutic process
was included in Carl's 1959 paper entitled 'A theory of therapy,
personality, and interpersonal relationships, as developed in the
client-centered framework'. This charted the characteristics of the
human infant, the development of self, the development of need for
positive regard, the development of need for self-regard, the
development of conditions of worth, the development of incongruence
between self and experience, the development of discrepancies in
behaviour, experiences of threat and the process of defence, the process
of breakdown and disorganisation, and the process of reintegration. It
is the last two, namely the process of breakdown and disorganisation and
the process of reintegration, that are especially relevant once a client
has entered therapy. In the same paper, Carl posited the characteristics
of a deteriorating relationship (with the self and others) and the
process whereby relationships (again, with the self and others) improve.

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

185

With both reintegration and the process of an improving relationship,
client experiencing of the client-centred therapist conditions
(authentic respect and empathy) are at the core. Having quoted the
necessary and sufficient conditions for therapeutic process, Rogers
stated that when they were in place a process with 12 characteristic
steps would unfold. In step 1, clients become increasingly expressive
(verbally, paraverbally and non-verbally). In step 2, such expressions
move towards having more reference to the self (rather than to others or
to situations). In step 3 there is increasingly accurate symbolisation
of experience, characterised by greater awareness of the differences
between feelings and perceptions, and between self, others and
contextual factors - and there is greater awareness of the interplay
between all of the preceding steps. In step 4 clients become more aware
of incongruence between their self-concepts and their experience. In
step 5, the threat of such incongruence is experienced. (At this point
in the process, Carl Rogers highlights therapist unconditional positive
regard for clients as a key factor, stating that clients are only able
to experience the threat that awareness of their incongruence brings
because the therapist is as accepting and respectful of incongruence as
of congruence, and as accepting of anxiety as of being anxiety free.) In
step 6, clients are now able to be fully aware of and experience
feelings that have up until now been either denied or distorted. In step
7 there follows a process of reorganising the self-concept in order to
include previously denied or distorted experiences. In step 8 this
ongoing reorganising of the self-concept produces more and more
congruence between self and experience, so experience that had up until
now been too threatening to symbolise accurately in awareness can now be
incorporated. (A further consequence of step 8 is that fewer new or
ongoing experiences will be perceived as threatening, and hence there
will be less denial or distortion of perceptions, and therefore less
need to be defensive.) In step 9, as a result, the client is more open
to experiencing the unconditional positive regard of the therapist
without attendant feelings of threat. In step 10, clients begin to feel
a sense of unconditional positive self-regard. In step 11, clients move
towards experiencing themselves as the primary locus of evaluation. In
step 12, organismic valuing becomes more prominent as valuing based on a
reaction to conditions of worth recedes. Having offered this 12-step
model of therapeutic process, Carl Rogers then stated that he was in no
doubt that students would be puzzled by the absence of any statements
about the 'mechanisms' (skills, techniques or procedures) that bring
such processes about. He again pointed us to the 'If-then' nature of his
theory - if these conditions are present, then these processes are a
natural and understandable (and predictable) consequence. In
experiential terms, if you drop a pencil, then it will fall to the
floor. You might not fully understand the theory of gravity or other
relevant factors, yet you can say with some certainty that if the
condition of standing on the planet earth is met, then when you let go
of the pencil it will drop - not stay where it is, float off sideways or
shoot upwards. In the early years of developing client-centred therapy,
Rogers tended to write in terms of propositions, hypotheses and
speculation. However, subsequent research has tended to strongly
support, corroborate and validate client-centred beliefs, theory and
practices.

186

Being empathic

In addition to stating that client-centred therapy begins immediately,
Carl Rogers also wrote that to begin with the process must be initiated,
and that therapist attitude is of primary importance - that
client-centred therapists hold a deep respect for and full acceptance of
clients as they are in the here and now. The clientcentred therapist
also believes fundamentally in clients having the innate potentialities
for 'dealing' or coping with themselves and their situations. Rogers
wrote that: If these attitudes are suffused with a sufficient warmth,
which transforms them into the most profound type of liking or affection
for the core of the person; and if a level of communication is reached
so that the client can begin to perceive that the therapist understands
the feelings \[the client\] is experiencing and accepts \[the client\]
at the full depth of that understanding, then we may be sure that the
process is already initiated. (Rogers 1961: pp. 74-5) Rather than
enquire as to whether or not client-centred therapeutic process served
specific ends, Rogers was more inclined to research into the nature of
this process, looking for its inherent characteristics and what
direction or directions it tends to take, and what (if any) the natural
end-points of the process might be. He wrote: I enjoy the discovering of
order in experience. It seems inevitable that I seek for the meaning or
the orderliness . . . Thus I have come to see both scientific research
and the process of theory construction as being aimed toward the inward
ordering of significant experience . . . So I have come to recognize
that the reason I devote myself to research, and to the building of
theory, is to satisfy a need for perceiving order and meaning, a
subjective need which exists in me. (Rogers 1961: pp. 74-5) In his book
entitled Client-Centred Therapy (Rogers 1951), Carl had already
attempted to gain understanding of the fundamental processes and to
honestly and openly describe them. He was clear that he was keen to
avoid 'warping' his ideas about process in order that they might somehow
fit with or 'prove' any preconceived theories or clinical needs. Carl
noted that there were certain characteristics of client movement, such
as an increase in insightful statements, an increase in maturity of
reported behaviour, an increase in positive attitude as therapy
progresses, a change in perception of and acceptance of the self, the
incorporation of previously denied experience into the self-structure,
and a shift in the locus of evaluation from outside to inside the self.
In other words, as therapy proceeds the therapeutic relationship
changes, personality structure changes, as does behaviour and the
physiological condition of the client. Carl wrote that even though such
reflections upon therapeutic process might prove to be faulty
descriptions, they were nevertheless part of an authentic attempt to
understand what happens when clients and counsellors engage in a
client-centred therapeutic experience. Pride of place here is given to
the five-stage model that Carl presented in 1961, first as it, too, is
based on how clients reported their experience of therapy, and

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

187

second, because it is my own favourite, mainly because it feels more
personal. The five stages are as follows: Stage 1, experiencing of the
potential self; Stage 2, the full experiencing of an affectional
relationship; Stage 3, the liking of one's self; Stage 4, the discovery
that the core of personality is positive; and Stage 5 being one's
organism, one's experience.

Experiencing of the potential self Experiencing of the potential self
could more accurately be described as the awareness of experiencing or
even the 'experiencing of experience''. In client-centred therapy, given
the relative absence of implied or actual threat from the counsellor,
clients could explore experiencing as they actually experienced it, and
without any strong need to deny or distort that experiencing in an
attempt to 'fit' it into the existing concept of self. Thus if as a
client I do not feel too threatened by my therapist, I can be me, in the
here and now -I can experience at different levels who I am and how I am
being me. As much of such experiencing may well represent an extreme
contradiction to the client's existing concept of self, there is often a
theme along the lines of T cannot deny that this is how I am, yet it
feels very at odds with who I am', and very often therapists hear
phrases from clients such as 'It was out of character' or T was beside
myself with . . .' or 'It's not like me at all', T don't know what came
over me', and so on. Such expressions may be part of a process that
could be formulated along the lines of T am experiencing a me that feels
quite different from any part of my experience to date', and this moves
tentatively towards 'Well, maybe there are quite a few different selves
within me - or at least I have within me rather more contradictions or
differences than I had realised', and this in turn moves towards T felt
certain that it was not possible for me to be all of my experiences or
all of my selves, because some of those experiences and some of those
selves just seemed too at odds with one another - yet I am beginning to
think that, just maybe, I can be all of my selves and all of my
experiencing'. In other words, the client moves away from being a
conglomeration of disparate, separate and often conflicting selves and
towards being a community within which each and every self can be valued
and embraced, celebrating difference where appropriate, rather than
demanding absolute conformity and balance - several selves being as one
rather than being one self if you will. Carl Rogers wrote of one client,
Mrs Oak, who described her own process as: No longer thinking about my
problems or working on them - but enjoying the feeling process - and
certainly learning something. (Rogers 1961: p. 78) Carl described how,
at first, client experiences may be examined by the client without him
or her particularly associating them with the self, while later in the
counselling process they become assimilated into the client's self
structure. Mrs Oak described her therapy as a kind of 'song without
words', a kind of poem, only to become dismissive of this, discounting
or 'writing off' her experience as an unacceptable form of
self-indulgence. all too often the therapist hears clients say things
like there being so many other people 'out there' far more deserving of
help than the client him- or herself, other people with far more serious
problems, concerns and situations. Very often clients report that they
feel 'bad' about

188

Being empathic

'wasting the therapist's time' and feel guilt and shame about this focus
on their selves. Yet such feelings and thoughts meet with authentic
therapist respect (which does not mean that the therapist agrees with
the client) and empathic understanding (not reassurance), and as a
consequence clients tend to move into a new phase - one that Rogers
summarised as follows: I came here to solve problems, and now I find
myself just experiencing myself. (Rogers 1961: p. 80) Mrs Oak said that
it was somewhat akin to blind people learning Braille - that is, it was
like learning a new way of experiencing. There follows a shift away from
mechanical or practical problem solving and doing and towards being a
process of experiencing. At a cognitive or intellectual level, clients
often report that the experiencing of experiencing somehow seems 'wrong'
(hence the feelings of guilt or shame), and yet at an experiential level
the experiencing of experiencing feels good. It may well be that early
in the therapeutic process this experiencing of experience is a kind of
free-flowing, 'go for it', 'no holds barred - just be it' way of being,
because it feels so good, so new, so unusual, so different, and so
liberating that clients really revel in it. However, as therapy
progresses, more attention is paid by the client to exploring and
organising this experiencing, and then assimilating or incorporating
their self-discoveries into the self-concept.

The full experiencing of an affectional relationship A second
characteristic of client-centred therapeutic process is: the learning,
on the part of the client, to accept fully and freely and without fear
the positive feelings of another. (Rogers 1961: pp. 80-1) Research
findings indicated that this learning does not occur in every single
client-centred therapeutic experience, although it is more frequent in
long-term counselling - yet even then the pattern is not uniform.
However, this learning is more likely to be a feature of successful
therapy. The full experiencing of an affectional relationship is deep
and significant, and yet it is often not verbalised. For Mrs Oak, for
instance: This letting the counsellor and his warm interest into her
life was undoubtedly one of the deepest features of therapy. (Rogers
1961: p. 81) Carl Rogers wrote that the phenomenon of clients fully
receiving therapist unconditional positive regard is definitely not one
of transference and countertransference. Rather, it is something mutual
and appropriate (whereas so-called transference and counter-transference
are characteristically one-way and inappropriate to the 'realities' of
the situation). Rogers believed that there was a discernible trend
towards client-centred therapists becoming less afraid of their positive
(and negative) feelings towards clients (which in turn may be linked
with more activities aimed at increasing therapist congruence). For
example, at the beginning of therapy the client-centred counsellor
receives clients with a deep respect for their innate potential.

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

189

As a result \[the therapist\] feels toward the client a warm, positive,
affectional reaction. This poses a problem for the client who often . .
. finds it difficult to accept the positive feeling of another. Yet once
accepted the inevitable reaction on the part of the client is to relax,
to let the warmth of liking by another person reduce the tension and
fear involved in facing life. (Rogers 1961: p. 82) As tension and fear
dissipate, so the therapeutic process unfolds, and the attitude of the
therapist becomes more one of awe as the counsellor is witness to a
process that is experienced like watching a beautiful butterfly emerging
from a chrysalis, or seeing a foal determinedly taking its first few
stumbling steps, or a newly hatched baby turtle struggling to reach the
sea. Indeed, Carl Rogers wrote that being with the awesome actualising
of potential can engender far deeper feelings of connection - not just
with or to the client but with the whole brotherhood and sisterhood of
human beings, or even a kind of universal, spiritual connection and
sense of belonging. Yet being in awe of clients is, according to Carl
Rogers, not quite the same as feeling love, for he stated that profound
unconditional positive regard is even more basic or fundamental than
love, sexual desires or parental commitments to children. It is the
simple outgoing human feeling of one individual for a n o t h e r . . .
caring enough about the person that you do not wish to interfere with
\[another's\] development, nor to use \[others\] for any
self-aggrandizing goals of your own. Your satisfaction comes in having
set others free to grow in \[their\] own fashion. (Rogers 1961: p. 84)
We have seen that on entering therapy clients are likely to be
vulnerable, anxious, incongruent, defensive, and lacking in self-esteem.
Thus clients are likely to believe that they do not deserve or merit
being respected or prized by others. They especially do not believe that
they merit unconditional prizing. Most if not all of their relationships
up until now will have been conditional, not unconditional, so this
experiencing with their therapist may well be something clients feel
that they have never received, or at least a quality they have no
recollection of ever having experienced. Clients may also try to
minimise the significance of their therapist to them, for prizing from a
significant other is threatening. If a client's self-concept (largely
constructed around introjected conditions of worth) dictates to them
that they are not worthy of being openly and freely valued, then there
will understandably follow a defence against the full receiving of
therapist unconditional positive regard. However: To discover that it is
not devastating to accept the positive feeling from another, that it
does not necessarily end in hurt, that it actually 'feels good' to have
another person with you in your struggles to meet life this may be one
of the most profound learnings encountered by the individual, whether in
therapy or not. (Rogers 1961: p. 85)

190

Being empathic

This aspect of the process does not end here - for if a client becomes
openly able to experience therapist unconditional positive regard (that
is, if there is no longer a defensive need to protect the self-concept
by denying or distorting perceptions of being unconditionally valued)
then, as a consequence, the client becomes more able to value others.
Rogers summarised this by writing that: It appears possible that one of
the characteristics of deep or significant therapy is that the client
discovers that it is not devastating to admit fully into his own
experience the positive feeling which another, the therapist, holds
towards him. Perhaps one of the reasons why this is so difficult is that
essentially it involves the feeling that T am worthy of being liked' . .
. This aspect of therapy is a free and full experiencing of an
affectional relationship which may be put in generalized terms as
follows: T can permit someone to care about me, and can fully accept
that caring within myself. This permits me to recognise that I care, and
care deeply, for and about others'. (Rogers 1961: p. 86) Thus in early
process stages the client might distort the experiencing of
unconditional positive regard from their therapist by being cynical (for
instance, their therapist is being paid to like them, or is simply being
professional and doing his or her job). To admit that I am a person
worthy of the effort of a significant other trying to respectfully
understand me might be very threatening to the concept of self. Yet once
I can allow myself to be unconditionally prized, I discover that I, too,
can allow myself to care deeply and unconditionally about others.

The liking of one's self So in successful client-centred therapy,
negative self-attitudes decrease and positive self-attitudes increase -
there is a gradual increase in self-acceptance and a correlated increase
in acceptance of others. However, Rogers wrote that such statements do
not entirely or accurately portray the complete picture, as they could
be interpreted as implying a grudging or reluctant acceptance, whereas
in successful client-centred therapy the client not only becomes more
accepting of self, but actually comes to like that self. Carl qualified
this statement, too, when he wrote that: This is not a bragging or
self-assertive liking; it is rather a quiet pleasure in being one's
self. (Rogers 1961: p. 87) This process may be a consequence of the full
experiencing of an affectional relationship, the experiencing in full
awareness of therapist unconditional positive regard and empathic
understanding. There may be a sense of spontaneity or of relaxation, of
enjoyment or a 'primitive joie de vivre' - a basic appreciation of being
oneself. It is possible that this is a way of being that clients
rediscover rather than something new that is discovered (that is, if
self-actualising has served to thwart the actualising tendency,
reconnecting with the actualising tendency may well feel like a 'new'
experience). Carl Rogers made references to analogies such as the
frisky, gamboling lamb, and the playful dolphin leaping and splashing in
the water, in an attempt to capture this joyful awakening.

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

191

Very often when clients enter therapy they soon disclose that they feel
'dysfunctional' or that they 'don't even know who the real me is' any
more, or that they are 'in pieces' and broken - a kind of 'I'm not
working properly any more' theme. However, this can move towards
experiencing themselves as more healthy, whole, 'functional' people who,
rather than rejecting, denying, suppressing or distorting their feelings
can actually be and live them. Carl Rogers stated that this is: an
important and often overlooked truth about the therapeutic process. It
works in the direction of permitting the person to experience fully, and
in awareness, all of his reactions including his feelings and emotions.
As this occurs, the individual feels a positive liking for himself, a
genuine appreciation of himself as a total functioning unit, which is
one of the important end points of therapy. (Rogers 1961: p. 90) The
discovery that the core of personality is positive Carl Rogers wrote
that: One of the most revolutionary concepts to grow out of our clinical
experience is the growing recognition that the innermost core of man's
nature, the deepest layers of his personality, the base of his 'animal
nature', is positive in nature - is basically socialised,
forward-moving, rational and realistic. (Rogers 1961: pp. 90-1) Rogers
did not expect his findings to be accepted by our modern culture. Most
major religions, for instance, permeate societies with the concept that
we are all fundamentally sinful and in need of either punishment,
forgiveness or repentance - and that only by something akin to a miracle
(or death) can we become inherently good. We have to be saved from our
inner natures. Likewise in the socalled 'caring' professions, where the
influence of Sigmund Freud and his psychoanalytic followers, for
example, indicated that if the 'id' enshrined within us were to be
uncontrolled or unrestrained, the resultant mayhem would be
catastrophic. Behaviourists, too, seemed to see people as things to be
restrained, controlled and managed, and more cognitive approaches set
about correcting our faulty thinking. Overwhelmingly, whether it be
religion or psychology, people simply could not be trusted to direct
their own lives. Carl Rogers therefore instigated thorough research
activities in an attempt to validate his deeply held views based on his
own experiences as a client-centred psychotherapist. Of religions and
psychoanalysis he wrote: The whole problem of therapy, as seen by this
group, is how to hold these untamed forces in check in a wholesome and
constructive manner, rather than in the costly fashion of the neurotic.
(Rogers 1961: p. 91) Furthermore, such views that at heart human beings
are irrational, unsocialised, self-destructive and destructive of others
tended to be (and perhaps still are, by many) accepted without question.
although his own beliefs could be seen as

192

Being empathic

radical and revolutionary, blasphemous or just plain wrong, Rogers was
not entirely alone. He was able to quote Abraham Maslow, for instance,
who posited that 'anti-social' emotions (such as hostility and jealousy)
result from the frustration of more basic impulses for love, security
and belonging, which are in themselves desirable. Rogers also referred
to Montagu, who postulated that cooperation, rather than struggle, is
the basic law of human life. Yet the alleged 'caring' resources of
so-called 'advanced' societies seemed to serve to 'keep us under
control' or 'keep us under cover', or both. Rogers stated that of course
hostile and anti-social feelings are continually uncovered in
counselling, yet must one therefore assume that these indicate that our
deeper and therefore basic natures are somehow 'bad' or even 'evil'?
Rogers believed that feelings associated with hostility (or feelings
that are deemed to be 'anti-social') were not representative of either
our deepest or even our strongest essence. Rather: the inner core of
man's personality is the organism itself, which is essentially both
self-preserving and social. (Rogers 1961: p. 92) In the case of Mrs Oak,
beneath her first layer of defence lay bitterness and a desire for
revenge. A 'murderous feeling of hatred and a desire to get even' was
behind the 'socially controlled surfaces of her behaviour'. Considerably
later on (after 23 sessions), Mrs Oak returned to this theme, this time
feeling somewhat emotionally blocked, and when the 'barriers burst', the
feeling has become less anti-social and more like a 'desire to get back
at the world which has cheated her, a deep experience of having been
hurt'. At this deeper level, it is very clear indeed that she had no
desire to put her murderous feelings into action. In fact, she disliked
those feelings and wished to be rid of them. Three sessions later,
'reaching far down into herself, the following consecutive themes were
expressed: I'm going to talk about myself as self-ish but with a new
connotation to the word. I've acquired an acquaintance with the
structure of myself, know myself deeply. As I descend into myself, I
discover something exciting, a core that is totally without hate. It
can't be a part of everyday life - it may even be abnormal. I thought
first it was just a sublimated sex drive. But no, this is more
inclusive, deeper than sex. One would expect this to be the kind of
thing one would discover by going up into the thin realms of ideals. It
seems to be something that is the essence that lasts. (Rogers 1961:
pp. 99-100) This almost 'mystical' client summary, by the next session,
has become clearer, more concise, and the difficulty of the experiencing
is acknowledged by the client. Rogers wrote:

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

193

Her feeling goes against the grain of her culture, \[yet\] she feels
bound to say that the core of herself is not bad, nor terribly wrong,
but something positive. Underneath the layer of controlled surface
behaviour, underneath the bitterness, underneath the hurt, \[underneath
the murderous hate and desire for revenge\] is a self that is positive,
and that is without hate. This I believe is the lesson which our clients
have been facing us with for a long time, and which we have been slow to
learn. (Rogers 1961: p. 101) The deeper one digs into oneself, the less
one has to fear. Instead of discovering 'bad' or 'terribly wrong', there
is a core self which is deeply socialised, without hate, and wanting to
neither punish nor reward others. In looking at 'negative', 'aggressive'
or 'hostile' aspects of human behaviour, at this point I turn from
Carl's narrative about Mrs Oak towards my own experience. After
thousands upon thousands of client hours, I can state that not once have
I ever experienced anger, rage, hostility or aggression as being at the
core of, or being the essential essence of, a human being. Inevitably
there were other factors underlying and generating such apparently
'negative' emotions and thoughts. Take anger, for instance. In terms of
the belief system that forms a significant part of a self-concept, there
was often the thought that something was unfair or unjust. Outrage at
injustice may not only be an understandable reaction, it might even be
considered honourable (and hence acceptable or even highly desirable) in
certain contexts. Who decides which contexts make anger at injustice
acceptable or unacceptable? Let us say, however, that in one particular
instance the perceived injustice seems 'irrational' or 'unreasonable' -
maybe exhibited by a 'selfish' individual who is seemingly unable to see
past or beyond their own needs and desires, and to hell with anyone
else. Is this person inherently bad? Or might this person feel deprived
of the love and affection that they had been led to believe was their
birthright? Quite often when engaging in a debate about the basic nature
of human beings, someone will say 'Ah . . . but what about Hitler? How
can anyone conceivably say that he was innately good?'. Well, personally
I cannot conceive that Adolf Hitler was inherently bad at the time he
was conceived! I wonder, for instance, how things might have been if
this young Adolf, with his creative flair and artistic temperament, had
not been so cruelly rejected (as he perceived it) for art college. Being
one's organism, one's experience The client-centred approach to therapy,
Carl Rogers wrote, is: a process whereby man becomes his organism -
without self-deception, without distortion. (Rogers 1961: p. 103) It is
because this process and its outcomes are experiential (a way of being)
that it does not readily lend itself to accurate symbolisation in words
alone. Indeed, Carl stated that if this experience were to be understood
in words alone, this would be but an abstract from or a distortion of
the totality of this way of being (in the way that a map of a piece of
land is not the territory itself). Yet we try. There is a sense in

194

Being empathic

which the process of client-centred therapy is towards a rediscovery of
what once was - getting back in touch with the organismic valuing
process that reigned prior to the onset of a concept of self that was
formulated through introjected values and the sometimes tyrannical rule
of consequent conditions of worth. Historically, prior to the advent of
client-centred therapy, clients might have asked themselves things like
'What do others think I should do?', 'What would my parents suggest that
I should do?', 'What would my culture tell me to do?' and 'What do I
think I should or ought to do?'. Yet clients may not necessarily act in
or be in accord with the 'shoulds' and 'oughts' of others (individually
or as groups). Even when in rebellion against external loci of
evaluation, the person is nevertheless acting in terms of those external
expectations, and often those expectations have been introjected into
the selfconcept. (I am reminded of the woman who, having felt liberated
from a lousy relationship for some months, suddenly froze in the middle
of a clothes-shopping expedition. She suddenly realised that she was
buying exactly the opposite of what she used to buy for, or on behalf
of, her ex-partner. It struck her like a thunderbolt that actually it
was the ex-partner's values that were still the governing factor, only
this time it was in opposition to them. She was dumbstruck as she
realised that she did not know what she herself liked.) During
client-centred therapy, clients are more likely to ask 'How do I
experience this?' and 'What does it mean to me?' and 'If I behave in a
certain way, how do I symbolise the meaning which it will have for me?'.
Rogers termed this openness to experiencing and the accurate perception
and symbolisation of that experiencing 'realism', in the sense that the
person is able to access all significant valuing and achieve a realistic
'balance' based on this absence of denial or distortion. It does seem
that a great deal of human energy is expended on trying to be, feel and
do in a consistent manner. For instance, the recently bereaved should
only feel sorrow, even if a part of them (no matter how small) perhaps
feels a sense of relief at being unburdened from an exhausting and
inconvenient duty of care. If this feeling of relief is admitted to
awareness (that is, if it is symbolised in consciousness), it is
accompanied by deep guilt for being so shameful, callous and selfish as
to have an emotion that one is not expected to feel. Rogers gave several
of his own examples, including the following: I have thought I must feel
only love for my parents, but I find that I experience both love and
bitter resentment. Perhaps I can be that person who freely experiences
both love and resentment. And: I have thought I was only bad and
worthless. Now I experience myself at times as one of much worth - at
other times as one of little worth or usefulness. Perhaps I can be a
person who experiences varying degrees of worth. (Rogers 1961: p. 104)
For another client: I have held the conception that no-one could really
love me for myself. Now I experience the affective warmth of another for
me. Perhaps I can be a person who is loveable by others - perhaps I am
such a person. (Rogers 1961: p. 104)

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

195

And for yet another: I have been brought up to feel that I must not
appreciate myself- but do. I can cry for myself, but I can enjoy myself,
too. Perhaps I am a richly varied person whom I can enjoy and for whom I
can feel sorry. (Rogers 1961: p. 104) Mrs Oak said: I have thought that
in some deep way I was bad, that the most basic elements in me must be
dire and awful. I don't experience that badness but rather a positive
desire to live and let live. Perhaps I can be that person who is, at
heart, positive. (Rogers 1961: p. 104) Rogers believed that a
fundamental ingredient that makes much of this process of becoming
possible is complete and free awareness of experiencing. There is an
elimination (or at least minimising) of denial and distortion to
awareness. There is an awareness of what is actually experienced through
all of the body and mind ('sensory and visceral' experiencing) - not
simply the crumbs that are left over after our needs to defend our
self-concepts (and conditions of worth) have screened out or filtered
our experience in an attempt to either 'make it fit' or deny it
altogether. This, then, is about realising full potential, with: the
enriching element of awareness freely added to the basic aspect of
sensory and visceral reaction. The person comes to be what he is, as
clients so frequently say in therapy . . . the individual comes to be -
in awareness - what he is - in experience. He is, in other words, a
complete and fully functioning human organism. (Rogers 1961: pp. 104-5)
Carl Rogers was very passionate about what he saw as the appalling way
in which people had hitherto been treated in the name of health, based
on socialised beliefs that we are all inherently 'bad' and
untrustworthy. He wrote that: When a man is less than fully man - when
he denies to awareness various aspects of his experience - then indeed
we have all too often reason to fear him and his behaviour, as the
present world situation testifies. (Rogers 1961: p. 105) In other words,
if we believe that we are by our very innermost natures evil or hostile
or murderous or licentious, then we are likely to treat ourselves and
each other in ways designed to prevent our animalistic ways holding
sway. Yet Rogers believed that: There is no beast in man. There is only
man in man, and this we have been able to release. (Rogers 1961: p. 105)
If we can dare to believe that our innermost natures, based on a
constructive actualising tendency, are actually positive in nature, then
rather than control, manage, manipulate, educate, change or suppress the
human psyche, our innate

196

Being empathic

potential becomes open to being released (through the provision of
appropriate conditions). Here then is a real message of hope: If we can
add to the sensory and visceral experiencing which is characteristic of
the whole animal kingdom, the gift of a free and undistorted awareness
of which only the human animal seems fully capable, we have an organism
which is beautifully and constructively realistic. We have then an
organism which is as aware of the demands of the culture as it is of its
own physiological demands for food or sex which is just as aware of its
desire for friendly relationships as it is of its desire to aggrandize
itself - which is just as aware of its delicate and sensitive tenderness
toward others, as it is of its hostilities toward others. When man's
unique capacity of awareness is thus functioning freely and fully, we
find that we have not an animal whom we must fear, not a beast who must
be controlled, but an organism able to achieve, through the remarkable
integrative capacity of its central nervous system, a balanced,
realistic, self-enhancing, other-enhancing behaviour as a resultant of
all these elements of awareness. (Rogers 1961: p. 105) Carl believed
that 'fully functioning' people are to be trusted and that their
behaviour is constructive. In today's world, fully functioning people
might not be perceived as entirely conventional and they might not
always blindly conform to accepted norms and mores, yet Rogers believed
that by our very natures we are both individuals (and hence
individualised) and social beings (and hence socialised). He also
acknowledged the difference between deep conviction and truth. He wrote
of his own deep truths, and asked readers to look deep inside themselves
and see whether or not the deep convictions of Carl Rogers resonate
within.

Therapist be If the therapist initiates certain conducive conditions,
then a process can unfold in which the innate potential of human beings
may be released. Carl Rogers stated that: In client-centered therapy we
are deeply engaged in the prediction and influencing of behavior, or
even the control of behavior. As therapists, we institute certain
attitudinal conditions, and the client has relatively little voice in
the establishment of these conditions. We predict that if these
conditions are instituted, certain behavioral consequences will ensue in
the client. (Rogers and Evans 1975, p. lxxvi) It is the therapist who
takes the core conditions to the relationship, and the therapist who
establishes a contact based on those conditions. So, having placed the
therapist conditions back together again in Chapter 4, now let us to
some degree take them apart again! As we move through these conditions,
they do in fact interface very much throughout.

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

197

Congruence and process The greater the degree of counsellor congruence
(that is, congruence between experience, awareness, and communication),
the more likely it is that the client will experience clear and
therapeutic communication. If all verbal, paraverbal and non-verbal
therapist expressions spring from congruence and unity, then there is
much less likelihood that these cues will have an ambiguous or unclear
meaning to the client. In order to achieve relatively high degrees of
congruence, therapists need to listen to themselves, to get in touch
with their own inner, complex, diverse and ever-changing attitudes and
feelings, and to hear themselves with acceptance - as Rogers said, to
become more adequate at being the person you are, and that just as
clients need to feel received in order to grow, so therapist
selfacceptance is necessary for personal growth. The more clearly the
counsellor communicates, the more the client responds to the counsellor
with clarity. Thus even though clients are likely to be relatively
incongruent, nevertheless their responses will have more clarity and
congruence than would be the case if the counsellor's communications
were themselves incongruent, confusing or ambiguous. The greater the
degree of counsellor congruence (for instance, the less the counsellor
is presenting a professional façade or a role that has to be defended),
the less need there is for that counsellor to be defensive, and hence
the greater the counsellor's ability to listen accurately and hear the
client. This links congruence to empathic understanding, because at
least to this degree clients feel empathically understood - that whether
client expressions have been defensive or congruent, the counsellor has
understood clients more or less as they see themselves. This also links
congruence and empathic understanding to unconditional positive regard,
as the client who feels really heard and to some degree understood
(which is a consequence of the counsellor respecting the client) is
likely to experience positive feelings (regard) towards their counsellor
(the mutual respect and understanding that Rogers called 'the
experiencing of an affectional relationship'). As a consequence of this
there are fewer barriers to communication - the need for defensiveness
gradually decreases. In other words, it is therapeutic if clients
experience their therapists as real: I would like my feelings in this
relationship with him to be as clear and transparent as possible, so
that they are a discernible reality for him, to which he can return
again and again . . . I recognize that this is a very human and
unpredictable journey for me, as well as for him, and that I may,
without even knowing my fear, shrink away within myself, from some of
the feelings he discovers. To this extent I know I will be limited in my
ability to help him. I realize that at times his own fears may make him
perceive me as uncaring, as rejecting, as an intruder, as one who does
not understand. I want fully to accept these feelings in him, and yet I
hope also that my own real feelings will show through so clearly that in
time he cannot fail to perceive them. Most of all I want him to
encounter in me a real person. I do not need to be uneasy as to whether
my own feelings are 'therapeutic'. What I am and what I feel are good
enough to be a basis for therapy, if I can transparently be what I am
and what I feel in relationship to him. Then perhaps he can be what he
is, openly and without fear.

198

Being empathic

And the client, for his part, goes through far more complex sequences
which can only be suggested. Perhaps schematically his feelings change
in some of these ways. 'I'm afraid of him. I want help, but I don't know
whether to trust him. He might see things which I don't know in myself -
frightening and bad elements. He seems not to be judging me, but I'm
sure he is. I can't tell him what really concerns me, but I can tell him
about some past experiences which are related to my concern. He seems to
understand those, so I can reveal a bit more of myself. But now that
I've shared with him some of this bad side of me, he despises me. I'm
sure of it, but it's strange I can find little evidence of it. Do you
suppose that what I've told him isn't so bad? Is it possible that I need
not be ashamed of it as a part of me? I no longer feel that he despises
me. It makes me feel that I want to go further, exploring me, perhaps
expressing more of myself. I find him a sort of companion as I do this -
he seems really to understand. But now I'm getting frightened again, and
this time deeply frightened. I didn't realize that exploring the unknown
recesses of myself would make me feel feelings I've never experienced
before. It's very strange because in one way these aren't new feelings.
I sense that they've always been there. But they seem so bad and
disturbing I've never dared to let them flow in me. And now as I live
these feelings in the hours with him, I feel terribly shaky, as though
my world is falling apart. It used to be sure and firm. Now it is loose,
permeable and vulnerable. It isn't pleasant to feel things I've always
been frightened of before. It's his fault. Yet curiously I'm eager to
see him and I feel more safe when I'm with him. I don't know who I am
any more, but sometimes when I feel things I seem solid and real for a
moment. I'm troubled by the contradictions I find in myself -I act one
way and feel another -I think one thing and feel another. It's very
disconcerting. It's also sometimes adventurous and exhilarating to be
trying to discover who I am. Sometimes I catch myself feeling that
perhaps the person I am is worth being, whatever that means. I'm
beginning to find it very satisfying, though often painful, to share
just what it is I'm feeling at this moment. You know, it is really
helpful to try to listen to myself, to hear what is going on in me. I'm
not so frightened any more of what is going on in me. It seems pretty
trustworthy. I use some of my hours with him to dig deep into myself to
know what I am feeling. It's scary work, but I want to know. And I do
trust him most of the time, and that helps. I feel pretty vulnerable and
raw, but I know he doesn't want to hurt me, and I even believe he cares.
It occurs to me as I try to let myself down and down, deep into myself,
that maybe if I could sense what is going on in me, and could realize
its meaning, I would know who I am, and I would also know what to do. At
least I feel this knowing sometimes with him. I can even tell him just
how I'm feeling toward him at any given moment and instead of this
killing the relationship, as I used to fear, it seems to deepen it. Do
you suppose I could be my feelings with other people also? Perhaps that
wouldn't be too dangerous either.

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

199

You know, I feel as if I'm floating along on the current of life, very
adventurously, being me. I get defeated sometimes, I get hurt sometimes,
but I'm learning that those experiences are not fatal. I don't know
exactly who I am, but I can feel my reactions at any given moment, and
they seem to work out pretty well as a basis for my behavior from moment
to moment. Maybe this is what it means to be me. But of course I can
only do this because I feel safe in the relationship with my therapist.
Or could I be myself this way outside of this relationship? I wonder. I
wonder. Perhaps I could . . .'. (Rogers 1961: pp. 67-9) Thus clients are
now able to hear themselves and receive the communications from their
counsellor more clearly, and hence the process of reciprocal empathy has
been established. This means that to some degree the process of therapy
occurs in each and that the outcomes of therapy will to that same degree
occur in each; change in personality in the direction of greater unity
and integration; less conflict and more energy utilizable for effective
living; change in behaviour in the direction of greater maturity.
(Rogers 1961: p. 344) Relating congruence to interpersonal
communication, Carl Rogers proposed a 'tentative statement of a general
law' stating that, assuming an ongoing minimal willingness to be in
contact and receive communication from each other: The greater the
congruence of experience, awareness and communication on the part of one
individual, the more the ensuing relationship will involve: a tendency
toward reciprocal communication with a quality of increasing congruence;
a tendency toward more mutually accurate understanding of the
communications; improved psychological adjustment and functioning in
both parties; mutual satisfaction in the relationship. (Rogers 1961:
p. 344) It follows that the opposite is true, too - that the greater the
incongruence of the therapist, the greater the 'disintegration' of
accurate empathic understanding, resulting in psychological
'maladjustment' and hence a dissatisfying therapeutic relationship for
both counsellor and client. Congruence: Fay, an illustration Fay was
referred for counselling by her GP, having 'fallen apart' as a
consequence of the termination of a relationship. She was in torment,
with one part (her selfstructure) trying its best to convince another
part (a part that was desperately yearning to be with her partner again)
that actually she was better off without him - battle was raging within.
Let me be honest here: I abhor violence and aggression in whatever way,
shape or form - I am a confirmed pacifist and coward, and proud of being
both. Therefore one judgement would be that of course Fay would be
better off without her former partner, for he sounded like a 'nasty
piece of work'! However, to voice

200

Being empathic

such an opinion within the therapy session would not have been
congruent, as my client-centred discipline means that while such an
opinion might very fleetingly enter my mind (mostly due to a
physiological reaction of disgust at some of his reported behaviour), my
primary commitment is to strive to enter Fay's world of feelings and
meanings. My anti-violence values are neither denied nor distorted in
the moment - they are simply irrelevant, or at least relatively
irrelevant in relation to Fay's world of feelings and meanings. Perhaps
the notion of taking precedence might illustrate client-centred
discipline. In counselling, the client's frame of reference takes
precedence over the counsellor's frame of reference. If there is no
psychological denial or distortion on the part of the therapist,
unconditional positive regard, in large part communicated through
empathic understanding, remains authentic and is largely communicated
empathic through being empathic. Unconditional positive regard and
process To begin with, Carl Rogers wrote that: When the therapist is
experiencing a positive, acceptant attitude toward whatever the client
is at that moment, therapeutic movement or change is more likely to
occur. (Rogers 1980: p. 116) This view that the client experiencing
respect from the counsellor was therapeutically helpful moved from being
a belief in the early days into being a therapeutic value based on solid
experience and data, for: Research indicates that the more this attitude
is experienced by the therapist, the greater the probability that
therapy will be successful. (Rogers 1978: p. 10) So what is this change
that is more likely to occur if clients experience unconditional
positive regard, and how might this change occur? In therapy, with its
climate of acceptance and safety and its freedom to explore one's
feelings whatever they may be, it becomes possible for the client to
experience the feelings that have not been admitted into his concept of
self. Once experienced in an accepting climate, they can gradually be
incorporated into his self-picture, and he thereby achieves more unity
and integration between the person he organismically is and the self he
perceives himself as being. (Rogers 1989: p. 24) Thus we can see that
client experiencing of unconditional positive regard from the therapist
enables the client to inwardly go where they may not have been before.
There is a hitherto unexperienced freedom to explore the self: When the
counselor perceives and accepts the client as he is, when he lays aside
all evaluation and enters into the perceptual frame of reference of the
client, he frees the client to explore his life and

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

201

experience anew, frees him to perceive in that experience new meanings
and new goals. (Rogers 1951: p. 48) As a consequence of this freedom to
self-explore in an acceptant climate, selfperceptions may change and be
incorporated into a new and ever-changing 'picture' of the self.
However, Rogers said: I believe that the person can only accept the
unacceptable in himself when he is in a close relationship in which he
experiences acceptance. This, I think, is a large share of what
constitutes psychotherapy - that the individual finds that the feelings
he has been ashamed of or that he has been unable to admit into his
awareness, that those can be accepted by another person, so then he
becomes able to accept them as a part of himself. (Rogers 1951: p. 71)
As we have seen, the client-centred therapist does not have to be
perfect in this experiencing of respect that clients perceive - if this
were so, there would be no client-centred therapists. Yet we have also
already encountered the conviction that imperfect human beings can be of
help (especially if they are aware and accepting of their
imperfections). although it may be true that more empathy is better than
some, and some is better than none, at the heart of the empathic process
is a therapist who is striving to understand: The accuracy of the
therapist's empathic understanding has often been emphasised, but more
important is the therapist's interest in appreciating the world of the
client and offering such understanding with the willingness to be
corrected. This creates a process in which the therapist gets closer and
closer to the client's meanings and feelings, developing an
ever-deepening relationship based on respect for and understanding of
the other person. (Rogers and Raskin 1989: p. 171) Thus the therapist
attitude of unconditional positive regard precedes empathic
understanding in the necessary and sufficient conditions because any
understanding is born out of the genuine desire to understand, based on
a belief that people are worth the effort. This desire and genuine
interest, as we have seen in Chapter 4, is ongoing through each moment.
Acceptance does not mean much until it involves understanding. It is
only as I understand the feelings and thoughts which seem so horrible to
you, or so weak, or so sentimental, or so bizarre - it is only as I see
them as you see them, and accept them and you, that you feel really free
to explore all the hidden nooks and frightening crannies of your inner
and often buried experience. This freedom is an important condition of
the relationship. There is implied here a freedom to explore oneself at
both conscious and unconscious levels, as rapidly as one can dare to
embark on this dangerous quest. (Rogers 1961: p. 34)

202

Being empathic

Here, then, we see an interweave between respect and empathy. Respect is
communicated through a belief that the other person is worth the effort
of striving to understand, and without understanding that respect means
little. The therapist appreciates the client enough to want to
understand, and, as the client reveals more, and as each disclosure
meets with non-evaluative unconditional positive regard and a degree of
empathic understanding, further respect is evident as the therapist
strives to respectfully engage with and understand this untangling
client. While it has been stressed that the client-centred therapist
does not intend to offer support, clients may well nevertheless
experience the counselling relationship as supportive, because they will
feel prized through perceiving the therapist's attitude of unconditional
positive regard and consequent striving to empathise an attitude that is
based at least in part upon a belief in the primacy of the actualising
tendency, and the right and capacity of clients to self-direction and
dignity. Thus one consequence of sensitive and respectful empathy is
that it helps to dissolve feelings of alienation, because the client
feels deeply accepted as the person he or she is from moment to moment:
A second consequence of empathic understanding is that the recipient
feels valued, cared for, accepted as the person that he or she is . . .
It is impossible to accurately sense the perceptual world of another
person unless you value that person and his or her world - unless you,
in some sense, care. Hence, the message comes through to the recipient
that 'this other individual trusts me, thinks I'm worthwhile. Perhaps I
am worth something. Perhaps I could value myself Perhaps I could care
for myself. It is, I believe, the therapist's caring understanding . . .
which has permitted this client to experience a high regard, even a
love, for himself. (Rogers 1980: p. 152) Remember that Carl Rogers
believed that it was impossible for a judgemental therapist to perceive
a client's world of feelings and meanings with accuracy. Thus we begin
to see some of the process consequences of respectful empathic
understanding. Through the client perceiving the attitude of
unconditional positive regard that underpins the therapist's striving to
understand, there is a tendency for feelings of alienation to dissolve,
an increase in client positive selfregard, and an increase in client
self-acceptance. The following quote demonstrates why Carl Rogers
believed unconditional positive regard to be a necessary precursor to
empathic understanding: In the emotional warmth of the relationship with
the therapist, the client begins to experience a feeling of safety as he
finds that whatever attitude he expresses is understood in almost the
same way that he perceives it, and is accepted. He then is able to
explore, for example, a vague feeling of guiltiness which he has
experienced. In this safe relationship he can perceive for the first
time the hostile meaning and purpose of certain aspects of his behavior,
and can understand why he has felt guilty about it, and why it has been
necessary to deny to awareness the meaning of this behavior. But this
clearer perception is in itself disrupting and anxiety-creating, not
therapeutic. It is evidence

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

203

to the client that there are disturbing inconsistencies in himself, that
he is not what he thinks he is. But as he voices his new perceptions and
their attendant anxieties, he finds that this acceptant alter ego, the
therapist, this other person who is only partly another person,
perceives these experiences too, but with a new quality. The therapist
perceives the client's self as the client has known it, and accepts it;
he perceives the contradictory aspects which have been denied to
awareness and accepts those too as being a part of the client; and both
of these acceptances have in them the same warmth and respect. Thus it
is that the client, experiencing in another an acceptance of both these
aspects of himself, can take toward himself the same attitude. He finds
that he too can accept himself even with the additions and alterations
that are necessitated by these new perceptions of himself as hostile. He
can experience himself as a person having hostile as well as other types
of feelings, and can experience himself in this way without guilt. He
has been enabled to do this (if our theory is correct) because another
person has been able to adopt his frame of reference, to perceive with
him, yet to perceive with acceptance and respect. (Rogers 1951: p. 41)

Unconditional positive regard: Fay, an illustration It felt very
important that Fay's yearning to be with her ex-partner be heard,
accepted and understood if she were to feel fully received and therefore
free to move on, so the therapist conditions easily took precedence over
any extraneous thoughts or opinions that, albeit momentarily, I may have
had. Fay was not at all accepting of the desperately yearning part of
herself. Indeed, every time she made reference to this aspect of
herself, words like 'silly, stupid, crazy and mad' were mentioned - and
she herself felt that this part of her needed to be defeated, crushed,
exiled or even killed. Yet if I had also judged this part of her to be
unworthy (or if I had somehow colluded with or condoned her value
judgements about herself), then in effect her whole person would not
have been welcomed into therapy. Metaphorically speaking, a barrier
burst during the ninth session, and Fay felt able to use the entire 50
minutes to disclose how she had engaged in 'perverse, often brutal,
sexual activities' with her ex-partner. although as part of her
'exorcism' Fay needed to be sexually explicit, I shall not be. Suffice
it to say that physically she would lose handfuls of hair and end up
severely battered and bruised as a consequence of these episodes. Worse
still for her, very often she would 'willingly' go along with or even
instigate these hideous sex sessions. Fay felt shame and embarrassment,
and she felt violated and defiled - yet how could she be angry or blame
her ex-partner when she had apparently so willingly engaged in this way?
It is my deeply held conviction that had Fay not felt fully received
during previous sessions - that is, had her longing-to-be-with-him-again
self as well as her better-off-without-him self not met with compassion,
acceptance, respect and understanding, she would not have felt safe and
secure enough as a whole person to make the disclosures she did (to a
male counsellor, at that). Both at the time and in retrospect, it was
clear that this ninth session was a real

204

Being empathic

turning point for Fay, a truly cathartic experience. She later described
how hard it had been for her to disclose such shameful acts and her
feeling of being so dirty and unclean, especially as she had co-operated
so seemingly fully with her own defilement. Again it felt really
important to hear, accept and understand her Iblame-myself self, as
unless she felt fully received once again she would have been less
likely to move on. (I stress that my intent is never to move anyone on -
my intent is to strive to be the therapist conditions, and I know that,
if I am successful, clients are likely to move on as a consequence.) In
the tenth session, Fay was realising the degree to which she had been
manipulated, coerced and exploited by her ex-partner (she had clearly
spent a great deal of time in between these two sessions processing her
feelings and thoughts). From the moment she arrived (she seemed to
breeze into the room rather than trudge) Fay seemed lighter in mood -
genuinely smiling at times, for instance, and making more open eye
contact - and derogatory riders about her own 'silliness' had all but
disappeared. She had remembered how her ex-partner had a video of sexual
performances with a previous partner (a 'benchmark' that she was
expected to live up to), and she recalled how he would express feeling
let down, and would mope or become withdrawn if Fay was not prepared to
engage in certain sexual activities (as previous partners had), so that
she felt as if she really was the huge disappointment her partner made
her out to be. Fay was able to recall many, many examples of the
'emotional blackmail' that had been used on her. This time though she
approached her self (or selves) with compassionate understanding rather
than self-blame, also being able to locate her way of being in time
(that is, she was developing a kind of extensional congruence). We can
now turn to empathic understanding and process.

Empathic understanding and process The fourth condition for therapy is
that the therapist is experiencing an accurate, empathic understanding
of the client's world as seen from the inside. To sense the client's
private world as if it were your own, but without ever losing the 'as if
quality - this is empathy, and this seems essential to therapy. To sense
the client's anger, fear, or confusion as if it were your own, yet
without your own anger, fear, or confusion getting bound up in it, is
the condition we are endeavoring to describe. When the client's world is
this clear to the therapist, and he moves about in it freely, then he
can both communicate his understanding of what is clearly known to the
client and can also voice meanings in the client's experience of which
the client is scarcely aware. (Rogers 1961: p. 284)

It's just you, you, you all the time! In a sense, clients are 'all over
the place' at the beginning of therapy, while the client-centred
counsellor is primarily intent on entering clients' worlds as they see
them - hence you, you, you . . . However: The therapist is not
interested in everything equally. He is interested in that which is
real, important, significant, or fundamental. (Barton 1974: p. 191)

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

205

And what is most real, important, significant and fundamental to
client-centred therapists is the internal frame of reference of clients.
How, then, does the process of beginning to enter the frame of reference
of clients commence? A fundamental striving to hear, understand and
voice something of that empathy is a good start, for the experience of
Carl Rogers indicated that: simply to listen understandingly to a client
and to attempt to convey that understanding were potent forces for
individual therapeutic change. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 124) However,
the therapist might well face some difficulties in striving to be this
way, just one being that: much of the client's expression is confused
and expressed in such private symbolism that it is difficult to enter
into his perceptual field and see experience in his terms. (Rogers 1951:
p. 44) Rogers pointed out that entering the internal frame of reference
of clients is not the 'royal road to learning', and that there are many
hindrances, another being that the therapist can mostly only perceive
what is in the conscious awareness of clients, so it follows that the
greater the degree of client incongruence, the more incomplete the
picture that is available to awareness. Nevertheless: If some of that
\[understanding\] can be communicated to the client, that I do really
see how you feel and understand the way you feel, that can be a most
releasing kind of experience. To find that here is a real person who
really accepts and understands sensitively, and accurately perceives
just the way the world seems to me - that just seems to pull people
forward. The effect that can have is really fascinating. It is this
aspect that enables the process of therapy to go on. (Rogers and Evans
1975: pp. 29-30) although Carl wrote of 'empathic inference' and
'empathic guessing', he also cautioned us that: The more we try to infer
what is present in the phenomenal field but not conscious (as in
interpreting projective techniques), the more complex grow the
inferences until the interpretation of the client's projections may
become merely an illustration of the clinician's projections. (Rogers
1951: p. 495) The imperfection of communication is another drawback. We
know from our own experience that communicating (verbally, paraverbally
and non-verbally) precisely what we think, what we feel, and our
personal meanings, is nigh-on impossible - yet in striving to
empathically understand clients, client-centred therapists have no
choice but to rely on their accurate perceiving of client (verbal,
non-verbal and paraverbal) communications. However, the situation is not
hopeless. For instance, we can, albeit with some caution, let our own
frames of

206

Being empathic

reference be a tentative guide to the world of feelings and meanings of
others, for as Rogers wrote: It is possible to achieve, to some extent,
the other person's frame of reference, because many of the perceptual
objects - self, parents, teachers, employers, and so on - have
counterparts in our own perceptual field, and practically all the
attitudes toward these perceptual objects - such as fear, anger,
annoyance, love, jealousy, satisfaction - have been present in our own
world of experience . . . Hence we can infer, quite directly, from the
communication of the individual, or less accurately from observation of
his behaviour, a portion of his perceptual and experiential field.
(Rogers 1951: pp. 495-6) In process terms, we have seen that the more
therapist unconditional positive regard is perceived by clients, the
less defensive clients feel that they need to be. The less defensive
they feel they need to be, the more experiences become available to
conscious awareness and the more free the expression of feelings and
meanings becomes. A similar process emerges when therapists offer their
empathic perceptions to clients: Empathic understanding, when it is
accurately and sensitively communicated, seems crucially important in
enabling the client more freely to experience his inward feelings,
perceptions, and personal meanings. When he is thus in contact with his
inward experiencing, he can recognize the points at which his experience
is at variance with his concept of himself and, consequently, where he
is endeavoring to live by a false conception. Such recognition of
incongruence is the first step towards its resolution and the revision
of the concept of self to include the hitherto denied experiences. This
is one of the major ways in which change becomes possible and a more
complete integration of self and behavior is inaugurated. (Rogers 1989:
p. 16) Given that clients (and especially self-referred clients) are
usually motivated towards change in the first place (that is why they
sought counselling), it makes a great deal of sense for the therapist to
behave in ways that are conducive to clients feeling as free as possible
to express and explore themselves: It should also be added that the
dynamic results - for the client and for the learning of the therapist -
which are achieved in client-centred therapy when even a portion of the
perceptual field is communicated have led us to feel that here is a way
of viewing experience which is much closer to the basic laws of
personality process and behaviour. Not only does there result a more
vivid understanding of the meaning of behaviour, but the opportunities
for new learning are maximized when we approach the individual without a
preconceived set of categories which we expect him to fit. (Rogers 1951:
pp. 496-7)

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

207

In the process of therapy, a therapist striving to empathise with and
understand clients clearly has consequences, one of which is: By
pointing to the possible meanings in the flow of another person's
experiencing, you help the other to focus on this useful type of
referent, to experience the meanings more fully, and to move forward in
the experiencing. (Rogers 1980: p. 142) We have also seen how Carl
Rogers believed that empathy, at its best, is mutual in the counselling
relationship. Furthemore, he linked this to growth when he said: perhaps
in the moment where real change takes place, then I wonder if it isn't
reciprocal in the sense that I am able to see this individual as he is
in that moment and he really sees my understanding and acceptance of
him. And that I think is what is reciprocal and is perhaps what produces
change. (Rogers 1989: p. 55) Carl believed that: The whole task of
psychotherapy is the task of dealing with a failure in communication.
(Rogers 1961: p. 330) Thus the process is that incongruent clients have
lost their inner communication abilities, and this in turn hinders their
self-expression (that is, the quality of their relationships with
others). Incongruent clients are, due to their defensive psychological
denial and distortion mechanisms, no longer consciously aware of certain
aspects of their experiencing, and such denial and distortion will of
course be reflected in their outer as well as their inner
communications. Thus: The task of psychotherapy is to help the person
achieve, through a special relationship with a therapist, good
communication within himself. Once this is achieved he can communicate
more freely and more effectively with others. We may say then that
psychotherapy is good communication, within and between men. We may also
turn that statement around and it will still be true. Good
communication, free communication, within or between men, is always
therapeutic. (Rogers 1961: p. 330) In 1961, when considering group
tensions, Carl wrote about how understanding can overcome:

empathic

the insincerities, the defensive exaggerations, the lies, the 'false
fronts' which characterize almost every failure in communication.
(Rogers 1961: p. 336) When people both realise and accept that the
sole - the only - authentic intent of the therapist is to respectfully
understand, then the need for defensive processes rapidly dissipates. As
barriers to both inner and outer communicating dissolve, so clients are
enabled to reach their inner truths and engage in more fulsome
relationships with others. Rogers likened this movement toward inner
truth with

208

Being empathic

accessing data - that is, the more accurate the information one has, the
more one is able to make informed, self-directed, responsible choices.
For sure, our anxieties, doubts and fears might serve to trigger our
defensive processes that are designed to deny us access to the 'facts'
yet nevertheless Carl Rogers believed that the facts in themselves are
always friendly: The facts are friendly . . . as I look back, it seems
to me that I regarded the facts as potential enemies, as possible
bearers of disaster. I have perhaps been slow in coming to realize that
the facts are always friendly. Every bit of evidence one can acquire, in
any area, leads one that much closer to what is true. And being closer
to the truth can never be a harmful or dangerous or unsatisfying thing.
So while I still hate to readjust my thinking, still hate to give up old
ways of perceiving and conceptualizing, yet at some deeper level I have,
to a considerable degree, come to realize that these painful
reorganizations are what is known as learning, and that though painful
they always lead to a more satisfying because somewhat more accurate way
of seeing life. (Rogers 1961: p. 25) Having stated that client
perception of a therapist's genuine and acceptant empathy helps serve to
reduce blocks to communication, it follows that the opposite is true:
When we don't feel understood, we're defensive. (Rogers and Teich 1992:
p. 59) An example of this might arise through therapeutic work with
couples. all too often, neither partner really hears the other because
each is indignantly defending their own stance, and as a consequence
neither feels heard or understood. Very often, in the first few sessions
with a couple, each client only experiences respectful empathy from the
therapist. Very often, couples have later reported how, when they
departed from sessions at the beginning of therapy, their conversation
was typified by 'See, the counsellor agreed with me'', 'Oh no! The
counsellor was clearly on my side!', and so on. In fact the therapist
did not agree with anyone, but clients reacted in this way to having
felt a contact - to having felt received, heard and understood. As the
therapist strives to experience and offer empathic understanding, client
change and growth may be fostered in many different ways. Reviewing a
transcript of a half-hour therapy session conducted by Carl Rogers, Nat
Raskin and Rogers identified several characteristics of Carl's
communications: The interview exemplifies the therapeutic mechanism of
empathy backed by genuineness and unconditional positive regard. It
helps the client to (1) examine her problems in a way that shifts
responsibility from others to herself, (2) experience emotions in the
immediacy of the therapy encounter, (3) accept aspects of self formerly
denied to awareness, and (4) raise her general level of self-regard.
(Rogers and Raskin 1989: p. 178)

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

209

Carl's initial verbalisations were open. He did not try to reassure the
client, ask questions or delve into their history, or take on the
responsibility of providing a solution or focusing therapy (thereby
living by his belief in the inner resources of clients). As a
consequence of perceiving that she has been understood, the client
broadens her view. Rather than talking about her emotions, she
experiences them in the here and now. She moves towards talking about
herself and away from narrative concerning others, and as a consequence
of experiencing unconditional positive regard from Carl, she moves
towards greater self-acceptance. Their relationship becomes more
reciprocal. What psychological purpose is served by attempting to
duplicate, as it were, the perceptual field of the client in the mind of
the counsellor? Clients experience therapists in a variety of ways, but
some common threads do emerge. For one client: Notice how the
significant theme of the relationship is, 'we were mostly me working
together on my situation as I found it.' The two selves have somehow
become one while remaining two - 'we were me.' This idea is repeated
several times. . . . The impression is that the client was in one sense
'talking to herself', and yet that this was a very different process
when she talked to herself through the medium of another person. (Rogers
1951: p. 39) For another client: Perhaps it would be accurate to say
that the attitudes which she could express but could not accept as a
part of herself became acceptable when an alternate self, the counselor,
looked upon them with acceptance . . . (Rogers 1951: p. 39) We have
already seen that if conducive therapeutic conditions prevail, then
clients are more readily able to access their ('self-referent')
psychological and physiological inner flow of experiencing. Indeed, you
may even have reacted to the idea of a momentary pause in order to try
it and experience it for yourself. Very often therapists are confident
in their sensing of something difficult or even fearful going on within
clients, yet feel less secure about the content and personal meanings
embraced by the client's here-and-now experiencing. In order to
perception check, the therapist might volunteer a tentative voicing of
their empathic grasping, while being constantly alert and willing to
move with the client's feelings and personal meanings that emerge as a
consequence of the therapist striving to understand. Rogers wrote: Now
here's what has interested me about this . . . it's always puzzled me.
Some words fit what is being experienced and others do not. I've noticed
that, in trying to check my understanding, I might say: 'Is it that you
are so angry at your father?', 'No, that's not quite it.' 'Is it that
you hate him?', 'No.' 'Is it that you feel contempt?', 'Yes! Contempt.
That's what I feel.' That's the kind of response, as though at some
level there is a verbal form which really fits what's being experienced.
It's quite striking sometimes. I don't pretend to understand it, but
it's

210

Being empathic

something that has intrigued me. How is it that, if he hadn't been able
to describe his feelings, one word fits exactly and another word quite
similar to it doesn't fit at all? Puzzling . . . (Rogers and Teich 1992:
pp. 62-3) Especially when reflecting in retrospect upon their
developmental movements over the course of a diploma in client-centred
therapy, trainees have often related how at the beginning it felt safer
to rely on implementing skills that they had learned or been taught than
to venture into communicating empathic understanding. The fear of owning
that a perception might be inaccurate seemed to far outweigh the
embarrassment of not quite getting a technique right. We have seen, too,
that Rogers believed a further risk of the therapist experiencing and
communicating empathy is that the therapist might change through the
process as well as the client. Yet to understand another empathically is
edifying in at least two fundamental respects: I find when I am working
with clients in distress, that to understand the bizarre world of a
psychotic individual, or to understand and sense the attitudes of a
person who feels that life is too tragic to bear, or to understand a man
who feels that he is a worthless and inferior individual - each of these
understandings somehow enriches me. I learn from these experiences in
ways that change me, that make me a different and, I think, a more
responsive person. (Rogers 1961: pp. 18-19) Thus counsellors themselves
may be enriched through being this therapist core condition. However,
even greater significance is the humbling privilege of being allowed to
enter the private world of feelings and meanings - both 'courage and
kindness and love and sensitivity' and terror, oddity, disillusionment
and tragedy - and to be in awe of oneself and the other as this
provision of understanding generates greater client self-understanding
and self-acceptance. Being an active party in the change and growth of
another is indeed an awesome, humbling privilege.

Empathy: Fay, an illustration My genuine and respectful striving to
empathically sense and understand Fay's world of feelings and meanings
was central to the whole of our journey together. From moment to moment
I would not only hang on her every word and expression, but also really
try to sense what lay beneath or behind her communications, and would
tentatively venture what I believed I had gleaned. My own process was an
internal seeking. What does this shame, for instance, actually feel
like? What meanings are attached to feeling this way? As a consequence
of seeking to sense such feelings and meanings, some empathic
understanding was ventured, accompanied by a very close attendance to
how Fay received my communications (verbally, paraverbally and
non-verbally). I tried to follow her ongoing leads in every way.
Sometimes my sensing was very accurate, and that felt good to Fay - to
feel honestly accepted and understood. At other times, I was a little
off-beam - and

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

211

that felt good to Fay, too, for in clarifying for me (which she
willingly did), things crystallised for her as well. As we moved towards
ending, she was able to say: I was a person who allowed myself to be
exploited, and now I can see why. I feel warmth toward that me now,
rather than despising and loathing myself. I do regret what happened,
yet I am different now. I still feel very lonely, but I do not miss him:
I miss some aspects of togetherness that being in a relationship can
bring. I realise, in fact, that I do not miss him at all - rather, I
miss the hopes and dreams, the potential that I initially saw in that
relationship. I do not hate him anymore; I feel a little pitying of him
(and pity doesn't feel too good, maybe I still need to work on that). I
realise that at times I sensed his vulnerable inner self, and it was
that part of him that I held out hope for. I have moved on now . . . It
feels like I am a new, more real, me.

Client do When asked what he was working towards as a therapist, Carl
Rogers said: For myself, I have a rather simple definition, yet one
which I think has a good many implications. I feel that I'm quite
pleased in my work as a therapist if I find that my client and I, too,
are - if we are both moving toward what I think of as greater openness
to experience. (Rogers 1989: p. 75) Client movement towards greater
openness to experience is enabled through clients becoming better able
to listen to and participate fully in their inner communications, and
hence becoming more perceptive about themselves, others and the worlds
that they inhabit. This process of becoming could hardly be described as
static, and Rogers said that he felt rewarded when this process gets
under way. The client also becomes more realistic and socialised: simply
because one of the elements which he can't help but actualize in himself
is the need and desire for closer human relationships; so for me, this
concept of openness to experience describes a good deal of what I would
hope to see in the more optimal person . . . (Rogers 1989: p. 75) We
have seen that client-centred therapy can be formulated as if (A) then
(B), if (B) then (C), where (A) is a relationship founded on contact
between an incongruent (vulnerable, anxious and defensive) client and an
authentic, respectful and understanding therapist, and in which the
client at least to some degree perceives that respectful empathy. (B)
can represent the capacity and potential of clients, which is released
as a consequence of being in (A). What is the outcome of (A) plus (B),
(C)? Put simply, if the therapist can be the core conditions, what do
clients do? In essence, client potential for self-actualising that is in
harmony with the organism as a whole can be released and realised: The
individual will reorganize himself at both the conscious and deeper
levels of his personality in such a manner as to cope with life

212

Being empathic

more constructively, more intelligently, and in a more socialized as
well as a more satisfying way. (Rogers 1961: p. 36) Carl Rogers was able
to base his comments on solid research findings, and could state that
even limited client experience of client-centred therapy would produce
changes in personality (attitudes and behaviour) that were both
significant and profound. The outcome is a more integrated and effective
individual. So it had been discovered that even relatively minimal
engagement with client-centred therapy results in fewer symptoms of what
might, in other approaches to helping, be labelled as 'neurosis',
'psychosis' or other 'personality problems' of some description.
Client-centred therapy results in clients moving towards having a more
realistic perception of the self. They become more like their ideal
selves, self-valuing increases, they exhibit higher levels of confidence
and greater autonomy, there is improved self-understanding, they become
more open to experiencing (that is, there is a marked decrease in denial
and distortion), and they become more accepting of the sovereignty and
humanity of others. Furthermore, there are behavioural changes as a
result of psychological growth. Clients become less frustrated by and
recover more quickly from stress, they are more mature and less
defensive, and they are more flexible and creative. As Rogers stated:
there can no longer be any doubt as to the effectiveness of such a
relationship in producing personality change. (Rogers 1961: p. 36) One
client said 'Now that I see all that, I guess it's really up to me', and
Carl Rogers said: I think as the person becomes aware of these various
factors in his background, he can make realistic and sensible choices as
to how he's going to both live with and transcend the circumstances of
the past. . . I don't believe in free will in the sense that a person's
free to do anything, but to deny the reality of the significance of
choice as the strict behaviorists do is totally unrealistic . . . the
person can and does choose significantly. I've always been rather
pleased that our researchers in psychotherapy have shown that the
element that probably changes most in individual therapy is the person's
concept of himself. He moves toward being a more confident self, more
acceptant of himself; self-hatred decreases. As a person feels genuinely
confident of who he is and what he's capable of doing, he goes ahead to
utilize his past, his conditioning, and the biological basis of his
being in more constructive ways. (Rogers and Evans 1975: pp. 76-7) Both
at the time but even more so in retrospect, Rogers realised the
importance of research into 'delinquents' undertaken by Bill Kell,
through which it was discovered (much to the astonishment of the
research team) that in terms of predicting future behaviour,
self-understanding far outweighed such factors as family environment and
other social and economic concerns:

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

213

Actually, it was so shocking to us at the time of the original study -
this was many years ago - that we frankly didn't believe the findings.
(Rogers and Evans 1975: pp. 77-9) As a result of this scepticism, Helen
McNeil replicated the research, and again selfunderstanding proved to be
the most significant factor. Yet again the research team could hardly
believe these findings, and so embarked on a sub-analysis, about which
Rogers wrote: Again, self-understanding . . . correlated more highly
with their behavior. So the essence of that seemed to be that the person
who is realistic about himself, who has a pretty good comprehension of
what he's up against, and what factors have influenced his behavior, has
a much better chance of controlling his behavior. He can make choices.
At the time I didn't appreciate the full depth of that study. It's taken
a good many years for me to realize that our findings were more
significant than I thought at the time. (Rogers and Evans 1975:
pp. 77-9) So if a fundamental aspect of client-centred therapy is
increasing awareness, acceptance and reorganising of the self, here was
evidence from 'beyond' therapy that corroborated the social significance
of this. In expressing a real trust in the potential (the actualising
tendency) that resides in all of us, Rogers said: it seems to me that
you could speak of the goal toward which therapy moves, and I guess the
goal toward which maturity moves in an individual, as being becoming, or
being knowingly and acceptingly that which one most deeply is. (Rogers
1989: p. 62) The client-centred therapist is committed to an ongoing,
moment-by-moment striving to authentically and respectfully empathise
with clients. How might clients experience this? the concentrated
attentiveness to his person, concerns, and his feelings is an
extraordinary event in the client's life, naturally increasing his sense
of substantiality and reality and lending dignity to his self and his
concerns. (Barton 1974: p. 192) From first contact onwards, clients
ideally experience both a meaningful and an acceptant connection and
feel fully received for whoever and however they are. all disclosures
are met with respect and an attempt at understanding, rather than being
contemptuously dismissed as 'silly', as is so often the case with both
their own inner and external communications. As self-expression meets
with an authentic, acceptant empathy, so clients feel increasingly safe
in further verbalising what is going on for them, and they gradually
begin to incorporate previously denied or distorted experiencing into
their self concepts. This in turn influences their behaviour (actions or
inaction):

214

Being empathic

As I listened to therapeutic interviews . . . I realized that when a
person is functioning well and has profited a lot from therapy, you find
they're open to their experience. They're able to express what they're
feeling - what they're experiencing - and to assimilate that into their
concept of themselves and guide their behavior in terms of it. (Rogers
and Russell 2002: pp. 256-7) As therapy progresses, clients gradually
adopt a client-centred way of being towards themselves. In a sense, the
process of client-centred therapy could almost be represented by the
therapist 'core' conditions in reverse - that is, a congruent therapist
experiences unconditional positive regard towards and strives to
empathically understand an incongruent client. As a consequence of
perceiving these conditions from the therapist, clients move towards
experiencing greater self-acceptance (especially as a consequence of
feeling respected by a significant other) and deeper self-understanding
(especially as a consequence of being reciprocally involved in a process
of genuine empathic striving). As a consequence of greater
self-acceptance and self-understanding, more and more experience becomes
available to awareness, and hence may become integrated aspects of the
client's concept of self: The self is now more congruent with the
experiencing. Thus, the persons have become, in their attitudes toward
themselves, more caring and acceptant, more empathic and understanding,
more real and congruent. But these three elements are the very ones that
both experience and research indicate are the attitudes of an effective
therapist. So we are perhaps not overstating the total picture if we say
that an empathic understanding by another enables a person to become a
more effective growth enhancer, a more effective therapist, for himself
or herself. (Rogers 1980: p. 159) No surrender! We have seen that upon
entering therapy clients are likely to be vulnerable, anxious and tense
as a consequence of their defensive psychological denial and distortion
processes no longer being able to entirely prevent some awareness of
their incongruence. Conversely: We may say that freedom from inner
tension, or psychological adjustment, exists when the concept of self is
at least roughly congruent with all the experiences of the organism.
(Rogers 1951: p. 513) Rogers gave the example of a woman who denied her
sexual impulses (this was in the 1950s) because she believed them to be
taboo, or improper, or immoral. Therefore they had to be denied because
they simply could not coexist with her view of herself as she should be,
namely 'proper' and moral. Many of her shoulds and oughts were values
introjected both from significant others and from her society. However,
as therapy progresses the client is able to accept and understand both
of these facets of herself. She can accept her sexual desires as
'normal' and respect and understand cultural moral values as being
significant in her world.

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

21 5

She can more fully be herself rather than being in conflict, strenuously
striving to achieve victory for one aspect of herself over another -
even though neither facet of herself is overly willing to surrender or
accept defeat: The feeling of reduction of inner tension is something
that clients experience as they make progress in 'being the real me' or
in developing 'a new feeling about myself' . . . The cost of maintaining
an alertness of defense to prevent various experiences from being
symbolized in consciousness is obviously great. (Rogers 1951: p. 513) In
a medical practice, many patients are referred to counselling because
either they have told their doctor, or their doctor has told them, that
they are depressed. These clients often arrive at their first therapy
session already having been prescribed antidepressant medication. Thus
there is a very powerful underlying value that the patient should not be
depressed. Usually the patients themselves feel that there is something
wrong with them (which is why they went to see their GP in the first
place), and this is confirmed by their having been prescribed medication
that is intended to 'help them get better' or 'recover' from their
depression. Yet, more often than not, there really would be something
odd or weird about these clients if they did not feel depressed. As
human beings who have experienced or are experiencing difficult or
tragic circumstances, of course they feel low. When these clients
experience authentic unconditional positive regard and empathic
understanding from their counsellor, they begin to realise that they are
not 'abnormal' after all - being received as human beings who are worthy
of respect as and how they are means that they can begin to accept
themselves as and how they are. Furthermore, the feelings, thoughts and
behaviours that they believe they should not have or ought not to have
begin to seem understandable and therefore normal, acceptable and real
consequences of living - they begin to reconnect with humanity.
'Depressed' clients very often describe their feeling of exhaustion -
even getting up in the morning just feels like too much trouble, and the
effort involved in getting through another day just doesn't feel
worthwhile. Yet very often it seems that a huge portion of the inner
energy available to them has been spent in fighting and trying to
vanquish their sinister, bizarre, unacceptable feelings and thoughts.
Their inner experience is of wanting to stay curled up in bed feeling
miserable and alone, but there is an internal voice saying 'pull
yourself together, stop being a selfindulgent wimp, and get on with
life - there are many people worse off than you!'. Other internal
dialogues might be characterised by, on the one hand, feeling
insignificant and worthless while, on the other hand, there is a
wailing, plaintive 'What about me?'. Many thoughts or wishes might be
dismissed as silly, irrational or needless. all in all, a massive amount
of energy is expended in striving to resolve this exhausting inner
battle that rages on - no wonder that there is a reluctance to emerge
from the cocoon of sleep, or a yearning to sleep for ever. Yet when
clients begin to be their depression rather than fighting it, there is a
huge metaphorical 'inner sigh' as the client relaxes into a greater
acceptance of their wholeness, and gradually the vast stores of energy
used up in a conflict that inevitably tends towards there being winners
and losers, victors and vanquished, can gradually be recouped or
recharged and redirected towards the more constructive tendencies in all
of us. As more experiencing becomes available to consciousness, the
client can move

216

Being empathic

towards celebrating the diversity of all of their selves, rather than
striving to impose a harsh regime in which some selves have to surrender
while others bask in their tyrannical glory: The term 'available to
consciousness'... is deliberately chosen. It is the fact that all
experiences, impulses, sensations are available that is important, and
not necessarily the fact that they are present in consciousness. It is
the organization of the concept of self against the symbolization of
certain experiences contradictory to itself, which is the significant
negative fact. Actually, when all experiences are assimilated in
relationship to the self and made a part of the structure of the self,
there tends to be less of what is called 'self-consciousness' on the
part of the individual. Behavior becomes more spontaneous, expression of
attitudes is less guarded, because the self can accept such attitudes
and such behavior as a part of itself. Frequently a client at the
beginning of therapy expresses real fear that others might discover his
real self. 'As soon as I start thinking about what I am, I have such a
terrible conflict at what I am that it makes me feel awful. It's such a
self-depreciation that I hope nobody ever knows it . . . I'm afraid to
act natural, I guess, because I just don't feel as though I like
myself.' In this frame of mind, behavior must always be guarded,
cautious, self-conscious. But when this same client has come to accept
deeply the fact that T am what I am', then she can be spontaneous and
can lose her self-consciousness. (Rogers 1951: p. 515) From four to one
against to t w o to one on! As a consequence of experiencing the
therapist conditions and of feeling received, there is less potential
for clients to experience tension or anxiety, and so they become less
vulnerable. Due to there being a reduced possibility of threat to the
self-concept, the self-concepts of clients change, as they are able to
assimilate previously denied or distorted experiencing. The self-concept
has become more flexible and inclusive, and the client has moved away
from feeling unworthy of respect (a feeling that was based largely on
standards introjected from others) and towards greater self-acceptance.
There is less and less need for defensiveness as each new disclosure
meets with therapist respect and understanding and, more importantly,
self-respect and self-understanding: One study showed that at the
beginning of therapy, current attitudes toward self were four to one
negative, but in the final fifth of therapy self-attitudes were twice as
often positive as negative. (Rogers 1961: p. 65) Clients become more
self-directing as both they and their therapists trust in the wisdom of
the whole organism - the client's internal locus of evaluation. Reduced
defensiveness (due to the absence of threat from both the client's own
selfconcept and an acceptant, understanding therapist) leads to clients
becoming more adaptable, as their behaviour becomes increasingly based
on more accurate and complete data (as less and less is denied or
distorted) - the facts are always friendly! Clients become more open to
their full experiencing, and the ideal self

Empathic understanding and therapeutic process

217

changes, too, becoming more realistic and therefore the person's aims
are more achievable. The chasm between clients as they want to be and
clients as they are is greatly diminished, which means that they are
less and less likely to have 'outof-character' experiences - and this
feeling of enhanced self-control in turn leads to yet greater
self-acceptance: More of the total experience of the organism is
directly incorporated into the self; or more accurately, the self tends
to be discovered in the total experience of the organism. The client
feels he is his 'real' self, his organic self. (Rogers 1951: pp. 531-2)
As a consequence, tension of all types (physiological as well as
psychological) continues to decrease as each new step on this journey of
personal development continues to meet with unconditional prizing and
empathy - from the therapist and, increasingly, internal acceptance and
understanding. As a consequence of feeling yet further self-acceptance,
clients become more accepting of others (and the ideals that they
project on to others also become more realistic and therefore
achievable). In large part due to the reduced need to protect their own
concepts of self, others are now perceived as unique and separate
individuals, worthy of their own dignity: The best definition of what
constitutes integration appears to be this statement that all the
sensory and visceral experiences are admissible to awareness through
accurate symbolization, and organizable into one system which is
internally consistent and which is, or is related to, the structure of
self. Once this type of integration occurs, then the tendency toward
growth can become fully operative, and the individual moves in the
directions normal to all organic life. When the selfstructure is able to
accept and take account in consciousness of the organic experiences,
when the organizational system is expansive enough to contain them, then
clear integration and a sense of direction are achieved, and the
individual feels that his strength can be and is directed toward the
clear purpose of actualization and enhancement of a unified organism.
(Rogers 1951: pp. 513-14) The client rejects the desire to control or
manipulate others, preferring instead to be the greater valuing and
enrichment that increased awareness of self and others brings. The
'fully functioning person' is able both to accurately perceive and to
assimilate and integrate all relevant experiencing: If I feel hatred, I
can assimilate the fact that I'm a hating person; I hate this
individual. If I feel love, I'm able to recognize that that's what I'm
feeling. If I'm frightened, the same, so that when one is really open to
all of the experiences going on in the organism, one is a fully
functioning person. (Rogers and Russell 2002: p. 252) Being fully
functioning - open to a multiplicity of experiences - involves a
readiness to engage with both here-and-now factors (such as social and
cultural

218

Being empathic

expectations, satisfactory and unsatisfactory relationships with others,
physical requirements, legal demands, and so on) and the personal
feelings and meanings that have grown out of the past. Every new
stimulus is evaluated in terms of the whole person, which means that the
actualising tendency and self-actualising are now harnessed together
rather than being in conflict. Rogers wrote that the valuing process
which resides in the 'fully functioning' or 'psychologically mature'
person is the most sensitive such process that exists in the entire
universe as we know it. He was also keen to point out that although this
valuing process does operate on whether or not experiencing maintains
and enhances (self-)actualisation, it is nevertheless not selfish,
because the fundamental nature of human beings is highly social (see,
for instance, Rogers 1989: pp. 137-8). Nor are fully functioning
individuals entirely 'perfect' - we have already learned that Rogers saw
the human being not as seeking stasis only, and that openness to
experience and self-acceptance includes being non-defensive about
failings and negative feelings as well as positive qualities: This
emerging person would not bring utopia. He would make mistakes, be
partially corrupted, go overboard in certain directions. (Rogers and
Evans 1975: pp. 173-4) However, the 'person of tomorrow' - the fully
functioning, psychologically mature person - would tend to live in (or
create) a culture (and subcultures) within which certain values, beliefs
and attitudes have significant emphasis. Nondefensive openness to self
and experience would apply in all relationships (with partners, family
and at work, for instance), and the 'style' of interpersonal
relationships would be more deeply rooted in the principles of the
person-centred approach. There would be greater respect for the dignity
of all people, irrespective of such issues as social status, gender,
ethnicity, or perceived and real disadvantages. Groupings of people (in
communities, at work, in education, and so on) would be less gargantuan
and impersonal, and greater respect towards and reciprocity with nature
would feature. Resources of all kinds would be shared with greater
equity, and there would be less materialism for its own sake, and less
greed. There would be reduced authoritarianism and bureaucracy, with
sensitivity to human needs outweighing administrative and control needs,
and leadership would become less significant. Concern for those who
would benefit from assistance would be genuine and caring, and
scientific creativity would become more humane, too. Indeed, there would
be greater creativity of all kinds in all areas. The human being has
moved: toward the exploration of self and the development of the
richness of the total, individual, responsible human soma - mind and
body. (Rogers and Evans 1975: pp. 173-4) Thus in becoming more open to
self and others, in becoming more aware of self and others, in becoming
more acceptant of self and others, and in becoming more understanding of
self and others, people become more able to live their lives
meaningfully, more: able to love; able to receive love. (Rogers and
Russell 2002: p. 258)

Chapter 6

Afterwords Our civilization does not yet have enough faith in the social
sciences to utilize their findings. (Rogers 1961: p. 335) We have found
that if a therapist can initiate a helping relationship with an
incongruent person, founded on the therapist experiencing authentic
unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding and the client
perceiving these therapist qualities, then this is all that is necessary
and sufficient for people to change and grow. Have faith! Trust in the
resources and capacities of clients! As Rogers said: I'm pretty good at
living and letting live, so the fact that people have held different
points of view from mine has never troubled me much. Criticisms that
come from honest viewpoints which differ quite sharply from mine are OK
with me. I suppose the kind of criticism that I've liked least is the
notion, which used to be expressed in many ways over the course of
years, that the client-centered approach was a pretty shallow approach.
It might do for dealing with superficial problems, but it really had not
much to do with the deeper problems of personality. That is just not
true. This criticism has probably troubled me more than any other I can
think of, because I don't think I am superficial. You can't do anything
but laugh off the fact that a lot of criticism is based on a complete
lack of understanding of what I've been doing and what my associates
have been doing. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 114) The would-be therapist
is faced with a choice - either we can utilise what we know to control,
manipulate, teach and, effectively, depersonalise and enslave people
(often without their knowing) into becoming what we or society wish them
to be, or we can opt for freedom, to provide conditions that are
conducive to growth, creativity and autonomy (whether it be for
individuals or groups of people): There are really only a few
psychologists who have contributed ideas that help to set people free,
making them psychologically free and selfresponsible, encouraging them
in decision making and problem solving. (Rogers and Evans 1975:
pp. 65-6) Rogers stated that he was particularly disappointed in
academic psychologists working within the 'great' learning
establishments, and conceded that he: had very little influence on
academic psychology, in the lecture hall, the textbook, or the
laboratory. There is some passing mention of my thinking, my theories,
or my approach to therapy, but, by and large,

220

Being empathic

I think I have been a painfully embarrassing phenomenon to the academic
psychologist. I do not fit. Increasingly I have come to agree with that
assessment. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 126) Rogers nevertheless
maintained that of course we need to remain sceptical, to continually
engage in research and question our findings, theories and practices yet
in doing so we can remain committed to the sovereignty of the person. As
Carl said (in response to Richard Evans): And I like your word,
commitment, because I think that's probably better than my use of belief
or conviction. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 69) Indeed, when asked to
state who had most shaped his work, Carl had no hesitation in saying
that it was his clients, and that he had paid attention to their 'raw
data' that emerged from the tape recording of sessions and the
subsequent reflection upon the experiencing: I feel that almost
everything I've learned about personality, about interpersonal
relationships, about personality dynamics came not from books or from
some charismatic teacher, but from direct experience with the people
I've been working with . . . I guess something I take some pride in is
that I always wanted to get close to the raw data. (Rogers and Evans
1975: p. 109 and pp. 112-13) So what of the future? Of his own
developmental trends, Rogersl said: I will introduce quite a personal
note here. I find I'm not much good at planning my future. I ooze toward
my future. That is one term I like to use because it reminds me of an
amoeba that sends out these protoplasmic tentacles and then if it runs
into something aversive, it draws back, but it flows in the direction
that seems rewarding. And I feel that's the nature of my professional
life. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 117) Of the world, Rogers acknowledged
that evidence of negativity is all around us, yet he remained
optimistic: To me, the person who offers the most hope in our crazy
world today, which could be wiping itself out, is the individual who is
most fully aware - most fully aware of what is going on within himself:
physiologically, feeling-wise, his thoughts; also aware of the external
world that is impinging on him. The more fully he is aware of the whole
system, or perhaps context - the more hope there is that he would live a
balanced human life without the violence, the craziness, the deceit, the
horrible things that we tend to do to each other in the modern world.
(Rogers 1989: pp. 188-9) And what of the future of client-centred
therapy? We face threats from without those who ignore the evidence of
research that sometimes they themselves have sponsored, evidence which
time and time again demonstrates that what is most

Afterwords

221

helpful is a therapeutic relationship founded on authentic respect and
understanding. We face threats from within - those who lack the
discipline of Rogers and view congruence as meaning that anything goes,
agencies responsible for the validation of training (governmental and
academic) who reduce an exquisite intimacy to the mechanical
implementation of skills, and those who lack the courage or support to
hold on to the therapist conditions as both necessary and sufficient.
Yet just as the client-centred therapist trusts in the capacity of
clients, maybe we need to trust in our own resources, too: I hope you
would find it possible to trust your deepest self. I think that the
follies and tragedies of the world result from people being fearful of
themselves, not knowing themselves, and certainly being unwilling to
trust the deepest level of selfhood. (Rogers 1989: pp. 197-8) There is
hope. I simply say with all my heart: Power to the emerging person and
the revolution he carries within. (Rogers and Evans 1975: p. 175)
Emerge! Why be the magician when you can be the magic?

Bibliography Barrett-Lennard G (1959) Dimensions of the client's
experience of his therapist associated with personality change.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago, Chicago.
Barton A (1974) Three Worlds of Therapy. Mayfield Publishing Company,
Palo alto, CA. Bergin A and Jasper L (1969) Correlates of empathy in
psychotherapy: a replication. J Abnorm Psychol. 74: 477-81. Bergin A and
Solomon S (1970) Personality and performance correlates of empathic
understanding in psychotherapy. In: J Hart and T Tomlinson (eds) New
Directions in Client-Centered Therapy. Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA.
Bergman DV (1951) Counseling method and client responses. J Consult
Psychol. 15: 216-44. Berwick K and Rogers C (1983) Carl Rogers Counsels
Keith Berwick. CSP/CCTPCAS video.\* Budman SH and Gurman AS (1988)
Theory and Practice of Brief Therapy. Guilford Press, New York. Farber
B, Brink D and Raskin P (eds) (1996) The Psychotherapy of Carl Rogers.
Guilford Press, New York. Farson R (1955) Introjection in the
psychotherapeutic relationship. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
University of Chicago, Chicago. Fiedler FE (1953) Quantitative studies
on the role of therapists' feelings toward their patients. In OH Mowrer
(ed.) Psychotherapy Theory and Research. Ronald Press, New York. Frick W
(1989) Humanistic Psychology: conversations with Maslow, Murphy, Rogers.
Wyndham Hall Press, Bristol. This includes a conversation with Carl
Rogers (1969). Friedli K, King M, Lloyd M and Horder J (1997) Randomised
controlled assessment of nondirective psychotherapy versus routine
general practitioner care. Lancet. 350: 1662-5. Greenfield S (2000)
Brain Story. BBC books, London. Hampshire Association for Counselling
(2001) Counsellor Resources Directory. Hampshire Association for
Counselling. Kelly G (1955) The Psychology of Personal Constructs.
Norton, New York. King M, Sibbald B, Ward E et al. (2000). Randomised
controlled trial of non-directive counselling, cognitive behaviour
therapy and usual general practitioner care in the management of
depression as well as mixed anxiety and depression in primary care. BMJ.
321: 1389-92. Kirschenbaum H (1979) On Becoming Carl Rogers. Delacorte
Press, New York. Laing RD (1965) The Divided Self. Pelican, Middlesex,
UK. McLeary RA and Lazarus RS (1949) Autonomic discrimination without
awareness. J Pers. 18: 171-9. Mearns D (2002) Developing Person-Centred
Counselling. Sage Publications, London. Mellor-Clark J, Connell J,
Barkham M and Cummins P (2001) Counselling outcomes in primary health
care: a CORE system data profile. Eur J Psychother Counsell Health. 4:
65-86. Nelson-Jones R and Patterson CH (1975) Measuring client-centred
attitudes. Br J Guidance Counsell. 3: 228-36. Patterson CH (2000)
Understanding Psychotherapy :fiftyyears of client-centred theory and
practice. PCCS Books. Patterson CH and Watkins CE Jnr (1996) Theories of
Psychotherapy. HarperCollins College Publishers, New York. Prouty G, van
Werde G and Portner M (2002) Pre-Therapy. PCCS Books, Llangarron,
Rosson-Wye.

224

Being empathic

Rogers C (1937) The clinical psychologist's approach to personality
problems. Family. 18: 233-43. Rogers C (1939) Clinical Treatment of the
Problem Child. Houghton Mifflin, Riverside Press, Cambridge, MA. Rogers
C (1942) Counseling and Psychotherapy. Houghton Mifflin, Boston, New
York. Rogers C (1946) Significant aspects of client-centered therapy. Am
Psychol. 1: 415-22. Rogers C (1951) Client-Centered Therapy. Constable,
London. Rogers C (1957a) The necessary and sufficient conditions of
therapeutic personality change. J Consult Psychol. 21: 95-103. Rogers C
(1957b) A therapist's view of the good life. Humanist. 17: 299-300.
Rogers C (1959) A theory of therapy, personality, and interpersonal
relationships, as developed in the client-centered framework. In: S Koch
(ed.) Psychology: a study of a science. Study 1. Volume 3. Formulations
of the person and the social context. McGraw-Hill, New York, Toronto,
London. *Rogers C (1961) On Becoming a Person. Constable, London. Rogers
C (ed.) (1967) The Therapeutic Relationship and its Impact: a study of
psychotherapy with schizophrenics. The University of Wisconsin Press,
Madison, Milwaukee and London. Rogers C (1975) Empathic: an
unappreciated way of being. Counsel Psychol. 5: 2-10. Rogers C (1978)
Carl Rogers on Personal Power. Constable, London. Rogers C (1980) A Way
of Being. Houghton Mifflin, Boston, New York. Rogers C (1981) Notes on
Rollo May. In: H Kirschenbaum and V Land Henderson (1989) Carl Rogers:
Dialogues. Hougton-Mifflin, Boston. Rogers C (1985) Personally Speaking:
Carl Rogers. John Masterson interview, RTE Dublin television programme,
recorded on 23 November 1985.* Rogers C (1986) Politics and Innocence: a
humanistic debate. Saybrook, Dallas, Texas. Rogers C (1987a)
Client-centered? Person-centered? Person-Centered Rev. 2: 11-13. Rogers
C (1987b) What areas of person-centred theory or practice require
further research? 2: 252. Rogers C (1989) Carl Rogers: dialogues (H
Kirschenbaum and V Land Henderson, eds). Houghton Mifflin, Boston.
Rogers C and Buber M (1957) In: H Kirschenbaum and V Land Henderson
(1989) Carl Rogers: Dialogues. Houghton Mifflin, Boston. Rogers C and
Frick W (1967) Conversation with Carl. In: Humanistic Psychology:
conversations with Maslow, Murphy, Rogers. Wyndham Hall Press, Bristol,
Indiana. Rogers C and Stevens B (1967) Person to Person: the problem of
being human. Souvenir Press, Guernsey, Channel Islands. Rogers C and
Truax C (1967) The therapeutic conditions antecedent to change: a
theoretical view. In: C Rogers, E Gendlin, D Kiesler and C Truax (eds)
The Therapeutic Relationship with Schizophrenics. Wisconsin Press,
Madison, WI. Rogers C and Evans R (1975) Carl Rogers: the man and his
ideas. EP Dutton, New York. Rogers C and Evans R (1981) In Dialogue with
Carl Rogers. Praeger, New York. Rogers C and Ryback D (1984) One
alternative to nuclear planetary suicide. Counsel Psychol. 12: 3-12.
Rogers C and Barfield GS (1985) Empathy: an exploration. Center for
Studies of the Person video. *Rogers C and Sanford R (1985) In
Conversation. Center for Studies of the Person video.* Rogers C and
Raskin N (1989) Person-centred therapy. In: R Corsini and D Wedding
(eds) Current Psychotherapies. Peacock, Itasca, Illinois. Rogers C and
Teich N (1992) Conversation with Carl Rogers (1985). In: N Teich (ed.)
Rogerian Perspectives: collaborative rhetoric for oral and written
communication. Ablex Publishing Corporation, Norwood, New Jersey. Rogers
C and Russell D (2002) Carl Rogers: the quiet revolutionary. Penmarin
Books, Roseville, CA.

Bibliography

225

Rogers C, Kohut H and Erickson M (1986) A personal perspective on some
similarities and differences. Person-Centered Rev. 1: 125-40. Rogers N
(1997) Counselling and creativity: an interview with Natalie Rogers. Br
J Guidance Counsell. 25: 263-73. Seeman J (1949) A study of the process
of nondirective therapy. J Consult Psychol. 13: 15767. Shlien J (1986)
In: Reflection of Feelings by Carl Rogers. Person-Centered Rev. 1:
375-7. Slack S (1985) Reflections on a workshop with Carl Rogers. J
Human Psychol. 25: 35-42. Snyder WU (1943) An investigation of the
nature of non-directive psychotherapy, PhD thesis, Ohio State
University, Ohio. Standal S (1954) The need for positive regard: a
contribution to client-centered theory. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation. University of Chicago, Chicago. *Tolman M (1990) Single
Session Therapy: maximizing the effect of the first (and often only)
therapeutic encounter. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco. Vincents (1998) PC or
Not PC. . . that is the question. BAPCA AGM address, 14 March 1998.*
Vincent S (1999a) On becoming person-centred? Masters dissertation,
University of East Anglia, Norwich. *Vincent S (1999b) On becoming more
whole? Necking in Glasgow. Person-Centred Pract. 7: 95-101. Vincent S
(1999c) A Training Trip Through Empathy. CCTPCAS publication.* Vincent S
(2000a) From Whole to Hole to Whole. In: Person-To-Person, BAPCA
Newsletter. *pp. 8-10. Vincent S (2000b) Failing or Fortunate? Striving
for revising. CCTPCAS publication.* Vincent S (2001) Setting Aside or
Erupting? Person-Centred Pract. 9: 97-104. Vincent S (2002a)
Client-centred therapy: conditions, process and theory. Person-Centred
Pract. 10: 35-44. Vincent S (2002b) Empathy: an inter-view. CCTPCAS
publication. *Vincent S (2002c) Evaluating Empathy? CCTPCAS
publication.* Vincent S (2004) Approach and outcomes. In: Southampton
Primary Care Counselling Services Summary Report 2004.\* Southampton
Primary Care Counselling Service.

- Available from CCTPCAS (www.cctpcas.com).

Index abdication of responsibilities 66 absolute assurance 126 absorbing
94-5, 96, 97, 103 abstraction 155 acceptance 4, 11, 49-50, 57, 62, 172
agreement and 48 of anxiety 185 of clients 51, 62 as they are 18
conditional 130 of feelings 183 of humanity of others by clients 212 of
others 190, 217 of positive feelings of others 188 presence of 27
rewards of 30 of self see self-acceptance of sovereignty of others by
clients 212 therapists 197 thoroughly consistent 126 unconditional 130
understanding and 167, 201 accountability 173 accurate empathic
understanding 30-3 accurate overlap of organism and self 151 accurate
perceptions of experiencing 194 accurate symbolisation definition 134
denial of 147 of experience 185 actions negative 62 positive 62, 181-2
reactions 57 activities 3 actualising of potential 189 actualising
tendencies 7, 26-7, 41, 135 balance and 137 birth with 142 the self
137-8 self-actualisation and 137-8, 144-5, 146, 218 therapist belief in
164, 165-6 trust in 213 adjustment, psychological 154-5 advice 48
affection 28

affectional relationships 188-90, 197 affective empathy 101-2 agenda 48
aggressive behaviour 192-3 agreement 15, 48, 50-2 acceptance contrasted
49-50 alienation 202 aloofness, professional 129 altering feelings and
thoughts 164 analogy 114 analysis 100 anger 28, 193 animalistic ways 195
annoyance 28, 81 answers 48 antidepressant medication 215 antisocial
behaviour 136 antisocial emotions 192 anxieties 4, 11, 214, 216
acceptance 185 definition 146 self-actualisation and 145 appreciation,
need for 142 appropriateness 27, 188 approval 15 'as if quality 18
assurance, absolute 126 attention 158 attitudes see also feelings
clients, changes in 212 Counsellor Attitude Scale 48 emotionally
detached 17 empathic, implementation 34 fully functioning persons 218
positive 28, 129, 190 self-attitudes 190 therapists 121, 186
unconditional positive regard 156, 163-4 attunement 31 authenticity see
also genuineness; reality empathic understanding 155-6 striving to
empathise 90 unconditional positive regard 27, 155-6 valuing of clients
158

228

Index

authoritarianism 218 autonomy 53, 166, 219 avoidance 20 awareness 17, 78
accurate symbolisation in 134 attaching meanings to 97, 99-100 conscious
see conscious awareness denial 147 elimination 195 distortion to,
elimination 195 edge of 111 experience available to 134 of experiencing
187, 195 free 196 human beings' capacity for 133, 196 internal 123-4
undistorted 196 use of term 133 awe 189 balance 137, 194 balanced
behaviour 196 becoming a person 141 processes of 128, 131, 211
befriending 48 behaviour aggressive 192-3 antisocial 136 balanced 196
changes 186, 212 clients 51 changes in 212 cognitive-behavioural therapy
180 constructive 196 control of 164 elimination of 164 encouragement of
164 evaluation of 164 evil 136 hostile 192-3 negative 192-3
other-enhancing 196 realistic 196 self-enhancing 196 behaviourists 191
being see also states of being freedom to be 129-30, 159 many things
simultaneously 151, 152 one's experience 193-6 one's organism 193-6
oneself 190

a person 16, 41-2 therapists 196-211 of worth, need for 142 beliefs
acceptance contrasted 49-50 client-centred 47, 53
faith-belief-trust-knowing 163 fully functioning persons 218
preconceived 53 therapists 121 benchmarking 173 bereavement counselling
23 birth with actualising tendencies 142 bitterness 192 body language 92
body shape, shifting 112 boredom 27, 151-2 brain structures 140
breakdown, processes 184 brilliance 55 bureaucracy 218 burnout 116-17
capabilities 20 capacities of clients 20-1 caring 162 challenging 52-3
changes clients 208, 212 physiological conditions 186 feelings 164
personality see personality therapeutic relationships 186 therapists 210
thoughts 164 from unconditional positive regard 200-4 channels, opening
127-31 choices 212 therapists 38, 66 voluntary 136 clarity 197
classification 56 client-centred beliefs 47, 53 client-centred skills
70-1 client-centred theory 148-9 of personality 141 relevance to
client-centre d practice 149-50 client-centred therapy 3 aim 17
beginning 120, 180, 186 conditions of worth 45 core conditions see core
conditions

Index describable process 180 effectiveness 22, 180 external threats to
integrity of 87-8 future 220-1 'if-then' variety 24 integrity, external
threats to 87-8 name of 21 necessary conditions see necessary and
sufficient conditions overview 7-11 political dimensions 166 process
179, 180 models 123, 180-7 initiation 186 questioning of 179-80
relationships 21-2 sequential orderly events 180 sufficient conditions
see necessary and sufficient conditions technical connotation 33
therapists' responsibilities 12 as way of being 148-9 the whole 4-5
clients acceptance of 18, 51, 62 acceptance of sovereignty and humanity
of others 212 active not passive 41 attitudes, changes in 212 authentic
valuing of 158 behaviour 51 changes in 212 capacities 20-1 changes 208,
212 conditions 12 creativity 56-7 disorganisation 181 doing 211-18
emotions towards therapists 83 empathic understanding, perception of see
perceptions below empathising with therapists 105 expressiveness 185
feelings changes 198-9 gathering and absorbing 103 positive 197 towards
therapists 83 frames of reference, precedence over therapists' 200 fully
received 125 growth 208 immature 124

229

immediate phenomenal worlds 35 immersion in worlds of 130 incongruence
10, 11, 59, 105, 132, 176 between self-concepts and their experience 185
empathy and 135-50 entering therapy 163 facing 183 inner communication
abilities, loss of 207 internal frames of reference and 205 therapist
accepting and respectful of 185 internal frames of reference 205
internal locus of evaluation 216 knowing the way for 159 learning to
accept positive feelings of others 188 meeting needs 48 perceptions of
empathic understanding 123, 170-5, 177-8 of unconditional positive
regard 123, 170-5, 177-8 perceptual fields 209 personal meanings to 31-2
personality changes 179, 212 potential 10 process, experiencing 182
psychologically received 125 received 125, 128 receiving empathy 106
receiving unconditional positive regard 106, 112, 185, 188, 200-4 regard
towards therapists 197 regressed 124 reintegration 181 releasing
experiences 181 responses 197 safety 126-7 security 126-7
self-acceptance 203, 209, 214, 216-17 self-actualising potential 211-12
self-concepts 212, 216 self-perceptions, changes in 201, 212
self-respect 216 self-understanding 212, 214, 216 self-valuing 212
therapist interface 132 therapists receiving with respect for their
innate potential 188-9 therapists' responsibilities to 63-6
unconditional positive self-regard 185

230

Index

clients (cont.) understandable responses 83 understanding of 22 vital
experiences 181 worlds, immersion in 130 young 124 clinical psychology
92-3 cognition 99-101 cognitive-behavioural therapy 180 cognitive
empathy 101-2 colluding 50, 51 common frames of reference 92, 98-9
communications 21, 27, 31 of congruence see congruence congruent 79, 155
diversity of 114-16 of empathic understanding 37 empathy by therapists
105-6 failures 39 free 123 good 207 imperfection of 205-6 inner
abilities, clients' loss of 207 non-verbal 67, 95, 112 paraverbal 66-7,
95, 112 reciprocal 199 of respect 202 responses and 77, 96 of striving
to understand 32 therapists 197 unconditional positive regard by
therapists 105-6 communities of selves 110 community processes 110
companions 39 comparisons 48 compassion 52 composure, constructive 17
concentrated attention 158 conditional acceptance 130 conditional
positive regard 124 conditional relationships 142-3, 189 conditioning,
social 136, 139-40 conditions 3-4 clients' 12 core see core conditions
necessary see necessary and sufficient conditions predictable process
19-20 sufficient see necessary and sufficient conditions therapist see
core conditions of worth 10, 12, 45, 112, 144, 145, 165

condoning 50, 51 confidence 94-5 configurations of self 109-11, 123,
140, 141, 152 confirming the other 131 conflicts 151, 153 confrontation
48, 52-3, 163 congruence 4, 10, 11, 12 communication of 78-9, 153 direct
155 confrontation and 52-3 congruent communications 79, 155 definitions
150-1, 154 empathic understanding and 25, 27-9, 38, 111-12, 157, 165,
197 empathy and 150-62 experience and self, between 154, 185 heady
clients 100 interpersonal communication, relating to 199 meaning 135
origins 18 process and 156, 197-200 receiving 105 self and experience,
between 154, 185 self-disclosures and 108-9 as state 151, 156, 163 as
state of being 156 therapists 150-62, 176-7 unconditional positive
regard and 25, 29-30, 111-12, 132, 165, 197 congruent respect and
empathy 11 connection, feelings of 189 conscious awareness denial of
entry to 147 experiencing, availability of 148 psychological organism,
and, not in harmony 145-6 conscious experiencing 138 consciousness 133-4
availability to 216 'centre' for 140 edge of consciousness material 111
consequences, predictable see predictability consistency 128 consistent
acceptance 126 constructive behaviour 196 constructive composure 17
constructive nature of human beings 136 constructs differentiation 183
personal see personal constructs rigidity of 141

Index contact 4, 104--5, 176, 179 empathic understanding client
perception of 170 link with 125 empathy and 119-35 existence of 124
looking, listening and learning 121-2 meaning 132 opening channels
127-31 as pre-condition 124 psychological see psychological contacts
relationships 122-7 unconditional positive regard, client perception of
170 use of term 120 context empathic understanding 41 contextual factors
the self and, awareness of differences between 185 contradictions 182-3
control 26, 68-9, 164, 219 controlled identification 17 conviction, deep
196 cooperation 192 core conditions 3-4, 10-11, 16, 111-12, 150 couches
121 counselling 3 training see training see also therapy Counsellor
Attitude Scale 48 counsellors see therapists counterparts of experience
92 counter-transference 48, 82-5, 188 couples, work with 208 courage 129
creativity 56-7, 219 criticism 219 cultural differences 160-1 cures 179
curiosity 137 current experiencing 99 current feelings 183 cynicism 190
danger 157 deep conviction 196 defence psychological 147 against
receiving unconditional positive regard 189 of the self 146-7

231

unwillingness to communicate 123-4 defensiveness 10, 11, 26, 51, 112,
207 psychological 134, 146, 163 reduced 216 therapists 28 defining what
is not 45 degrees of empathy 172-5 dehumanising practices 47 delinquents
212-13 denial 10 of accurate symbolisation for experiences 147 of
awareness, elimination 195 defensive psychological process of 146 of
experiencing 187 of feelings 185 dependability 128 dependable reality
128 dependency 63 depression 215 describable processes client-centred
therapy 180 describing feelings and meanings 182 destructiveness of
labelling 55-6 deteriorating relationships 184 development psychological
140 therapist self-development 152, 157 diagnoses 48, 53-8, 101, 172
different selves 140 differentiation 183 dignity 166, 217, 218 direct
communication of congruence 155 directive counsellors 16-17 directive
therapy 45, 110 reflecting and 72, 73 directiveness, subtle 22
disagreement 50, 51 disappearance of self-as-object 184 disapproval of
feelings 130 discipline 108, 126, 141 disclosures by therapists see
self-disclosure discouragement 62 discovery 47 discrimination 133
dislike 107 disorganisation clients 181 processes 184 within the self
181 disowned feelings 182 distortion 10 to awareness, elimination 195

232

Index

distortion (cont.) defensive psychological process of 146-7 degrees of
139 of experiencing 187 feelings 185 symbolisation 147 distrust 183
diversity of communication 114-16 'does not, is not' 42 doing, clients
211-18 eclectic counsellor training programmes 86 edge of awareness 111
edge of consciousness material 111 effectiveness client-centred therapy
22, 180 elements see conditions elimination of behaviour 164 of denial
and distortion 195 emerging persons 221 emotional release 20 emotionally
detached attitudes 17 emotions antisocial 192 clients towards therapists
83 empathic attitudes, implementation 34 empathic understanding 4, 10,
11, 177 accuracy of 30-3 actualising tendencies 26-7 'as if' quality 18
authenticity 155-6 'being a person' 41-2 capacity of clients 20-1
client-centred therapeutic relationships 21-2 client perceptions 123,
134, 170-5, 177-8 clients, active not passive 41 communication of 37
confrontation and 52 congruence and 25, 27-9, 38, 111-12, 157, 165, 197
contact and 125, 170 context 41 definitions 15 empathy 24 'does not, is
not' 42 empathy and 169-70 evaluative ways of being and 54 experiencing
and 34-6 external frames of reference 23 feelings as integral aspects of
37, 42

feigning 80 gender 40 intent of 48 internal frames of reference 22-3
intuition 39-40 meanings as integral aspects of 37, 42 necessary
conditions 24-7, 119-78 negatives 45-88 objectivity 17-18 perceptions by
clients 123, 134 predictable consequences 43 predictable process 19-20,
43 as process 156, 169 process and 204-11 to process from state 36-9
psychological knowledge 18-19 receiving 105-6 reciprocity 40 respect and
202 respect for the individual 18 self-understanding 18 skills and 45-88
from state to process 36-9 sufficient conditions see necessary and
sufficient conditions above summary 40-3 techniques and 45-88
therapeutic process and 179-218 therapists offering 158 threatening,
feeling 163 unconditional positive regard and 29-30, 38, 111-12, 149,
165, 167-9, 197, 202-3 valuing some aspects above others 174 empathising
in action 89-117 empathy definition 15, 24 levels of 32, 172-5 loss of
113-14 as process 36 as state of being 36, 37 as way of being 36, 37
empathy muscles 114 encouragement 48, 49, 62, 164 encouragers, minimal
85 enrichment, therapists 210 entropy 7, 117 environment, interaction
with 142 essence 97 evaluation 53-8 becoming non-evaluative 158 of
behaviour 164 of degrees of empathy 173-5

Index external 130-1 freedom from 131 internal locus of 143, 216 locus
of see locus of evaluation by therapists 158 evaluative feelings 130
ever-changing pictures of the self 201 evil behaviour 136 exactness of
symbolisation 183 existence of contact 124 existentialism 135-6
expectations 194 experience 132 see also experiences; experiencing
accurate symbolisation of 185 awareness, available to 134 being one's
experience 193-6 client incongruence between selfconcepts and their
experience 185 congruence of 154 counterparts of 92 experiencing of 187
incongruence and 138 as noun 138 openness to 154, 155, 211, 218 order in
186 perceptions of 138, 151 remoteness from 182 self and, congruence
between 185 self-experience 141 threatening to concept of self 147
symbolisation of 134 as verb 138-9 experiences see also experience;
experiencing assimilated in relationship to the self 216 attaching
meanings to 132 denial of accurate symbolisation for 147 organismic 143,
145 sensory 138, 217 visceral 138, 217 experiencing 47 see also
experience; experiences accurate perception of 194 of affectional
relationships 188-90 awareness of 187, 195 conscious 138 conscious
awareness, availability to 148 current 99 denial of 187 difficulties
acknowledged by clients 192-3

233

distortion of 187 empathic understanding and 34-6 of experience 187
feelings 138, 139 with immediacy 183-4 immediacy of 183-4 of
incongruence 146 inner flow of 209 learning new ways of 188 openness to
194 organismic 138 past 99 perceptions of 143 postponement 183 potential
self 187-8 process of 188 realism 194 remoteness from, sense of 182
sensory 195, 196 symbolisation of 194 unconditional positive regard 145
unconscious 58-9 visceral 195, 196 experiential fields 138 experts 42,
61 explaining 58-62 exploration of self 20 expressiveness, clients 185
extensionality 151, 154, 155 external evaluation 130-1 external
expectations 194 external frames of reference 23, 31, 98-9 external
intrusions, guarding against 122 external threats to integrity of
clientcentred therapy 87-8 eyes, use of 112 facing incongruence, clients
183 facts, friendliness of 208, 216 failures of communication 39
faith-belief-trust-knowing 163 fatuous alternatives 78, 79 fear 183, 189
feelings 48, 62, 99-100 see also attitudes absorbing 103 acceptance of
183 affective empathy and 101-2 of alienation 202 altering 164 changing
164 clients see clients cognitive way of talking about 100-1

234

Index

feelings (cont.) of connection 189 contradictory 182 controlling 164
current 183 denied 185 describing 182 differentiation 183 disapproval of
130 disowned 182 distorted 185 evaluative 130 experiencing 138, 139 with
immediacy 183-4 flowing readily 183 gathering 103 influencing 164 as
integral aspects of empathic understanding 37, 42 managing 164 meanings
and 97-8 negative 28, 136, 152 'not-now-present' variety of 183 past 218
perceptions and, awareness of differences between 185 persistent 106-9
personal meanings and, differentiating between 183 positive see positive
feelings reflecting and 72, 73 repressing 164 responsibility for 182
sensing 95 suppressing 164 therapists see therapists thoughts and 100
valuing above thoughts 174 feigning empathic understanding 80 felt
meanings 34 fixed organisation of the self 182 fixed states 156 fixed
states of being 182 fixity 183 focusing 66 on words 96-7 formative
tendencies 7 formulating responses 77 frames of reference 30-1 common
92, 98-9 external 23, 31, 98-9 internal see internal frames of reference
precedence of clients' over therapists' 200

free awareness 196 free communication 123 free relationships 123 freedom
46, 219 to be 129-30, 159 from judgement and evaluation 131 friendliness
of facts 208, 216 frustration 192 fulfilment 46 full potential,
realising 195 fully functioning persons 196, 217-18 fully received
clients 125, 182, 183 gathering 91, 97, 103 gazing 91 gender 40
generalising 182 genuine interest 38 genuineness 11, 79, 108-9, 153-4
see also authenticity; reality gestalt analysis 180 goals setting 48 of
therapy 10 good communication 207 greed 218 group-centred leadership 8
group settings 37 growth 12, 219 balance and 137 clients 128-9, 208
incongruence 138 therapists see therapists guessing, empathic 77, 92,
103, 112-13, 205 guilt 202 headiness 100-1 helping relationships 49,
128, 219 here and now 99, 138, 184, 217-18 hierarchy necessary and
sufficient conditions, presentation as 131-2 high levels of empathy 32,
172 honesty 82 hostile behaviour 192-3 human beings see also persons
actualising tendencies see actualising tendencies awareness, capacity
for 133, 196 constructive nature 136 irrationality 26

Index motivational tendencies 164-5 needs, sensitivity to 218
rationality 26 relationships see relationships human nature incongruence
135-7 understanding 158 humanistic approach to psychotherapy 8
humanistic counsellor training programmes 86 humanity of others
acceptance by clients 212 humility 94, 116 hurt 28 hypotheses 185 ideal
self 142, 216-17 identification, controlled 17 'I-thou' relationships
92, 106, 122 'if-then' 12-13, 125 capabilities of clients 20
client-centred therapy 24, 185 fully-received clients 182 probing and 76
striving to understand 167 imagery 114-16 immature clients 124 immediacy
31, 99, 124 of experiencing 183-4 immediate phenomenal worlds of clients
35 immersing 96 immersion in worlds of clients 130 imperfection of
communication 205-6 impersonal therapists 126 impingement of stimuli 132
implementing skills 88, 103 improving relationships 184-5 incongruence
4, 10, 27 actualising tendencies thwarted by selfactualisation 144-5
basic concept 148 boredom and 151 clients see clients conscious
awareness and psychological organism not in harmony 145-6 experience and
138 experiencing of 146 growth 138 human nature 135-7 meaning 135, 138
psychological organism and conscious awareness not in harmony 145-6

235

recognition of 206 the self 137-50 self-actualisation, actualising
tendencies thwarted by 144-5 therapists see therapists understanding of
150 indifference 163 individuals aspects of themselves 152 respect for
the individual see respect ineffective ways of therapists being with
clients 47-68, 70-86 inference 101 empathic 77, 92, 103, 112-13, 205
influencing feelings and thoughts 164 information giving 172 information
seeking 172 inner communication abilities, clients' loss of 207 inner
flow of experiencing 209 insights 15, 181-2 institutionalisation 56
integration 217 necessary and sufficient conditions 132 integrative
approach 180 integrative counsellor training programmes 86-7 integrity
of client-centred therapy external threats to 87-8 intent of empathic
understanding 48 therapists 59, 75 interaction with environment 142
intercultural work 160-1 interest genuine 38 therapists in clients 158
intermediate levels of empathy 32, 172 internal awareness 123-4 internal
frames of reference 4, 8, 31, 34, 98-9 client incongruence and 205
empathic understanding 22-3 praise and 74 internal locus of evaluation
47, 143, 145, 216 internal validation 21 interpersonal communication
congruence relating to 199 interpersonal relationships 218
interpretation 48, 58-62, 92, 101, 172 introjected values of others 47,
79, 143-5

236

Index

intuition 4, 43, 101, 102-4, 119 empathic understanding 39-40
irrationality of man 26 judgements see also value judgements diagnoses
54 evaluation 54 freedom from 131 lack of 15, 38 praise and 73 prognoses
54 reflecting and 72 rescuing and 63 suspending 51 by therapists 158
knowing best 48 faith-belief-trust-knowing 163 the way for clients 159
knowledge self 18 psychological see psychological knowledge labelling
55-6 languages 95 leadership 218 leading 67-8 learning 121-2
experiencing, new ways of 188 levels of empathy 32, 172-5 liberation 46
liking need for 142 one's self 190-1 listening 33-4, 86, 121-2 living
subjectively 184 locus of evaluation definition 144 external 46 internal
47, 143, 145, 216 primary 185 looking 121-2 loss of empathy 113-14 love
142, 189, 194, 218 low levels of empathy 32, 172 low self-esteem 10, 11
maintaining entire organism 137 managing feelings and thoughts 164
masochistic paradigms 79

materialism 218 maturity 154, 155 meanings absorbing 103 attaching to
awarenesses or perceptions 97, 99-100 cognitive empathy and 101-2
contradictory 182 describing 182 experiences, attaching meanings to 132
feelings and 97-8 felt 34 gathering 103 as integral aspects of empathic
understanding 37, 42 past 218 personal see personal meanings measuring
degrees of empathy 173-5 medical prescription 56 medication,
antidepressant 215 memories 99, 115 mental health 137 mental priming
90-1 metaphor 114-16 minimal degree of client perception 104-6, 123,
171-2, 175 minimal encouragers 85 mirroring 70-3 modulation 90-1, 141
moralising 172 motivational tendencies of human beings 164-5 mutuality
188 narcissistic paradigms 79 nature 218 versus nurture 136 nearly
accurate empathy 93-4 necessary and sufficient conditions 3-4, 10-11,
119 contact and empathy 119-35 empathic understanding 24-7 hierarchy,
presentation as 131-2 integration 132 interweaving 132 needs clients,
meeting 48 human, sensitivity to 218 for positive regard 142, 143 for
self-regard 144 negative actions 62 negative behaviour 192-3 negative
feelings 28, 136, 152

Index negative self-attitudes 190 negatives of empathic understanding
45-88 negativity 220 neuroscience 93, 140-1 new pictures of the self 201
'nice' qualities 74 non-agreement 51 non-directive techniques 70
non-directive therapy 8, 19, 45 non-judgemental therapists 38 non-verbal
communication 67, 95, 112 normalising 48, 58-62 'not-now-present'
variety of feelings 183 object, self as see self-as-object objectivity
4, 16, 95-6, 129 empathic understanding 17-18 oneself, being 190 ongoing
perception checking 37 ongoing process of becoming a person 141 ongoing
psycho-physiological flow 34-5 open-minded seekers 124 opening channels
127-31 openness 82 to experience 154, 155, 211, 218 to experiencing 194
of potential to being released 196 to the self 218 opinions, personal
172 order in experience 186 organisation rigid organisation of the self
182 organismic experiences 143, 145 organismic experiencing 138
organismic sensing 153 organismic valuing 133, 143-5, 153, 185, 194
organisms being one's organism 193-6 maintaining 137 the self accurate
overlap 150-1 differentiation from 142 other-enhancing behaviour 196
others acceptance of 190, 217 acceptance of sovereignty and humanity by
clients 212 confirming the other 131 positive feelings, clients learning
to accept 188 the self and, awareness of differences between 185

237

significant 142 understanding 157 valuing 190 'oughtness' 172 outcomes
43 paraphrasing 70-3, 96 paraverbal communication 66-7, 95, 112
passivity 163 past experiencing 99 past feelings and meanings 218
patronising 48 paying attention 158 perceptions 4, 38 attaching meanings
to 97, 99-100 checking 23, 37, 72, 92, 116, 170, 209 of empathic
understanding by clients 123, 134, 170-5, 177-8 of experience 138, 151
of experiencing 143, 194 feelings and, awareness of differences between
185 filtering stimuli 149 meaning 132-3 minimal degree see minimal
degree of client perception the self 145 symbolisation and 134 of
unconditional positive regard by clients 123, 134-5, 170-5, 177-8 use of
term 133 perceptiveness, diagnostic 55 perceptual fields, clients 209
perceptual hypotheses 134 perpetrators 51-2 persistent feelings or
thoughts 106-9 person-centred approach 3, 9 person-centred supervision
149-50 personal constructs 123, 141, 152, 183 personal growth,
therapists 158, 161, 197 personal meanings to clients 31-2
differentiation 183 feelings and, differentiating between 183 personal
opinions 172 personal power 129 personal strength, therapists 159
personality changes clients 179, 212 structures 186 therapeutic 4-5

238

Index

personality (cont.) client-centred theory of 141 core being positive,
discovery of 191-3 self-preserving and social core 192 structure changes
186 persons see also human beings becoming 141 being 16, 41-2 emerging
221 fully functioning 196, 217-18 ongoing process of becoming 141
psychologically mature 218 sovereignty of 212, 220 of tomorrow 218 whole
114, 149 phenomenal fields 138 phenomenal worlds of clients 35 physical
brain structures 140 political dimensions, client-centred therapy 166
positive actions 62, 181-2 positive attitudes 28, 129, 190 positive
feelings clients 197 of others, clients learning to accept 188
therapists 129 positive potential 164 positive regard 9 conditional 124
meaning 142 need for 142, 143 unconditional see unconditional positive
regard positive self-attitudes 190 positive self-regard 9-10 need for
143 postponement 183 potential 10, 136 actualising of 189 full,
realising 195 open to being released 196 positive 164 for
self-actualising 211-12 potential self, experiencing 187-8 power 68-70
personal 129 sharing 121 'practice makes perfect' 161 praise 48, 49,
73-4, 131 preconceived beliefs 53 pre-conditions contact as 124

predictability 13 consequences 75-6 empathic understanding 43 processes
conditions 19-20 empathic understanding 19-20, 43 prejudice 160-1
pre-perception 147-8 presence, therapists 77-8 pre-symbolisation 147
pre-therapy 124 primary locus of evaluation 185 priming, mental 90-1
prizing 27, 100, 101, 162, 163, 189, 202 probing 75-6 problem solving
48, 61, 188 process models client-centred therapy 123, 180-7 processes
of becoming 128, 131, 211 of becoming a person 141 of breakdown 184
client-centred therapy 179, 180 initiation 186 clients experiencing 182
community 110 congruence and 156, 197-200 describable, client-centred
therapy 180 of disorganisation 184 empathic understanding and 36-9, 156,
169, 204-11 of empathising 90-1, 103 definition 23 empathy as 36 of
experiencing 188 ongoing perception checking 37 organismic valuing 144
predictable see predictability of reintegration 184 self-as-process 109,
152, 153 therapeutic see therapeutic processes and unconditional
positive regard 200-4 valuing 218 professional aloofness 129 prognoses
48, 53-8 propositions 185 pseudo-things 55 psychoanalysis 82-4, 135-6,
191 psychodynamic approach 180 psychological adjustment 154-5
psychological contacts 72, 104-5, 120, 135 psychological defence 147
psychological defensiveness 134, 146, 163

Index psychological development 140 psychological knowledge 4, 16
empathic understanding 18-19 psychological mindedness 105 psychological
organisms conscious awareness, and, not in harmony 145-6 psychological
safety 127 psychologically mature persons 218 psychologically received
clients 125 psychology, clinical 92-3 psycho-physiological flow, ongoing
34-5 psychotherapy, humanistic approach 8 questioning 48, 76-7 of
client-centre d therapy 179-80 of theories and practices 220 rating
scales 173 rationality of man 26 reactions 57 reading 161 realism 196
experiencing 194 realistic behaviour 196 reality 151, 154 dependable 128
see also authenticity; genuineness reassurance 48, 74-5 received clients
125, 128, 179 receiving congruence 105 empathic understanding 105-6
unconditional positive regard 105-6, 112 reciprocal communications 199
reciprocal empathy 50, 82 client perception of therapist empathy 170-1
contact and 104-5 empathic understanding and 132 process established 199
self-understanding and 214 therapist incongruence and 128 therapist
presence 78 reciprocity empathic understanding 40 with nature 218
recognition 92 of incongruence 206 rediscovery 194 reference, frames of
see internal frames of reference; frames of reference references to the
self 185

239

reflection 58-9, 70-3, 96, 103-4, 172 regard clients towards therapists
197 complexes 142, 145 regressed clients 124 regression 57 reintegration
185 clients 181 processes 184 within the self 181 relationships 4 see
also contact affectional 188-90, 197 client-centred therapy 21-2
conditional 142-3, 189 contact 122-7 deteriorating 184 free 123 helping
49, 128, 219 'I-thou' 92, 106, 122 improving 184-5 interpersonal 218
Relationship Inventory 172-3 safe 123 sensitivity to 17 therapeutic see
therapeutic relationships release 181-2 emotional 20 of potential 196
religions 191 remoteness from experience 182 reorganising self-concepts
185 repressing feelings and thoughts 164 rescue 48, 63, 66 resentment
194 resistance 20, 84 resources 218 respect see also self-respect
communication of 202 congruent 11 empathic understanding and 202
empathising respectfully 213 for the individual 4, 16 empathic
understanding 18 responses 37, 96 clients 83, 197 formulating 77
responsibilities abdication of 66 for feelings 182 self-responsibility
183 therapists 63-6

240

Index

revenge 192 rigid consistency 128 rigid organisation of the self 182
rigidity of constructs 141 Rogers, Carl 2, 16 see also individual
subjects role models, therapists as 159 safety 123, 126-7 scepticism 220
scripts 46 security 170 clients 126-7 therapists 129 seekers 124, 170
the self 9 actualising tendencies 137-8 communities of selves 110
concepts of see self-concepts configurations of see configurations of
self contextual factors and, awareness of differences between 185
defence of 146-7 definition 139, 141 different selves 140
disorganisation within 181 ever-changing pictures of 201 experience and,
congruence between 154, 185 experiences assimilated in relationship to
216 fixed organisation of 182 ideal 142, 216-17 incongruence 137-50
liking of 190-1 new pictures of 201 openness to 218 organism accurate
overlap 150-1 differentiation from 142 others and, awareness of
differences between 185 as perceived 145 references to 185 reintegration
within 181 rigid organisation of 182 setting aside, therapists 157
talking about 182 transient 93, 140, 141 understanding see
self-understanding self-acceptance 190 clients 203, 209, 214, 216-17

therapists 165, 197 self-actualisation 7 actualising tendencies and
137-8, 144-5, 146, 218 movement towards 183 potential, clients 211-12
self-as-object 109, 152, 153, 184 self-as-process 109, 152, 153
self-assertion 46 self-attitudes 190 self-awareness, therapists 113
self-blame 203-4 self-concepts 9 client incongruence between
selfconcepts and their experience 185 clients 212, 216 defence 147
definition 139, 141 expectations introjected into 194 reorganising 185
self-actualisation and 144, 145, 146 self-structures and 152 therapists
165 threats to 10 self-consciousness 216 self-determination 166
self-development, therapists 152, 157 self-direction 53 self-discipline
108 self-disclosure 48, 50-1, 77-82, 106-9, 111, 113 self-enhancing
behaviour 196 self-esteem, low 10, 11 self-experience 141
self-exploration 20 self-expression 213 self-knowledge 18
self-perceptions changes in, clients 201, 212 self-preserving core of
personality 192 self-regard need for 144 positive see positive
self-regard unconditional 144 self-respect clients 216 therapists 129,
159-60 self-responsibility 183 self-self-self phase 79 self-structures
141, 152, 153 self-understanding 4, 16 clients 212, 214, 216 delinquents
212-13

Index

empathic understanding and 18 therapists 160-1, 165 self-valuing,
clients 212 semblance of unconditional positive regard 80 sensing
feelings 95 organismic 153 the sense 92 sensitivity 130 to human needs
218 to human relationships 17 social 17 therapists 38 sensory
experiences 138, 217 sensory experiencing 195, 196 separateness 129
sequential orderly events client-centred therapy 180 sex 107-8 signals,
non-verbal 95 significant others 142 silence 112-13, 172 simply
listening 33-4 skills 42, 48 being skilled 88 client-centred 70-1
empathic understanding and 45-88 implementation 88, 103 social
conditioning 136, 139-40 social core of personality 192 social
sensitivity 17 socialisation 26 sounds, absorbing 94-5 sovereignty of
the person 212, 220 speculation 185 spiritual connection 4 spirituality
104, 119 stasis 137 statements heard from others, understanding 157
states congruence 151, 156, 163 empathic understanding 36-9 fixed 156
static 156 states of being congruence 156 empathy as 36, 37 fixed 182
static states 156 stimuli 133 impingement of 132

241

perceptions filtering 149 strength, personal, therapists 159 striving to
understand 32, 166-7, 209-10 structured/brief approach 180
student-centred teaching 8 subception 133, 147 subjective living 184
subjectivity 95-6 subtle directiveness 22 sufficient conditions see
necessary and sufficient conditions suggestion 67-8 summarising 70-3, 96
supervision person-centred 149-50 value of 130 supervisors 126 support
48, 49, 63, 126, 172, 202 suppressing feelings and thoughts 164 surprise
183 symbolisation accurate see accurate symbolisation capacity for 133
distorted 147 exactness of 183 of experiencing 145, 194 perception and
134 sympathy 15, 48 syntropy 7, 117 talking about the self 182 technical
connotation client-centred therapy 33 technique-oriented practices 47
techniques 42 confrontation as 52 empathic understanding and 45-88
encouragers 85 non-directive 70 tensions 137, 145, 146, 189, 214-15,
216, 217 tentativeness 94-5, 116 testing, diagnostic 56 textbook
responses from therapists 26 therapeutic personality changes 4-5
therapeutic processes 12 empathic understanding and 179-218 therapeutic
relationships 121, 179 changes 186 therapists acceptance 197 actualising
tendencies, belief in 164, 165-6

242

Index

therapists (cont.) attitudes 121, 186 being 196-211 beliefs 121 changes
210 choices 38, 66 client incongruence, accepting and respectful of 185
client interface 132 clients' regard towards 197 communicating
unconditional positive regard and empathy 105-6 communication 197
conditions see core conditions congruence 150-62, 176-7 defensiveness 28
diagnoses 53-8 directive 16-17 emotions of clients towards 83 empathic
understanding, offering 158 empathising with clients 105 enrichment 210
evaluation by 53-8, 158 feelings 197 of clients towards 83 about
self-disclosure 107 frames of reference, precedence of clients' over 200
growth 129, 130 158, 161, 197 impersonal 126 incongruence 59, 80, 128,
151 indicators of 28 ineffective ways of being with clients 47-68, 70-86
intent 59, 75 interest in clients 158 judgemental 158 knowing the way
for clients 159 non-judgemental 38 personal growth 158, 161, 197
personal strength 159 presence 77-8 procedures 19 prognoses 53-8
receiving clients with respect for their innate potential 188-9
responsibilities 63-6 for client-centred therapy 12 as role models 159
self, setting aside 157 self-acceptance 165, 197 self-awareness 113
self-concepts 165

self-development 152, 157 self-disclosure see self-disclosure
self-respect 129, 159-60 self-understanding 160-1, 165 sensitivity 38
setting aside self 157 striving to understand 32, 166-7, 209-10
techniques 19 textbook responses 26 unafraid 38 values 121 therapy 3
client-centred see client-centred therapy goal 10 non-directive 8, 19,
45 time-limited 21 training see training third parties 126 thoroughly
consistent acceptance 126 thoughts altering 164 changing 164 controlling
164 feelings and 100 influencing 164 managing 164 persistent 106-9
repressing 164 suppressing 164 therapists', about self-disclosure 107
valuing below feelings 174 threats empathic understanding feeling
threatening 163 experience threatening to concept of self 147
incongruence, experiencing 146 to integrity of client-centred therapy
87-8 to self-concepts 10, 216 time-limited therapy 21 timing 94
tomorrow, persons of 218 tools 42 tracking clients 68 training 46, 48,
86-7, 96 transactional analysis 180 transcendental connection 4
transference 48, 82-5, 188 transient self 93, 140, 141 transparency 27,
79, 108-9, 128-9, 156 tricks 42

Index trust 196, 213, 221 faith-belief-trust-knowing 163 trustworthiness
128, 164-5 truth 196 'uh-huh' 85 unconditional acceptance 130
unconditional positive regard 3, 4, 10, 11, 12, 177 as attitude 156,
163-4 authenticity 27, 155-6 changes from 200-4 clients 185 ability to
experience 190 perceptions 123, 134-5, 170-5, 177-8 receiving 106, 112,
185, 188, 200-4 safety and security and 126 collusion and 51 condoning
and 51 confrontation and 52 congruence and 25, 29-30, 111-12, 132, 165,
197 defence against receiving 189 empathic understanding and 29-30, 38,
111-12, 149, 165, 167-9, 197, 202-3 empathy and 162-9 experiencing 145
heady clients 100 nature 189 origins 18 perceptions by clients 123,
134-5, 170-5 praise and 73 as primary constituent of therapists'
selfconcepts 165 process and 200-4 receiving 105-6 semblance of 80
therapists' self-concepts, as primary constituent of 165 valuing some
aspects of empathic understanding above others 174 unconditional prizing
189 unconditional self-regard 144 unconscious experiencing 58-9
unconsciousness, 'centre' for 140 understandable responses, clients 83
understanding see also understanding about acceptance and 167, 201 of
clients 22

243

clients' frames of reference, from within 102 empathic see empathic
understanding of human nature 158 of incongruence 150 of others 157 the
self see self-understanding of statements heard from others 157 striving
for 32, 166-7, 209-10 understanding about 48, 85-6, 102 undistorted
awareness 196 unpredictability 13 VALID 11 validation, internal 21 value
judgements 48, 50, 62 values see also organismic valuing; valuing
adopted from others 145 fully functioning persons 218 others'
introjected see introjected values of others therapists 121 valuing see
also values authentic 158 empathic understanding, some aspects above
others 174 feelings above thoughts 174 need for 142 organismic see
organismic valuing others 190 processes 218 thoughts below feelings 174
very high levels of empathy 32, 172 very young clients 124 victims 52
visceral experiences 138, 217 visceral experiencing 195, 196 vital
experiences, clients 181 voluntary choices 136 vulnerability 4, 11,
107-8, 146, 214, 216 ways of being client-centred therapy as 148-9
empathic 71 empathy as 36, 37 faith-belief-trust-knowing, implementing
163 moving towards 46 whole persons 114, 149 wholeness 99-100 words
94-5, 96-7

244

Index

worlds of clients, immersion in 130 worth 194 being of, need for 142

conditions of see conditions: of worth young clients 124


