7

CBT for Social Anxiety Disorder Henrik Nordahl and Adrian Wells

Introduction Social anxiety disorder (SAD) is characterized by a marked
fear or anxiety concerning one or more social situations in which the
individual may be scrutinized by others (DSM-5; American Psychiatric
Association \[APA\], 2013). Individuals with SAD are concerned with
their social performance and fear that others will perceive them
negatively, for example, as anxious, boring, stupid, weak, or unlikeable
and that this will lead to embarrassment, humiliation, rejection, or
loss of self-worth. These concerns can be so pronounced that the
individual avoids most social situations or endures them with intense
discomfort. SAD is one of the most common mental health disorders, with
a 12-month prevalence estimate of 7% and a lifetime estimate of 12% in
the United States (Ruscio et al., 2008). The disorder often has an early
onset with a median of 13 years of age, and 75% of individuals with SAD
have an onset between 8 and 15 years (APA, 2013). In addition, SAD is
considered a relatively chronic disorder if left untreated and is
associated with lower quality of life. It is also considered to be a
major risk factor for developing major depressive disorder, other
anxiety disorders, substance abuse/addiction, and work-related problems
(APA, 2013; Wittchen & Fehm, 2003). Effective clinical management and
treatment of the disorder is therefore of great importance.

The Cognitive Model of SAD Building on Beck's schema theory (Beck, 1976)
and the self-regulatory executive function (S-REF) model of
psychological disorder (Wells & Matthews, 1994), Clark and Wells (1995)
advanced a cognitive model of SAD that has received substantial
empirical support. Central to the model is the view that individuals
with SAD engage in an information processing style characterized by
self-focused attention. Self-attention is not capable of providing
unambiguous disconﬁrmation of social fears and concerns in feared social
situations, as the primary source of information comes from feelings and
sensations rather than external information which has the

115 Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of
Cape Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

116

Henrik Nordahl and Adrian Wells

Social Situation

Activates assumptions

Perceived social danger (negative automatic thoughts)

Processing of Self as a Social Object

Safety Behaviors

Somatic and cognitive symptoms

Figure 7.1. A cognitive model of social phobia. From Wells (1997,
p. 169). Copyright 1997 by John Wiley & Sons Limited. Reprinted by
permission

potential to correct distorted beliefs. Hence, the Clark and Wells model
accounts for the persistence of SAD with reference to a number of
speciﬁc cognitive-behavioral mechanisms involving vicious circles that
are responsible for maintaining the problem. This model is depicted in
Figure 7.1.

Assumptions and Beliefs Resulting from past experience, individuals with
SAD hold negative assumptions and beliefs about social situations and
the social self that are activated when entering or anticipating a
social situation. These beliefs contribute to negative appraisals of
social situations and the vicious cycles that maintain SAD. The
following three types of assumptions and beliefs are identiﬁed in the
model: 1. Conditional assumptions (e.g., "If I show signs of anxiety,
people will think I am weak"; "If people like me they will begin the
conversation ﬁrst") 2. Unconditional beliefs about the social self
(e.g., "I am boring"; "I am unlikeable") 3. High standards and rules for
social performance (e.g., "I must always get everyone's approval"; "I
have to appear intelligent and relaxed")

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

CBT for Social Anxiety Disorder

117

Activation of such assumptions and beliefs leads to a perception of
potential social danger, which is evident as anticipatory worry or
negative automatic thoughts -- for example, "What if I shake?"; "They
will notice I'm anxious"; and "I'll babble and talk funny" -- which
increase the sense of threat and anxiety. Furthermore, the somatic and
cognitive symptoms that accompany anxiety are themselves subject to
negative appraisal and may be interpreted as evidence of failure and
impending social humiliation. Processing of the Self as a Social Object
Negative automatic thoughts about the social self not only are
associated with an increase in anxiety symptoms but also are accompanied
by a shift in attention in which the individual becomes self-conscious
and engages in self-processing with a speciﬁc focus toward how they
think they appear to others. The socially anxious individual uses
internal information in the form of feelings or an image of the self in
their mind's eye to infer how they must appear. The image of the self
typically consists of an "observer perspective," meaning that it entails
seeing oneself as if from someone else's vantage point. In images of
this type, anxiety symptoms and personal inadequacies are seen as highly
conspicuous, and the socially anxious person assumes that the negative
observer image accurately reﬂects what other people can see in them.
This process in turn reinforces negative self-appraisals of performance
and negative thoughts about evaluation by others. Safety Behaviors In
order to prevent feared social outcomes, such as showing anxiety or
failed performance, safety behaviors are used. For example, individuals
fearful of saying something that others will judge as stupid will often
say little or mentally rehearse sentences before talking. Contrary to
their intended effect, safety behaviors are problematic and maintain
social anxiety in several ways. They contribute to heightened
self-focused attention, prevent disconﬁrmation of negative beliefs and
assumptions, increase feared symptoms, can draw attention toward the
individual, and have the potential to contaminate the social situation
by, for example, making the person with SAD appear withdrawn or
unfriendly. In addition to the safety behaviors that are used during a
social encounter, avoidance of social situations is a problem because it
prohibits experiences that could disconﬁrm assumptions and beliefs. It
is therefore crucial to deal with in order to maximize treatment
effects. Post-Mortem and Anticipatory Processing There are two other
strategies that individuals with SAD use to deal with social concerns
that occur before or after social encounters. Before exposure to
situations, anticipatory worry and planning are used to try to deal with
and avoid social threat,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

118

Henrik Nordahl and Adrian Wells

for example, mentally rehearsing conversations. This is a negative
process that heightens the sense of danger and anxiety. On leaving the
social situation the individual may also engage in a "post-mortem" that
consists of rumination, analyzing their performance, and recalling what
might have gone wrong. This process can transform a relatively positive
experience into a sense of failure to perform well. Each of these
processes contributes to emotional distress and negative selfprocessing
even in the absence of direct social threat.

Research Supporting CBT for SAD There is substantial empirical support
for the key aspects of the Clark and Wells model such as the role of
observer perspective imagery (e.g., Wells, Clark & Ahmad, 1998) and
reviews of self-focused attention (Ng et al., 2014), safety behaviors
(Piccirillo et al., 2015), and dysfunctional self-beliefs (Gregory &
Peters, 2017). In terms of treatments for SAD, ﬁndings are summarized in
a systematic review and network meta-analysis by Mayo-Wilson and
colleagues (2014) that aimed to compare interventions for SAD and
identify which were the most effective in adults. They included 101
trials which explored 41 interventions or control conditions. Compared
with wait-list control, several classes of medications (monoamine
oxidase inhibitors, benzodiazepines, selective serotonin-reuptake
inhibitors, serotoninnorepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, and
anticonvulsants), individual CBT, group CBT, exposure and social skills
training, self-help with support, self-help without support, and
psychodynamic psychotherapy were efﬁcacious. However, individual CBT was
found to be most effective, and the authors concluded that, in
particular, individual CBT that was based on the Clark and Wells (1995)
model provided large effects (standardized mean difference compared with
wait-list reported to be 1.56, with 95% conﬁdence interval for recovery
from 1.85 to 1.27 based on three included studies). This ﬁnding is in
line with the most updated clinical guidelines for adults with SAD, for
example, by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE,
2013); however, the meta-analysis has also been criticized for being
biased in favor of CBT in drawing its conclusions (Wampold et al.,
2017). The efﬁcacy of CBT based speciﬁcally on the Clark and Wells
(1995) model and treatment manuals (e.g., Wells, 1997) has been
evaluated in several randomized controlled trials. Clark et al. (2003)
reported that CBT was superior to ﬂuoxetine combined with self-exposure,
and superior to placebo combined with self-exposure. The effect size for
CBT pre- to post-treatment on social anxiety symptoms was large (Cohen's
d = 1.31). In a different study, Clark and colleagues (2006)
demonstrated that CBT was superior to exposure plus applied relaxation.
The effect size for CBT was reported to be large from pre- to
post-treatment (Cohen's d = 2.63) and 86% of patients were classiﬁed as
recovered at post-treatment. In this study, 78% of the patients who met
criteria for avoidant personality disorder at pretreatment no longer met
the criteria at one-year follow-up. Both these studies reported that
treatment effects were maintained at follow-up one year after treatment.
Moreover, CBT was also associated with large effect sizes on secondary
outcome measures such as depression.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

CBT for Social Anxiety Disorder

119

Stangier and colleagues (2003) compared individual with group CBT and
found that the treatment was most efﬁcacious in the individual format
with a large mean effect size for social anxiety measures at
post-treatment (Cohen's d = 1.17) and at six-month follow-up (Cohen's d
= 1.57). In a similar study, Mörtberg and colleagues (2007) reported
individual CBT to be more efﬁcacious than group and intensive group CBT.
The individual CBT was associated with a large mean effect size for
social anxiety measures post-treatment (Cohen's d = 1.62) and at
one-year follow-up (Cohen's d = 1.89). CBT has been compared with
interpersonal therapy (IPT) in two studies. Stangier et al. (2011)
reported that CBT was superior to IPT and that the response rate for CBT
was 65.8% and largely maintained at one-year follow-up. CBT was
associated with large controlled effect sizes on measures of social
anxiety and medium controlled effect sizes for depression symptoms. In
another study, CBT was evaluated against IPT in a residential setting:
Borge and colleagues (2008) reported a medium effect size for CBT from
pre- to post-treatment (Cohen's d = 0.76) and that only 31% of patients
were classiﬁed as recovered post-treatment. However, the effects of CBT
were not statistically different from those of residential interpersonal
therapy. Leichsenring et al. (2013) conducted a large RCT where they
compared CBT to psychodynamic therapy. They found CBT to be the superior
intervention and reported a remission rate for CBT of 36%. The effect
size for CBT from pre- to post-treatment was large (Cohen's d = 1.32).
However, it is important to note that Leichsenring and colleagues
delivered CBT over a mean of 25.7 sessions, suggesting that the
treatment manual was not adhered to. To summarize, CBT based on the
Clark and Wells model is associated with moderate to large effects on
primary and secondary outcome measures, which are largely maintained at
follow-up. The efﬁcacy of the treatment seems to be reliant on adherence
and competence factors. Moreover, the treatment has been found to be
superior to other psychological treatments and medications in most
direct comparisons.

Clinical Management of SAD In the remainder of this chapter, we will
describe the clinical management of SAD from a CBT orientation in terms
of issues related to assessment, formulation, and intervention. A more
extensive and detailed description of this CBT for SAD can be found in
the treatment manual by Wells (1997, pp. 167--199). Effective
interventions for SAD such as CBT may not be accessed due to poor
recognition and inadequate assessment. Often, individuals with primary
SAD present in the clinic with other problems such as depression or
substance dependence, and will reveal their problem with social anxiety
only on direct questioning. In addition, many patients with various
disorders present with social evaluative concerns and anxiety in social
situations that are not manifestations of SAD. For example, patients
with paranoid personality problems can present social anxiety

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

120

Henrik Nordahl and Adrian Wells

due to suspiciousness and mistrust in others, while patients with body
dysmorphic disorder can present social anxiety related to their
obsessive belief about the conspicuousness of a "ﬂawed body part." Thus,
an initial and crucial step in the successful formulation and treatment
of these patients is a thorough clinical assessment and accurate
diagnosis of the presenting problem. Two of the most commonly used
semi-structured interviews for diagnosing SAD are the Anxiety Disorders
Interview Schedule for DSM-IV (ADIS-IV; Brown et al., 1994) and the
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders (SCID-IV;
First et al., 1996). Both instruments are based on the diagnostic
criteria outlined in DSM-IV, but recent revisions of these instruments
have been published following the publication of DSM-5 (APA, 2013):
ADIS-5 (Brown & Barlow, 2014) and SCID-5-RV (First et al., 2015).
Assessment Following a thorough general clinical assessment and accurate
diagnosis of SAD, more SAD-speciﬁc assessment and measurement will serve
several aims. These include assessing severity of the problem,
identifying which situations are associated with most fear and/or
avoidance, elicitation of information about the maintaining mechanisms
for case conceptualization, and monitoring treatment outcome.
Measurement should be used to determine progress in meeting treatment
goals and as a guide to modifying components of treatment in a way that
maximizes the probability of cognitive behavioral change. For example,
the continuation of counterproductive safety behaviors and avoidance
should be monitored throughout treatment as they prohibit necessary
disconﬁrmation of social fears and the acquisition of new information.
There is a range of clinical assessment tools that can be used to assess
social anxiety and the components thought to maintain it. These have
recently been summarized in a review by Wong et al. (2016), which the
interested reader can consult for more detailed information. A brief
overview of scales frequently used in research and with good utility for
clinical practice are outlined. Clinician-Administered Outcome Measures
In addition to the ADIS-IV/ADIS-5, commonly used clinician-administered
scales include the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS; Liebowitz,
1987) and the Brief Social Phobia Scale (BSPS; Davidson et al., 1997).
All these assessment tools provide separate ratings of fear and
avoidance for different social situations. Thus, these instruments can
be of great use in planning treatment as they provide information about
the severity and breadth of social anxiety and which situations are
associated with the most fear and/or anxiety for the patient.
Self-Report Outcome Measures There is a range of self-report measures
that are established and widely used to assess social anxiety. Although
these measures overlap, there are slight differences

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

CBT for Social Anxiety Disorder

121

in terms of what they assess. The Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale has
also been developed as a self-report version (LSAS-SR; Baker et al.,
2002) and assesses fear and avoidance across 24 different social
situations. The Social Interaction Anxiety Scale (SIAS; Mattick &
Clarke, 1998) measures distress related to interaction with others. The
Social Phobia Scale (SPS; Mattick & Clarke, 1998) assesses anxiety
related to being observed or watched by others. The Social Phobia and
Anxiety Inventory (SPAI; Turner et al., 1989) assesses symptoms,
cognitions, and behavior in a range of social situations. The Social
Phobia Inventory (SPIN; Connor et al., 2000) assesses fear, avoidance,
and physiological discomfort related to social situations. Moreover,
shortened versions have been developed for several of the most commonly
used scales to reduce administration times, which can be an important
factor in clinical settings. For a comprehensive overview of these
measures, the interested reader should consult Wong et al. (2016).
Self-Report Measures of SAD-Maintenance Factors Cognitive and behavioral
factors that maintain social anxiety are usually assessed with
self-report measures. The Social Phobia Rating Scale (SPRS; Wells, 1997)
was published together with the original treatment manual and was
designed as a clinical assessment tool for assessment and monitoring of
social anxiety and its cognitive behavioral maintenance components when
treating SAD patients with CBT. The SPRS has 32 items and ﬁve subscales
that assess distress, avoidance, selfconsciousness, use of safety
behaviors, and negative beliefs characterizing SAD. In addition, several
measures more speciﬁcally assess cognitive and behavioral components of
the cognitive model that we brieﬂy mention below. Negative beliefs
characterizing social anxiety can be assessed with the Social Cognitions
Questionnaire (SCQ; Wells et al., 1993). In addition, the Self-Beliefs
Related to Social Anxiety Scale (SBSA; Wong & Moulds, 2009; Wong et al.,
2014) was developed to assess high standards, unconditional beliefs, and
conditional beliefs based on the Clark and Wells (1995) model.
Anticipatory processing can be assessed with the Anticipatory Social
Behaviours Questionnaire (ASBQ; Hinrichsen & Clark, 2003), and
post-event processing can be assessed with the Post-Event Processing
Questionnaire (PEPQ; Rachman et al., 2000). Self-attention can be
assessed with the Self-Consciousness Scale (SCS; Fenigstein et al.,
1975), and, in particular, one of its subscales (public
self-consciousness) is relevant to the Clark and Wells (1995) model.
Safety behaviors can be assessed with the Social Behaviours
Questionnaire (SBQ; Clark et al., 1995). Avoidance of social situations
is best assessed with the previously described outcome measures.

Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Social Anxiety Disorder Structure of
Treatment A course of CBT treatment for SAD (Wells, 1997) is typically
implemented over 12--14 sessions, in which sessions are held weekly and
each session is normally

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

122

Henrik Nordahl and Adrian Wells

60 minutes in duration. Moreover, the treatment should follow a
particular sequence in maximizing the efﬁciency of cognitive behavioral
change. It is a logical derivation from the model to use strategies
early in treatment that reconﬁgure the patient's behaviors and focus of
attention in a way that maximizes subsequent change in negative thoughts
and beliefs. More speciﬁcally, if behavioral experiments involving
exposure proceed without modifying the use of maladaptive safety
behaviors and reducing self-focused attention, the effectiveness of such
strategies may be impaired. Sessions 1--3 of treatment usually consists
of case formulation, socialization, and cognitive preparation for
restructuring, involving manipulations of safety behaviors and of
attention. Treatment sessions 4--6 typically focus on a continuation of
behavioral experiments, often involving exposure to test negative
appraisals and predictions, and video feedback methods to correct the
distorted self-image. Sessions 7--9 continue with cognitive and
behavioral reattribution methods, and introduce bandwidth maneuvers
aimed at further interrogating the environment and discovering that
social catastrophes (e.g., everyone staring at you) are unlikely, even
in the event of failed performance. Finally, sessions 10--12 involve
consolidation of material learned, relapse prevention, and a
continuation of work on the remaining issues (i.e., residual negative
beliefs and avoidance). Clearly, there is ﬂexibility in the number of
sessions devoted to these phases of treatment, but it serves here to
provide a basic conceptual structure for planning speciﬁc interventions.
Formulation In the following, we present a ﬁctional but realistic case
of Jenny to illustrate the process from assessment to case formulation
and socialization. First, we provide some background information about
Jenny. Background Information Jenny is a single, 32-year-old architect
with no children. After graduating from university three years ago,
Jenny moved to a new city a long way from her family and childhood
friends to work for a medium-sized construction company. This was a
large step for Jenny as she had always been a cautious person and most
comfortable in safe and well-known surroundings. However, the
construction company had a great reputation, and Jenny was excited that
she was offered a job there as a newly qualiﬁed architect. After three
years in the city, Jenny did not know anyone outside work, and she
rarely spent time with colleagues outside the ofﬁce. Most of her spare
time was spent going for walks, doing yoga, or just sitting in front of
the TV. Jenny felt lonely and depressed, and she also struggled at work.
She very much enjoyed working by herself on, for example, designing
houses, but she found teamwork challenging as it nearly always had her
feel very anxious; she avoided eating lunch with her colleagues; and she
hated attending meetings and other formal settings. Sometimes

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

CBT for Social Anxiety Disorder

123

Jenny found it difﬁcult to ask her manager for help, even when she
needed supervision to do her job effectively. On some occasions,
typically before meetings where she had to present some of her design
drawings to several spectators, Jenny would drink wine before
presenting. During the past three years, Jenny had been on several
periods of short-term sick leave due to depression and fatigue, and her
general practitioner had prescribed antidepressant medications that had
helped somewhat. However, in her latest encounter with her general
practitioner, Jenny agreed to be referred to a mental health
professional for assessment and treatment as the problems with
depression and ﬂuctuating work performance endured. Jenny's therapist
initially conducted a standardized diagnostic interview and concluded
that Jenny met the diagnostic criteria for social anxiety disorder and
recurrent depressive disorder. Jenny reported avoidance of performance
situations and concerns about being negatively evaluated since
adolescence. She agreed with the therapist that depression would be less
of a problem if she could have a richer social life and be more relaxed
when interacting with others during the work day. The therapist
questioned Jenny about her worst fears in social situations at work. The
main problem as Jenny saw it was trembling in her whole body and in her
voice, and she was certain that others would think she was a stupid and
weak person if they noticed it. Therefore, she avoided as many
performance situations as she could. However, when she was left with no
choice other than confronting her feared situations, Jenny reported that
she tried to control her body and voice with the aim of concealing her
anxiety. Eliciting Information for Case Formulation When working with
SAD, there are two basic approaches that can be used to elicit data for
conceptualization. The ﬁrst option is reviewing one or more recent
episodes in which the patient felt socially anxious by direct
questioning. However, for some individuals where avoidance of feared
situations is a prominent problem, it might be necessary to conduct a
behavioral assessment test where the individual is exposed to a feared
situation constructed in session. Depending on the nature of the
patient's fear, this will typically involve introducing a type of
performance situation for the patient such as making conversation with a
stranger. For an example of a behavior test to elicit data for
conceptualization, the reader can consult Wells (1997, p. 180). Four
types of information are required to make an idiosyncratic case
formulation. The therapist aims to identify (1) main negative automatic
thoughts, (2) anxiety symptoms, (3) contents of self-consciousness/inner
image, and (4) safety behaviors. Negative Automatic Thoughts. Negative
automatic thoughts occur in anticipation of and within social
situations. Two types of content are relevant to problem maintenance:
(1) the meaning and signiﬁcance that other people might attach to
symptoms and (2) an individual's own appraisal of the signiﬁcance of
symptoms such as overestimation of conspicuousness and implications for
self-concept. Useful questions to elicit negative automatic thoughts
include (1) "What were you thinking before you entered the situation/in
the situation/when you noticed symptom X?"

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

124

Henrik Nordahl and Adrian Wells

(2) "What was the worst you thought could happen in the situation?"
    and (3) "What did you think people would think or see?" Anxiety
    Symptoms. Anxiety takes the form of cognitive and somatic symptoms.
    They are maintained by negative appraisals, but are also a focus of
    negative appraisals. Individuals with SAD are often most troubled by
    symptoms that can be witnessed by others, such as shaking, sweating,
    blushing, crying, or their mind going blank. In constructing the
    idiosyncratic formulation, it is useful to determine the extent to
    which appraisals of symptoms contribute to negative automatic
    thoughts and dysfunctional self-processing. The following questions
    can be used:
(3) "Which symptoms bother you most?" (2) "When you felt anxious in the
    situation, what symptoms did you notice?" (3) "How conspicuous do
    you think the symptoms are?" and (4) "If people did notice your
    symptoms what would that mean?" Contents of Self-Processing. There
    are three main ways to explore the content of an individual's
    self-processing: (1) exploring the content of heightened
    selfconsciousness, (2) questioning the appraised level of
    conspicuousness of symptoms, and (3) determining if safety behaviors
    are linked to a particular self-perception. The initial marker for
    self-processing in patients' accounts of situations is a report of
    increased self-consciousness. The therapist should speciﬁcally ask
    about the point in time at which the patient became highly
    self-conscious, either through direct exploration of the content of
    processing in this state (e.g., "What aspect of yourself were you
    most aware of?") or by questioning the subjective impression of the
    self for periods when symptoms were intense (e.g., "When you felt
    anxious, how do you think you appeared?"). Moreover, some patients
    utilize safety behaviors to conceal symptoms, and this provides an
    opportunity to determine the content of selfperception in two
    ways: (1) explore self-processing associated with implementing
    safety behaviors (e.g., "When you try to conceal your symptoms, what
    is your impression of how you look to others?") and (2) explore
    self-processing in the hypothetical absence of safety behaviors
    (e.g., "If you did not engage in your safety behavior when you felt
    anxious, how would you look to others then?"). It is important to
    try to determine the content of self-processing in as detailed and
    precise a way as possible, and the therapist should ask about
    imagery, as the selfimpression often occurs as an image from the
    "observer perspective" (e.g., "Did you have an image of the way you
    thought you looked when you were in the situation? Can you describe
    the image"?). Safety Behaviors. Safety behaviors can be overt or
    covert. It is important that the therapist works to elicit all kinds
    of safety behaviors, which can be a challenge when there is low
    awareness by the patient. In addition to questioning about safety
    behaviors, exposure to feared situations in conjunction with
    questioning from the therapist may be warranted. Examples of typical
    question to elicit safety behaviors are: (1) "When you thought
    (feared event) was happening, did you do anything to prevent
    it?" (2) "Do you do anything to control your symptoms/improve your
    performance/hide your problem?" and (3) "Do you do anything to avoid
    drawing attention to yourself?"

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

CBT for Social Anxiety Disorder

125

Collecting Data for Jenny's Formulation In the case of Jenny, reviewing
a recent episode of social anxiety was chosen to elicit data for her
idiosyncratic case formulation. Below we have provided a description of
the conversation between Jenny and her therapist from the process of
generating her formulation. The formulation arising from the dialogue is
presented in ﬁgure 2. Therapist:

Jenny: Therapist: Jenny: Therapist: Jenny: Therapist: Jenny:

Therapist: Jenny: Therapist: Jenny: Therapist: Jenny: Therapist:

Jenny: Therapist: Jenny: Therapist:

In today's session, I would like to explore a recent social situation in
which you felt anxious and uncomfortable. In doing this we can explore
factors that are keeping your social anxiety going and begin to examine
ways that you can overcome your anxiety. When was the last time you were
anxious and distressed in a social situation? It was on Monday. I went
to a meeting with two of my colleagues to talk to some customers about a
new project. I am going to ask you some questions about your feelings
and thoughts in that situation. Is it clear in your memory? Yes. Just
before you went to the meeting, were you feeling anxious? Very much so,
I did not really want to go, but it was an important meeting and I did
not want to let my colleagues down. What were your anxious thoughts? I
was worried that I had to take the lead in the conversation, and that my
anxiety would lead to trembling in my voice and body. I do not want
others to see me shaking and being anxious for nothing. So, your
thoughts were something like "What if I shake and everybody will
notice?" Is that right? Yes, that is right. When you entered the
situation, how did you feel? I felt anxious, tense, hot, and shaky. When
you felt anxious in that situation, what thoughts went through your
mind? I thought, "They will notice the shaking and think I am an
incompetent person." It sounds like you think others will perceive you
as an incompetent person if they saw you shaking. How conspicuous do you
think your symptoms are? I think it is quite easy to notice that I am
nervous and uncomfortable. If I could have seen you in that meeting,
what would I see? You would see a shivering wreck. It felt like my whole
body was shaking. When you felt that your whole body was shaking, did
you do anything to prevent it?

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

126

Henrik Nordahl and Adrian Wells Situation: Meeting at work NAT: "They
will notice the shaking and think I am an incompetent person"

Self-Conscious Image of self as a "shivering wreck"

Safety Behaviors Tense legs Hide arms Deep breaths Control shaking Say
little

Anxiety Anxious Tense Hot Shaky

Figure 7.2. An idiosyncratic SAD case conceptualization for Jenny.

Jenny:

Therapist:

Yes, I tried to tense my legs to control the shaking. I hid my arms
behind my back, and I took deep breaths to calm down. I usually say very
little to avoid attracting attention. Thank you for answering these
questions, Jenny. Now, let us have a look together at a diagram \[Figure
7.2\] I have mapped out to see some important factors and cycles that
help us understand the causes of your anxiety problem.

Socialization When the idiosyncratic formulation has been developed, the
therapist presents the model using guided discovery to begin to share an
understanding of the factors maintaining the problem. A goal in the
socialization process is to engage the patient in the treatment and to
demonstrate that social anxiety is linked to negative selfevaluation
based on internal information. In particular, the effect of self-focused
attention and use of safety behaviors on symptoms and performance is
discussed and illustrated by in-session experiments. Behavioral
Experiments in Socialization Typically, a socialization experiment
involves social performance under two conditions where the engagement in
and disengagement from safety behaviors and/or

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

CBT for Social Anxiety Disorder

127

self-focused attention are contrasted. The ﬁrst condition usually
involves full engagement in self-focus/safety behaviors, and this is
followed by a second condition where the patient is instructed to reduce
these strategies as much as possible. Several socialization experiments
are usually required in order to demonstrate the key elements in the
model and the interactions between them. For examples and further
discussion, the reader should consult Wells (1997). In the case of
Jenny, one of the socialization experiments aimed to explore the effects
of her safety behaviors. She was asked to participate in two
interactions with a small group of the therapist's colleagues. In the
ﬁrst interaction, Jenny was instructed to engage all of her typical
safety behaviors (e.g., tensing her legs, hiding her arms, taking deep
breaths, trying to control shaking, and saying little). In the second
interaction, Jenny was instructed to drop all safety behaviors, and
focus attention externally on other people in the situation. When the
two conditions were contrasted with appropriate questioning by the
therapist, Jenny discovered that her self-consciousness was greater and
her trembling more noticeable in the ﬁrst condition. She also felt more
at ease in the second condition and experienced that participating in
the conversation felt more natural. The experiment had the effect that
Jenny was more curious about the role of safety behaviors and
self-attention; this increased her motivation for therapy and to reduce
these responses.

Modifying Self-Processing with Video Feedback Following socialization
and successful work in reducing safety behaviors, the next stage of
treatment consists of modifying the content of self-processing, as it is
the main source of evidence used by the socially anxious individual to
make negative self-appraisals and inferences about the content of other
people's appraisals. Video feedback provides an effective technique for
correcting distorted self-images and beliefs concerning the
conspicuousness of anxiety symptoms, and can help patients obtain a more
realistic view of how they appear to other people. This procedure should
be managed in a particular way to prohibit adverse effects and maximize
change in self-image and negative beliefs. Clinical guidelines detailing
a range of procedures for successful implementation of the procedure
have been published elsewhere (Warnock-Parkes et al., 2017; Wells,
1997). Video feedback can be used in a variety of different ways during
a course of CBT for SAD. Normally, a video of the behavioral experiment
with two contrasting conditions is used as part of the socialization
process where the patient likely experienced high levels of anxiety as
described above. This experiment was originally set up to evaluate the
effect of self-focused attention and safety behaviors, and patients
usually discover that they feel less anxious and think they came across
more favorably in the second condition. In the case of Jenny, watching
the videos helped her discover that her trembling was barely noticeable
and that she came across more favorably in both conditions than she
thought. For Jenny, this insight meant that her feelings are not a
reliable judge of how she appears to others and that even when

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

128

Henrik Nordahl and Adrian Wells

feeling shaky it is barely noticeable to others. In addition, Jenny
realized that the safety behavior of tensing her legs likely contributed
to the felt shakiness.

Verbal Reattribution Throughout therapy, verbal reattribution techniques
are used with a view to modifying negative self-appraisals and thoughts
concerning other people's reactions and thoughts in social situations.
In addition to video feedback, there are several strategies that can be
used for challenging the patient's belief in their negative automatic
thoughts, of which we present some of the most commonly used techniques
here. Questioning the Evidence A typical strategy to use is to review
the evidence that the socially anxious individual has for their belief.
A central aim in doing so is to help the patient discover that the
evidence mostly stems from internal information such as
feelings/symptoms and self-appraisal rather than objective sources.
Thinking Errors Educating patients to identify thinking errors is a good
approach as a means of helping the patient gaining distance from their
negative appraisals and objectively evaluating their validity. Common
thinking errors in SAD include mind reading (e.g., "She thinks I am
stupid"), catastrophizing (e.g., "I won't be able to say anything"), and
personalization (e.g., "No one is talking to me because I am boring").
Some also engage in an error of projected self-appraisal (Wells, 1997)
in which they assume their own negative beliefs are held by others
(e.g., "I sound really boring; they must think I am boring"). Dealing
with Anticipatory Processing and the Post-mortem These cognitive types
of safety behaviors are typically dealt with by asking patients to ban
or reduce the time spent on these processes. To make this easier for the
patient, an analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of such
processing is usually undertaken with the aim to show how the
disadvantages outweigh the advantages. In the case of Jenny, her
therapist made a list of all the advantages and disadvantages of
planning what to say (i.e., anticipatory processing) that Jenny could
think of. According to Jenny, the advantage with this coping strategy
was that it could help her come across as a competent person. The
disadvantage was that she became more self-focused and anxious when
engaging in this strategy. In addition, Jenny's therapist helped her see
other disadvantages with using the strategy, for example, that her
planning seldom ﬁtted with how meetings and conversations actually turn
out and that the strategy had not helped her overcome her social anxiety
problem. In reviewing the advantages and disadvantages, Jenny concluded
that the disadvantages by far outweighed the advantages and that
anticipating potential negative social consequences contributed to her
social anxiety problem.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

CBT for Social Anxiety Disorder

129

She agreed to ban the activity as homework and to spend time on
evaluating her experiences from this in the next treatment session.
Using Rational Self-Statements When more rational statements have been
generated and/or validated by verbal retribution and behavioral
strategies during the course of treatment, these can be used as
self-statements in feared situations as a means of preventing full
activation of self-processing and of maintaining stability of the
self-concept. For example, Jenny was instructed to use a rational
self-statement ("I look calm even when I don't feel it") based on
corrective video feedback in challenging social situations.

Behavioral Experiments Behavioral experiments consisting of exposure to
social situations with concurrent dropping of safety behaviors and
processing of external information are a crucial component of CBT for
SAD. They complement verbal reattribution procedures and provide one of
the most powerful means of modifying distorted appraisals and beliefs by
enabling testing of other people's reactions and by evaluating the
consequences of showing signs of anxiety or failed performance in feared
social situations. We recommend implementing behavioral experiments in
accordance with the P-ET-S protocol described by Wells (1997), which
consists of four phases: (1) preparation (P), (2) exposure to social
situations (E), (3) testing the predictions based on negative beliefs
(T), and (4) a ﬁnal summarizing (S) of the results. Examples of test (T)
phases in such experiments include deliberately focusing on other people
to determine their reactions, dropping safety behaviors, deliberately
showing signs of anxiety, producing "failures in performance," or
behaving in an "unacceptable" manner and observing if predicted outcomes
occur. Such testing usually requires that the patient maintain an
external focus of attention as a means to gather objective information
about other people's reactions. After the testing phase, the experiences
are interpreted and summarized in light of the cognitive formulation,
and belief in negative thoughts and predictions is reassessed in light
of these results. Experiments conducted in session are normally repeated
for homework in order to test the predictions in more naturalistic
settings for the patients with means to further challenge negative
thoughts and beliefs. In the case of Jenny, she did an experiment in a
meeting at work where she deliberately shook her arms while carefully
observing her colleagues' reactions. To her surprise, Jenny discovered
that only one of her colleagues noticed, but this person did not seem to
react to it in any negative may. This discovery was used by the
therapist to help Jenny discover that even in the event of "failed
performance," strong negative reactions from others are unlikely.
Dealing with Underlying Assumptions and Beliefs In the Clark and Wells
model, individuals with SAD hold underlying negative assumptions and
beliefs ("schemas") that are activated when entering or

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

130

Henrik Nordahl and Adrian Wells

anticipating a social situation and contribute to negative appraisals of
social situations and the vicious cycle that maintains SAD. These
schemas can be divided into conditional assumptions, unconditional
beliefs about the social self, and high standards and rules for social
performance, and should be addressed and modiﬁed in the later stages of
the treatment. To accomplish this successfully, it is important to
generate a clear deﬁnition of concepts represented in the assumptions
and to operationalize them in a testable format. A good strategy in
working with conditional assumptions is to review evidence and
counterevidence for the assumptions, as individuals with SAD often fail
to process disconﬁrmatory information. This can be followed up with a
mini-survey to gather information about other people's thoughts and
beliefs, and it may be useful to run behavioral experiments to test the
validity of the assumption. When the therapist aims to modify high
standards and rigid rules for social performance, it is useful to
explore the effects of behaving in ways that break these personal rules.
For example, the patient may be asked to deliberately "make mistakes" or
spill a drink in a social situation to test the reactions of others.
With unconditional negative self-beliefs, which often consist of
dichotomous concepts, continua work offers a means of introducing a more
nuanced perspective on the self. The positive data log and ﬂashcards
provide a means of accumulating evidence in support of replacement
positive beliefs with the aim of counteracting negative cognitive bias
in feared situations. In some cases, identifying early events and images
that might explain how a negative self-belief arose can also be helpful,
and either encouraging the patient to treat their negative self-beliefs
as prejudice against themselves or using elements from trauma
interventions such as exposure or memory rescripting to process the
traumatic event and thus overcome the negative belief. Relapse
Prevention Toward the end of therapy, a central part of the treatment is
relapse prevention. Patients are typically asked to write a detailed
summary of the information learned during the course of treatment, a
task that the therapist should supervise to make sure most of the
important learning points and experiences are included. In addition,
several examples of the patient's formulation that highlight the more
speciﬁc components responsible for maintaining social anxiety are
included in the summary. It is also typical to include a list of
strategies that have been used in overcoming social anxiety.
Furthermore, booster sessions are normally scheduled at two and six
months after treatment and provide an opportunity to consolidate
treatment gains and reinforce the implementation of treatment
strategies. Recent Developments and Advances Although it has been nearly
25 years since the Clark and Wells model and the treatment derived from
it was published, it is still considered the benchmark model

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

CBT for Social Anxiety Disorder

131

and treatment of SAD. In more recent years, treatment based on the model
has successfully been adapted to children and adolescents (Ingul et al.,
2014; Leigh & Clark, 2016, 2018) and to different formats such as
delivery through the Internet (see Carlbring et al., 2018, for a review
of controlled trials) with promising results. A Return to Theoretical
Inﬂuences: The Metacognitive Approach. A conceptual feature of the Clark
and Wells model (1995) is that it draws on different theoretical
frameworks in an integrative way that may create upper limits to what
can be achieved. For example, it places the content of cognition in
center stage and argues that schemas or negative beliefs give rise to
self-processing and social anxiety. However, the S-REF model (Wells &
Matthews, 1994) that partially informed its development emphasizes the
failure to adaptively regulate processing such as worry and attention as
the main features of disorder. This effect is thought to emerge from
metacognitive beliefs, and together these are the targets of
metacognitive therapy (Wells, 2009). In line with this idea, recent
studies have shown that metacognitive (e.g., "I cannot control my
worry") rather than cognitive beliefs (e.g., "I am boring") are more
reliable predictors of social anxiety (Gkika et al., 2017; Nordahl &
Wells, 2017). Moreover, change in metacognitive rather than cognitive
beliefs is associated with symptom improvement in individuals undergoing
treatment for SAD (Nordahl et al., 2017). Metacognitive but not
cognitive beliefs are statistical predictors of depression symptoms in
patients with SAD (Nordahl et al., 2018), and of work status among high
socially anxious individuals (Nordahl & Wells, 2017). Two studies
(Nordahl et al., 2016; Wells & Papageorgiou, 2001) have shown that a
briefer and more metacognitive-focused intervention can be highly
effective and time efﬁcient for patients with SAD. Furthermore, Vogel
and colleagues (2016) isolated and tested two techniques: the attention
training technique (ATT: Wells, 1990) and situational attentional
refocusing (SAR: Wells & Papageorgiou, 1998) often used in metacognitive
therapy applications, and found that 46% of patients no longer met
diagnostic criteria for SAD after receiving them. Nordahl and Wells
(2018) have presented preliminary evidence suggesting that full
metacognitive therapy is associated with positive outcomes for patients
with different presentations of SAD. These emerging data support the
idea that moving toward a greater metacognitive-focused implementation
of treatment may contribute positively to further treatment
developments.

Key Points  Social anxiety disorder (SAD) is among the most common
mental disorders, with a lifetime prevalence of approximately 12%. 
Building on Beck's schema theory (Beck, 1976) and the self-regulatory
executive function model of psychological disorder (Wells & Matthews,
1994), Clark and Wells (1995) advanced a cognitive model of SAD.  The
cognitive model emphasizes schemas/negative automatic thoughts,
selfattention, and safety behaviors as the key maintenance factors of
social anxiety.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

132

Henrik Nordahl and Adrian Wells

(cont.)  Wells (1997) developed the CBT manual for SAD based on the
Clark and Wells (1995) model.  Individual CBT is considered the most
efﬁcacious treatment of SAD and is recommended as the treatment of
choice in NICE guidelines.  Reﬁnements of the model and treatment may be
possible, as shown by recent research on metacognitive factors.

RECOMMENDED READING

Clark, D. M., & Wells, A. (1995). A cognitive model of social phobia. In
R. G. Heimberg, M. R. Liebowitz, D. A. Hope, & F. R. Schneier (Eds.),
Social phobia: Diagnosis, assessment, and treatment (pp. 69--93).
Guilford Press. Mayo-Wilson, E., Dias, S., Mavranezouli, I., Kew, K.,
Clark, D. M., Ades, A. E., & Pilling, S. (2014). Psychological and
pharmacological interventions for social anxiety disorder in adults: A
systematic review and network meta-analysis. The Lancet Psychiatry, 1,
368--376. Wells, A. (1997). Cognitive therapy of anxiety disorders: A
practice manual and conceptual guide. John Wiley & Sons. (2007).
Cognition about cognition: Metacognitive therapy and change in
generalized anxiety disorder and social phobia. Cognitive and Behavioral
Practice, 14, 18--25. (2009). Metacognitive therapy for anxiety and
depression. Guilford Press.

REFERENCES

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). American Psychiatric Publishing.
Baker, S. L., Heinrichs, N., Kim, H. J., & Hofmann, S. G. (2002). The
Liebowitz social anxiety scale as a self-report instrument: A
preliminary psychometric analysis. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 40,
701--715. Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional
disorders. International Universities Press. Borge, F. M., Hoffart, A.,
Sexton, H., Clark, D. M., Markowitz, J. C., & McManus, F. (2008).
Residential cognitive therapy versus residential interpersonal therapy
for social phobia: A randomized clinical trial. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 22, 991--1010. Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2014). Anxiety
and Related Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-5 (ADIS-5L): Lifetime
Version. Client interview schedule. Oxford University Press. Brown, T.
A., Di Nardo, P. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety Disorders Interview
Schedule for DSM-IV (ADIS-IV). Psychological Corporation. Carlbring, P.,
Andersson, G., Cuijpers, P., Riper, H., & Hedman-Lagerlöf, E. (2018).
Internet-based vs. face-to-face cognitive behavior therapy for
psychiatric and somatic disorders: An updated systematic review and
meta-analysis. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 47, 1--18. Connor, K. M.,
Davidson, J. R., Churchill, L. E., Sherwood, A., Weisler, R. H., & Foa,
E. (2000). Psychometric properties of the Social Phobia Inventory
(SPIN): New self-rating scale. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 176,
379--386. Clark, D. M., Butler, G., Fennell, M., Hackmann, A., McManus,
F., & Wells, A. (1995). Social behaviour questionnaire \[Unpublished
manuscript\].

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

CBT for Social Anxiety Disorder

133

Clark, D. M., Ehlers, A., Hackmann, A., McManus, F., Fennell, M., Grey,
N., . . . & Wild, J. (2006). Cognitive therapy versus exposure and
applied relaxation in social phobia: A randomized controlled trial.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74, 568--578. Clark, D.
M., Ehlers, A., McManus, F., Hackmann, A., Fennell, M., Campbell, H., .
. . & Louis, B. (2003). Cognitive therapy versus ﬂuoxetine in
generalized social phobia: A randomized placebo-controlled trial.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 1058--1067. Clark, D.
M., & Wells, A. (1995). A cognitive model of social phobia. In R. G.
Heimberg, M. R. Liebowitz, D. A. Hope, & F. Schneier (Eds.), Social
phobia: Diagnosis, assessment, and treatment (pp. 69--93). Guilford
Press. Connor, K., Davidson, J., Churchill, L., Sherwood, A., Weisler,
R., & Foa, E. (2000). Psychometric properties of the Social Phobia
Inventory (SPIN): New self-rating scale. British Journal of Psychiatry,
176(4), 379--386. doi:10.1192/bjp.176.4.379 Davidson, J. R., Miner, C.
M., De Veaugh-Geiss, J., Tupler, L. A., Colket, J. T., & Potts, N. L. S.
(1997). The brief social phobia scale: A psychometric evaluation.
Psychological Medicine, 27, 161--166. Fenigstein, A., Scheier, M. F., &
Buss, A. H. (1975). Public and private self-consciousness: Assessment
and theory, Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 43(4),
522--527. First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B.
(1996). User's guide for the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV
axis I disorders. SCID-I: Clinician version. American Psychiatric
Publishing. First, M. B., Williams, J. B. W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R.
L. (2015). Structured clinical interview for DSM-5: Research version
(SCID-5 for DSM-5, research version; SCID-5RV). American Psychiatric
Association. Gkika, S., Wittkowski, A., & Wells, A. (2017). Social
cognition and metacognition in social anxiety: A systematic review.
Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy, 25, 10--30. Gregory, B., & Peters,
L. (2017). Changes in the self during cognitive behavioural therapy for
social anxiety disorder: A systematic review. Clinical Psychology
Review, 52, 1--18. Hinrichsen, H., & Clark, D. M. (2003). Anticipatory
processing in social anxiety: Two pilot studies. Journal of Behavior
Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 34, 205--218. Ingul, J. M., Aune,
T., & Nordahl, H. M. (2014). A randomized controlled trial of individual
cognitive therapy, group cognitive behaviour therapy and attentional
placebo for adolescent social phobia. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics,
83, 54--61. Leichsenring, F., Salzer, S., Beutel, M. E., Herpertz, S.,
Hiller, W., Hoyer, J., . . . & Ritter, V. (2013). Psychodynamic therapy
and cognitive-behavioral therapy in social anxiety disorder: A
multicenter randomized controlled trial. American Journal of Psychiatry,
170, 759--767. Leigh, E., & Clark, D. M. (2016). Cognitive therapy for
social anxiety disorder in adolescents: A development case series.
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 44, 1--17. (2018).
Understanding social anxiety disorder in adolescents and improving
treatment outcomes: Applying the cognitive model of Clark and Wells
(1995). Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 21, 388--414.
Liebowitz, M. R. (1987). Social phobia. In D. F. Klein (Ed.), Anxiety.
Karger, 141--173. Mattick, R. P., & Clarke, J. C. (1998). Development
and validation of measures of social phobia scrutiny fear and social
interaction anxiety. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 455--470.
Mayo-Wilson, E., Dias, S., Mavranezouli, I., Kew, K., Clark, D. M.,
Ades, A. E., & Pilling, S. (2014). Psychological and pharmacological
interventions for social anxiety disorder in adults: A systematic review
and network meta-analysis. The Lancet Psychiatry, 1, 368--376.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

134

Henrik Nordahl and Adrian Wells Mörtberg, E., Clark, D. M., Sundin, Ö.,
& Åberg Wistedt, A. (2007). Intensive group cognitive treatment and
individual cognitive therapy vs. treatment as usual in social phobia: A
randomized controlled trial. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 115,
142--154. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. (2013).
Social anxiety disorder: recognition, assessment and treatment of social
anxiety disorder (Clinical guideline 159). http://
guidance.nice.org.uk/CG159 Ng, A. S., Abbott, M. J., & Hunt, C. (2014).
The effect of self-imagery on symptoms and processes in social anxiety:
A systematic review. Clinical Psychology Review, 34, 620--633. Nordahl,
H., Nordahl, H. M., Hjemdal, O., & Wells, A. (2017). Cognitive and
metacognitive predictors of symptom improvement following treatment of
social anxiety disorder: A secondary analysis from a randomized
controlled trial. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 24(6),
1221--1227. Nordahl, H., Nordahl, H. M., Vogel, P. A., & Wells, A.
(2018). Explaining depression symptoms in patients with social anxiety
disorder: Do maladaptive metacognitive beliefs play a role? Clinical
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 25, 457--464. Nordahl, H. M., Vogel, P.
A., Morken, G., Stiles, T. C., Sandvik, P., & Wells, A. (2016).
Paroxetine, cognitive therapy or their combination in the treatment of
social anxiety disorder with and without avoidant personality disorder:
A randomized clinical trial. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 85,
346--356. Nordahl, H. M., & Wells, A. (2017). Social anxiety and work
status: The role of negative metacognitive beliefs, symptom severity and
cognitive-behavioural factors. Journal of Mental Health, 29(6),
665--669. (2018). Metacognitive therapy for social anxiety disorder: An
A-B replication series across social anxiety subtypes. Frontiers in
Psychology, 9, 540. Piccirillo, M. L., Dryman, M. T., & Heimberg, R. G.
(2015). Safety behaviors in adults with social anxiety: Review and
future directions. Behavior Therapy, 47, 675--687. Rachman, S.,
Grüter-Andrew, J., & Shafran, R. (2000). Post-event processing in social
anxiety. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38, 611--617. Ruscio, A. M.,
Brown, T. A., Chiu, W. T., Sareen, J., Stein, M. B., & Kessler, R. C.
(2008). Social fears and social phobia in the USA: Results from the
National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Psychological Medicine, 38,
15--28. Scheier, M. F., & Carver, C. S. (1985). The Self-Consciousness
Scale: A revised version for use with general populations. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 15, 687--699. Stangier, U., Heidenreich, T.,
Peitz, M., Lauterbach, W., & Clark, D. M. (2003). Cognitive therapy for
social phobia: Individual versus group treatment. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 41, 991--1007. Stangier, U., Schramm, E., Heidenreich, T.,
Berger, M., & Clark, D. M. (2011). Cognitive therapy vs interpersonal
psychotherapy in social anxiety disorder: A randomized controlled trial.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 68, 692--700. Turner, S. M., Beidel, D.
C., Dancu, C. V., & Stanley, M. A. (1989). An empirically derived
inventory to measure social fears and anxiety: The Social Phobia and
Anxiety Inventory. Psychological Assessment: A Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 1, 35--40. Vogel, P. A., Hagen, R., Hjemdal, O.,
Solem, S., Smeby, M. C. B., Strand, E. R., Fisher, P., Nordahl, H. M., &
Wells, A. (2016). Metacognitive therapy applications in social phobia:
An exploratory study of the individual and combined effects of the
attention training technique and situational attentional refocusing.
Journal of Experimental Psychopathology, 7, 608--618. Wampold, B. E.,
Flückiger, C., Del Re, A. C., Yulish, N. E., Frost, N. D., Pace, B. T.,
. . . & Hilsenroth, M. J. (2017). In pursuit of truth: A critical
examination of meta-analyses of cognitive behavior therapy.
Psychotherapy Research, 27, 14--32.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008

CBT for Social Anxiety Disorder

135

Warnock-Parkes, E., Wild, J., Stott, R., Grey, N., Ehlers, A., & Clark,
D. M. (2017). Seeing is believing: Using video feedback in cognitive
therapy for social anxiety disorder. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice,
24, 245--255. Watson, D., & Friend, R. (1969). Measurement of
social-evaluative anxiety. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 33, 448--457. Wells, A. (1990). Panic disorder in
association with relaxation induced anxiety: An attentional training
approach to treatment. Behavior Therapy, 21, 273--280. (1997). Cognitive
therapy of anxiety disorders: A practice manual and conceptual guide.
John Wiley & Sons. (2009). Metacognitive therapy for anxiety and
depression. Guilford Press. Wells, A., Clark, D. M., & Ahmad, S. (1998).
How do I look with my mind's eye?: Perspective taking in social phobic
imagery. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 631--634. Wells, A., &
Matthews, G. (1994). Attention and emotion: A clinical perspective.
Erlbaum. Wells, A., & Papageorgiou, C. (1998). Social phobia: Effect of
external attention on anxiety, negative beliefs and perspective taking.
Behavior Therapy, 29, 357--370. (2001). Brief cognitive therapy for
social phobia: A case series. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39,
713--720. Wells, A., Stopa, L., & Clark, D. M. (1993). Social cognition
questionnaire \[Unpublished manuscript\]. Department of Psychiatry,
University of Oxford, Warnerford Hospital. Wittchen, H. U., & Fehm, L.
(2003). Epidemiology and natural course of social fears and social
phobia. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 108, 4--18. Wong, Q. J.,
Gregory, B., & McLellan, L. F. (2016). A review of scales to measure
social anxiety disorder in clinical and epidemiological studies. Current
Psychiatry Reports, 18, 38--53. Wong, Q. J., & Moulds, M. L. (2009).
Impact of rumination versus distraction on anxiety and maladaptive
self-beliefs in socially anxious individuals. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 47, 861--867. Wong, Q. J., Moulds, M. L., & Rapee, R. M.
(2014). Validation of the self-beliefs related to social anxiety scale:
A replication and extension. Assessment, 21, 300--311.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. UCT University of Cape
Town Libraries, on 03 Mar 2022 at 14:10:31, subject to the Cambridge
Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108355605.008


