![](html/docimages/cover_ader.jpg)

[]{#001_htitle.html}

<div>

 

</div>

Client-Centered Therapy

[]{#002_alsoby.html}

<div>

 

</div>

::: mtop
:::

Also by Carl R. Rogers

*On Becoming a Person:\
A Therapist's View of Psychotherapy*

*Becoming Partners:\
Marriage and Its Alternatives*

*Carl Rogers: Dialogues*

*Carl Rogers On Personal Power*

*The Carl Rogers Reader*

*Counseling and Psychotherapy*

[]{#003_title.html}

<div>

[]{#003_title.html_title}

</div>

![](html/docimages/title.jpg){height="100%"}

[]{#004_cr.html}

<div>

[]{#004_cr.html_cr}

</div>

Constable & Robinson Ltd\
3 The Lanchesters\
162 Fulham Palace Road\
London W6 9ER\
[www.constablerobinson.com](http://www.constablerobinson.com)

First published in the UK by Constable and Company Limited 1951

This edition published by Constable,\
an imprint of Constable & Robinson Ltd 2003

Copyright © Carl R. Rogers 1951

The right of Carl R. Rogers to be identified as the author of this work
has been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act, 1988

All rights reserved. This book is sold subject to the condition that it
shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or
otherwise circulated in any form of binding or cover other than that in
which it is published and without a similar condition including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.

A copy of the British Library Cataloguing in\
Publication Data is available from the British Library

ISBN 1-84119-840-4\
ISBN 978-1-84119-840-8\
eISBN 978-1-78033-706-7

Printed and bound in the EU

10 9 8 7

[]{#005_epigrapgh.html}

<div>

[]{#005_epigrapgh.html_epigraph}

</div>

::: mtop
:::

[WE MARK]{.sc} *with light in the memory the few interviews we have
had*, *in the dreary years of routine and of sin*, *with souls that made
our souls wiser; that spoke what we thought; that told us what we knew;
that gave us leave to be what we inly were.*

--- [EMERSON, Divinity School Address, 1838]{.sl}

[]{#006_intro.html}

<div>

[]{#006_intro.html_intro}

</div>

#### E[DITOR]{.sc}'[S]{.sc} I[NTRODUCTION]{.sc} {.fronthead}

I[N THE PRESENT VOLUME]{.sc} Dr. Carl Rogers and some of his associates
have crystallized the great progress that has been made in the past
decade in the development of the techniques and basic philosophy of
counseling.

In this book there is a clear exposition of procedures by means of which
individuals who are being counseled may be assisted in achieving for
themselves new and more effective personality adjustments. It deals with
the nature of this important and subtle therapeutic process and with
related counseling problems.

This is no static guidebook to monuments of past thinking. It is rather
a current synthesis and a dynamic integration of successful techniques
of general counseling and of counseling procedures in special
situations. Its pages open up most attractive new lines of study in
which further experimentation and investigation may be carried on with
profit.

The point of view in regard to psychotherapy and counseling that is
explained in this book is one which has from the first been hospitable
to analysis of its results by scientific and experimental techniques.
The amount of such research that is reported in the present volume may
well surprise those whose field of specialization is not in this area of
study. This attitude of open-mindedness and of welcome to valid new
ideas that are developed by scientific techniques has by no means been
characteristic of all previous psychotherapeutic systems.

The implications of the new and vital contributions of nondirective
counseling to a number of novel and broad fields are presented in the
book. The place of play therapy in work with children is explored in a
special chapter. Group therapy is likewise given novel and interesting
consideration. The importance of the therapeutic principles that are
discussed in the book is treated in relation to problems of group
leadership and administration. The application of a nondirective
client-centered approach for teaching is evaluated. The special chapter
which deals with the school situation cannot fail to be recognized as a
significant challenge to the thinking of those who are interested in the
improvement of all education that rises above the level of mere routine
training. There is a chapter on the preparation of new professional
workers in the field of counseling in which special insights are
presented, dealing with some of the deepest aspects of the human
personality as recognized by the author.

In every chapter of the book there are references to an active and
growing theory of the nature of the personality and of the underlying
mechanisms which determine human behavior. The final chapter of the
book, however, presents a formal treatment of the psychological theory
which is basic to the whole client-centered point of view not only in
counseling but in all interpersonal relations. This theory concerns
itself with a modern understanding of the psychology of the self. It
gives a new point of view from which to consider the nature of the
maladjustment of modern man in his physical and social environments.
Here are outlined in detail therapeutic procedures which do not deal
alone with obvious surface adjustments but which seek to reach deep
aspects of the personality.

This book supplements, expands, and qualitatively enriches the views so
well expressed previously in the author's *Counseling and
Psychotherapy*. The present volume does not replace this earlier book.
The student who is just becoming acquainted with this modern point of
view in psychology may wish to use both books together. In some respects
the older work still provides certain essential steps of introduction to
the basic concepts of modern counseling which are not repeated in the
same detail in this book.

*Client-Centered Therapy* is a mature presentation of the nondirective
and related points of view in counseling and therapy. It seems to the
editor that this new book will be of especial value to individuals who
are professionally concerned with the problems of working with human
maladjustment or with any aspect of the work of assisting other human
beings to meet in an adequate and rewarding way the problems of modern
living.

The volume is not a rigid presentation of a closed system. The author
and his collaborators have captured the gift of making the reader feel
as he turns its pages that he is already participating in the
constructive and forward-looking thinking which characterizes the basic
point of view of the book.

L[EONARD]{.sc} C[ARMICHAEL]{.sc}

*Tufts College*

[]{#007_preface.html}

<div>

[]{#007_preface.html_preface}

</div>

#### P[REFACE]{.sc} {.fronthead}

T[HIS BOOK]{.sc} is the product of many minds, and the result of a great
deal of group interaction. First and foremost it is a product of the
staff of the Counseling Center of the University of Chicago, and of the
work there being done in psychotherapy and psychotherapeutic research.
So deep has been the mingling of thought and experience in this group
that any member of the staff would be bold indeed to regard any
conceptualization of psychotherapy as strictly his own. The book is also
a pooling of ideas and experiences from psychologists and other workers
in the field of therapy scattered from coast to coast. The author would
like to indicate something of his indebtedness to those who have
influenced his thinking, by naming several who are most likely to find
portions of their own thought included in this book. The list would
include: Virginia M. Axline, Douglas D. Blocksma, Oliver H. Bown, John
M. Butler, Arthur W. Combs, Paul E. Eiserer, Thomas Gordon, Donald L.
Grummon, Gerard V. Haigh, Nicholas Hobbs, Richard A. Hogan, Bill L.
Kell, E. H. Porter, Jr., Victor C. Raimy, Nathaniel J. Raskin, Esselyn
C. Rudikoff, Elizabeth T. Sheerer, Jules Seeman, Arthur J. Shedlin,
William U. Snyder, Donald Snygg, Bernard Steinzor, H. Walter Yoder. From
this list are omitted many whose work is just as significant as that of
those given here, but it includes, I believe, those whose thinking has
most influenced the contents of this book. In addition, the author is
deeply indebted to Elaine Dorfman, Nicholas Hobbs, and Thomas Gordon for
their contributions of individual chapters in areas where he feels less
competent.

In writing this book I have often thought of the idea expressed by a
semanticist, that the true, the genuine, the real meaning of a word can
never be expressed in words, because the real meaning would be the thing
itself. If one wishes to give such a real meaning he should put his hand
over his mouth and *point*. This is what I should most like to do. I
would willingly throw away all the words of this manuscript if I could,
somehow, effectively *point* to the experience which is therapy. It is a
process, a thing-in-itself, an experience, a relationship, a dynamic. It
is not what this book says about it, nor what another book says about
it, any more than a flower is the botanist's description of it or the
poet's ecstasy over it. If this book serves as a large signpost pointing
to an experience which is open to our senses of hearing and sight and to
our capacity for emotional experience, and if it captures the interest
of some and causes them to explore more deeply this thing-in-itself, it
will have accomplished its purpose. If, on the other hand, this book
adds to the already staggering pile of words about words, if its readers
get from it the notion that truth is words and that the printed page is
all, then it will have sadly failed to achieve its purpose. And if it
suffers that final degradation of becoming "classroom knowledge" ---
where the dead words of an author are dissected and poured into the
minds of passive students, so that live individuals carry about the dead
and dissected portions of what were once living thoughts and
experiences, without even the awareness that they were once living ---
then better by far that the book had never been written. Therapy is of
the essence of life, and is to be so understood. It is only the sad
inadequacy of man's capacity for communication that makes it necessary
to run the risk of trying to capture that living experience in words.

If then the purpose of this book is not simply to put dead words on
paper, what is its purpose? What is it intended to convey? What is this
book about? Let me try to give an answer which may, to some degree,
convey the living experience that this book is intended to be.

This book is about the suffering and the hope, the anxiety and the
satisfaction, with which each therapist's counseling room is filled. It
is about the uniqueness of the relationship each therapist forms with
each client, and equally about the common elements which we discover in
all these relationships. This book is about the highly personal
experiences of each one of us. It is about a client in my office who
sits there by the corner of the desk, struggling to be himself, yet
deathly afraid of being himself --- striving to see his experience as it
is, wanting to *be* that experience, and yet deeply fearful of the
prospect. The book is about me, as I sit there with that client, facing
him, participating in that struggle as deeply and sensitively as I am
able. It is about me as I try to perceive his experience, and the
meaning and the feeling and the taste and the flavor that it has for
him. It is about me as I bemoan my very human fallibility in
understanding that client, and the occasional failures to see life as it
appears to him, failures which fall like heavy objects across the
intricate, delicate web of growth which is taking place. It is about me
as I rejoice at the privilege of being a midwife to a new personality
--- as I stand by with awe at the emergence of a self, a person, as I
see a birth process in which I have had an important and facilitating
part. It is about both the client and me as we regard with wonder the
potent and orderly forces which are evident in this whole experience,
forces which seem deeply rooted in the universe as a whole. The book is,
I believe, about life, as life vividly reveals itself in the therapeutic
process --- with its blind power and its tremendous capacity for
destruction, but with its overbalancing thrust toward growth, if the
opportunity for growth is provided.

But the book is also about my colleagues and me as we undertake the
beginnings of scientific analysis of this living, emotional experience.
It is about our conflicts in this respect --- our strong feeling that
the therapeutic process is rich in shadings, complexities, and
subtleties, and our equally strong feeling that the scientific finding,
the generalization, is cold, lifeless, and lacking in the fullness of
the experience. But the book also expresses, I trust, our growing
conviction that though science can never make therapists, it can help
therapy; that though the scientific finding is cold and abstract, it may
assist us in releasing forces that are warm, personal, and complex; and
that though science is slow and fumbling, it represents the best road we
know to the truth, even in so delicately intricate an area as that of
human relationships.

Again the book is about these others and me as we go about our daily
tasks and find ourselves compellingly influenced by the therapeutic
experience of which we have been a part. It is about each of us as we
try to teach, to lead groups, to consult with industry, to serve as
administrators and supervisors, and find that we can no longer function
as we formerly did. It is about each of us as we try to face up to the
internal revolution which therapy has meant for us: the fact that we can
never teach a class, chair a committee, or raise a family without having
our behavior profoundly influenced by a deep and moving experience which
has elements of commonality for all of us.

Finally, the book is about all of us as we puzzle over this experience
--- as we endeavor to put it into some intellectual framework, as we try
to build concepts which will contain it. It is most deeply about us as
we realize the inadequacy of these words, forms, constructs, to contain
all the elements of the vivid process which we have experienced with our
clients. It is about our feeling of tentativeness as we advance these
theories in the hope that they may strike here and there a spark which
will aid in illuminating and advancing this whole area of endeavor.

Perhaps all this conveys some notion of what the book is about. But this
prefatory note cannot be concluded without a word of thanks to the
people who have really written it, who have, in the most genuine sense
been its major contributors --- the clients with whom we have worked. To
these men, women, and children who have brought themselves and their
struggles to us, who have with such natural grace permitted us to learn
from them, who have laid bare for us the forces which operate in the
mind and spirit of man --- to them goes our deepest gratitude. We hope
that the book will be worthy of them.

C[ARL]{.sc} R. R[OGERS]{.sc}

*Chicago*, *Illinois*

[]{#008_toc.html}

<div>

[]{#008_toc.html_toc}

</div>

#### C[ONTENTS]{.sc} {.fronthead}

:::: block1
<div>

[[PART]{.sc} [I]{style="font-size: 120%"} *A Current View of
Client-Centered Therapy*](#009_p1.html_p1)

[1. The Developing Character of Client-Centered
Therapy](#010_c1.html_c1)

[2. The Attitude and Orientation of the Counselor](#011_c2.html_c2)

[3. The Therapeutic Relationship as Experienced by the
Client](#012_c3.html_c3)

[4. The Process of Therapy](#013_c4.html_c4)

[5. Three Questions Raised by Other Viewpoints: Transference, Diagnosis,
Applicability](#014_c5.html_c5)

[[PART]{.sc} [II]{style="font-size: 120%"} *The Application of
Client-Centered Therapy*](#015_p2.html_p2)

[6. Play Therapy](#016_c6.html_c6)

*by Elaine Dorfman*, *M.A.*

[7. Group-Centered Psychotherapy](#017_c7.html_c7)

*by Nicholas Hobbs*, *Ph.D.*

[8. Group-Centered Leadership and Administration](#018_c8.html_c8)

*by Thomas Gordon*, *Ph.D.*

[9. Student-Centered Teaching](#019_c9.html_c9)

[10. The Training of Counselors and Therapists](#020_c10.html_c10)

[[PART]{.sc} [III]{style="font-size: 120%"} *Implications for
Psychological Theory*](#021_p3.html_p3)

[11. A Theory of Personality and Behavior](#022_c11.html_c11)

[REFERENCES](#023_ref.html_ref)

[INDEX](#024_index.html_index)

</div>
::::

[]{#009_p1.html}

<div>

[]{#009_p1.html_p1}

</div>

# [PART]{.sc} [I]{.partnum} *A Current View of Client-Centered Therapy* {.parttitle}

[]{#010_c1.html}

<div>

[]{#010_c1.html_c1}

</div>

# []{#010_c1.html_lpn_3}*Chapter* [1]{.chapnum} • The Developing Character of Client-Centered Therapy {.chaptitle}

![](html/docimages/line.jpg){height="10" width="100%"}

Professional interest in psychotherapy is in all likelihood the most
rapidly growing area in the social sciences today. In clinical
psychology and psychiatry the development of this field is proceeding
with astonishing rapidity. Nearly twenty per cent of the members of the
American Psychological Association give psychotherapy --- or adjustment
counseling or some similar term --- as one of their major interests,
whereas a decade ago this would have been true of only a handful.
Programs of training in psychotherapy have been growing in number,
scope, intensity, and we hope in effectiveness. Furthermore, we find
educators who are eager to keep pace with the developments in therapy in
order that they may adapt and use these findings through the work of
school and college counselors and adjustment teachers. Ministers and
religious workers are seeking training in counseling and psychotherapy
in order to improve their skill in dealing with the personal problems of
their parishioners. Sociologists and social psychologists have a keen
interest in this field because of its possible adaptations to work with
groups, and because it helps to shed light on the dynamics of groups as
well as individuals. And last, but far from least, the average citizen
is supporting the rapid extension of psychotherapeutic work to his
children in school, to veterans by the thousands, to industrial workers,
and []{#010_c1.html_lpn_4}to the students, parents, and other adults who
wish psychological help.

In short, there appears to be a strong trend toward studying,
developing, and utilizing those procedures which offer help in bringing
to modern man an increased peace of mind. It would seem that as our
culture has grown less homogeneous, it gives much less support to the
individual. He cannot simply rest comfortably upon the ways and
traditions of his society, but finds many of the basic issues and
conflicts of life centering in himself. Each man must resolve within
himself issues for which his society previously took full
responsibility. Because psychotherapy holds promise of resolving some of
those conflicts, of giving the individual a more satisfying adjustment
within himself as well as a more satisfying relationship to others and
to his environment, it has become a significant focal point of both
public and professional interest.

In this broadening stream of interest in and development of
psychotherapeutic procedures, nondirective or client-centered counseling
has had its growth. It is a product of its time and its cultural
setting. Its development would not have been possible without the
appreciation of man's unconscious strivings and complex emotional nature
which was Freud's contribution to our culture. Though it has developed
along somewhat different paths than the psychotherapeutic views of
Horney or Sullivan, or Alexander and French, yet there are many threads
of interconnection with these modern formulations of psychoanalytic
thinking. Especially are roots of client-centered therapy to be found in
the therapy of Rank, and the Philadelphia group which has integrated his
views into their own. Even more deeply, client-centered therapy has been
influenced by psychology as it has developed in the United States, with
its genius for operational definitions, for objective measurement, its
insistence upon scientific method and the necessity of submitting all
hypotheses to a process of objective verification or disproof. As will
be evident to readers of this volume, it has also been indebted to
Gestalt psychology, with its emphasis upon the wholeness and
interrelatedness of the cluster of phenomena which we think of as the
individual. Some of its roots []{#010_c1.html_lpn_5}stretch out even
further into the educational and social and political philosophy which
is at the heart of our American culture. So much is this true that
paragraphs from a book such as Lilienthal's small volume on the TVA, if
lifted from context, could equally well be regarded as an exposition of
the basic orientation of the client-centered
therapist.^[1](#025_endnotes.html_e1){#010_c1.html_f1}^ Thus
client-centered therapy has drawn, both consciously and unconsciously,
upon many of the current streams of clinical, scientific, and
philosophical thought which are present in our culture.

Yet it would perhaps be a mistake to view client-centered therapy as
solely a product of cultural influences. Most deeply of all, it is built
upon close, intimate, and specific observations of man's behavior in a
relationship, observations which it is believed transcend to some degree
the limitations or influences of a given culture. Likewise in its
research attempts to discover the significant laws which operate in a
therapeutic relationship it is endeavoring to cut through to
invariances, to behavioral sequences which are true not only for a day
or a culture, but which describe the way in which man's nature operates.

Though ten years ago neither "nondirective" nor "client-centered" had
been coined as a label, interest in the point of view described by these
terms has grown very rapidly. It has captured the attention of
psychologists and others to a point where one cannot pick up a
psychological journal or book without a considerable likelihood of
finding some reference to it, whether negative or positive. There
appears to be a need for some means of informing those who wish to know
more fully of the development of this particular therapeutic approach to
individual problems and human relationships. It is hoped that this book
will to some extent satisfy such a need.

*A Changing Approach*

There has been a tendency to regard the nondirective or client-centered
approach as something static --- a method, a technique, a
[]{#010_c1.html_lpn_6}rather rigid system. Nothing could be further from
the truth. The group of professional workers in this field are working
with dynamic concepts which they are constantly revising in the light of
continuing clinical experience and in the light of research findings.
The picture is one of fluid changes in a general approach to problems of
human relationships, rather than a situation in which some relatively
rigid technique is more or less mechanically applied.

In this flux of changing thinking there are some central hypotheses
which give unity to the search for further knowledge. Perhaps one of the
reasons for the high stimulus-value which client-centered therapy seems
to have had is the fact that these hypotheses are testable, are capable
of proof or disproof, and hence offer a hope of progress, rather than
the stagnation of dogma. There appears to be more than a likelihood that
psychotherapy is, by the efforts of various workers, being brought out
of the realm of the mystical, the intuitive, the personal, the
undefinable, into the full light of objective scrutiny. This inevitably
means that change rather than rigidity becomes the characteristic of
such a field. To those at work in client-centered therapy, this
characteristic of development, of reformulation, of change, appears to
be one of its most outstanding qualities.

*The Aim of This Volume*

The purpose, then, of this volume is to present, not a fixed and rigid
point of view, but a current cross section of a developing field of
therapy, with its practices and theory, indicating the changes and
trends which are evident, making comparisons with earlier formulations
and, to a limited extent, with viewpoints held by other therapeutic
orientations.

In doing this, one aim will be to bring together the clinical thinking
of those who are engaged in client-centered therapy. The hypotheses they
have come to hold, the formulations they are making of the therapeutic
process, will be presented. Illustrative material from electrically
recorded interviews will, it is hoped, indicate something of the ways in
which issues are dealt []{#010_c1.html_lpn_7}with in the counseling
hour. Statements from
clients^[2](#025_endnotes.html_e2){#010_c1.html_f2}^ themselves about
their experience will also be given, since such material has had
definite influence on the thinking of the therapists. Thus it is hoped
that the reader may gain an overview of the current thinking and
practice of clinical therapists working from a similar orientation, with
a wide range of individuals.

A further aim will be to review the research evidence which has been and
is being gathered in respect to the hypotheses which are explicit or
implicit in therapy. Little by little, objective evidence is
accumulating in regard to various phases of therapy, and the results of
this research endeavor will be analyzed and considered.

A newer aspect of this volume, and one which has been less covered in
journal publications, is the presentation of a theory of therapy and a
theory of personality. Both in the attempt to explain the process of
therapy, and in the desire to understand the basic personality structure
which makes therapy possible, theory is being continually formulated and
revised, and the ramifications of this thinking will be presented, with
stress upon its fluid quality.

Finally the effort will be made to pose some of the unanswered problems
and perplexities which cry out for deeper understanding, for more
adequate research, for new and more penetrating theory.

*The Presentation of a "School of Thought"*

It is clearly the purpose of these pages to present only one point of
view, and to leave to others the development of other
[]{#010_c1.html_lpn_8}orientations. There will be no apology for this
"one-sided" presentation. It appears to the writer that the somewhat
critical attitude which is usually held toward anything which may be
defined as a "school of thought" grows out of a lack of appreciation of
the way in which science grows. In a new field of investigation which is
being opened up to objective study, the school of thought is a necessary
cultural step. Where objective evidence is limited, it is almost
inevitable that markedly different hypotheses will be developed and
offered to explain the phenomena which are observed. The corollaries and
ramifications of any such hypothesis constitute a system which is a
school of thought. These schools of thought will not be abolished by
wishful thinking. The person who attempts to reconcile them by
compromise will find himself left with a superficial eclecticism which
does not increase objectivity, and which leads nowhere. Truth is not
arrived at by concessions from differing schools of thought. The
eventual disappearance of such rival formulations comes about either
when the issues are settled by research evidence, or when both types of
hypotheses are absorbed into some new and more penetrating view which
sees the problems from a new vantage point, thus redefining the issues
in a way not hitherto perceived.

There are disadvantages connected with the presentation of a single
orientation, or a school of thought, but these are minimized if we are
aware of them. There is the possibility that hypotheses will be
presented as dogmas. There is the possibility that emotional involvement
with a point of view may make the perception of contradictory evidence
unlikely. Over against these disadvantages is the advantage of
facilitation of progress. If we have a consistent system of hypotheses
which we are testing, and if we are able to discard, revise, reformulate
these hypotheses in the light of objective experience, we have a
valuable tool, a "task force," by which new areas of knowledge may be
opened up.

Consequently, one will find in this volume the development of a point of
view, the statement of a related system of hypotheses, and no attempt to
present other systems, since this is much better done by those who
advocate them. Such objective research []{#010_c1.html_lpn_9}evidence as
has been collected with relation to these hypotheses will be presented,
as well as clinical evidence in its most objective form, the recorded
interview. Efforts have been made to eliminate emotional bias, but the
reader may well discover points at which this aim has not been achieved,
and at which he will therefore have to make his own corrections. If a
systematic body of hypotheses, with implications reaching into every
type of interpersonal and group relationship, serves to stimulate more
research, more critical evaluation of clinical practice, more adequate
theoretical thinking, then this presentation will have served its
purpose.

R[ECENT]{.sc} D[EVELOPMENTS IN]{.sc} C[LIENT]{.sc}-C[ENTERED]{.sc}
T[HERAPY]{.sc}

It was in 1940 that the writer made a first attempt at crystallizing in
written form^[3](#025_endnotes.html_e3){#010_c1.html_f3}^ some of the
principles and techniques of a newer approach to therapy, an approach
which soon became labeled "nondirective counseling." Two years later
*Counseling and Psychotherapy: Newer Concepts in Practice*
(166)^[4](#025_endnotes.html_e4){#010_c1.html_f4}^ was published. In
that volume a presentation was given of the practice of those principles
in the counseling field which were aimed at releasing the integrative
capacities of the individual. It may be of service to the reader to
review briefly some of the developments which have taken place in the
decade or so since these ideas were first formulated. It will then be
more evident why another presentation seems necessary at this time.

*Developments in Range of Practice*

At the time when *Counseling and Psychotherapy* was being written, a
part of the work at the Psychological Clinic of Ohio State University
was being carried on from the nondirective point of view, based on
earlier work done by the staff of the Rochester Guidance Center under
the author's direction. In addition, a []{#010_c1.html_lpn_10}very
similar point of view had been independently developed and put into
practice by Roethlisberger, Dickson, and their colleagues in the Western
Electric plant. A somewhat similar therapeutic approach, stemming
directly from the work of Otto Rank (work which had also influenced the
present writer) was being practiced by social workers, psychiatrists,
and psychologists who received their training in the Philadelphia area
under such workers as Jessie Taft, Frederick Allen, and Virginia
Robinson. This was about the extent of any practical experience with a
therapeutic orientation which relied primarily upon the capacity of the
client.

At the present time several hundred counselors in colleges and in the
Veterans Administration, psychologists in counseling centers, in mental
hygiene clinics, and in psychiatric hospitals, as well as workers in
schools, industry, social work, and religious work, are attempting, with
varying degrees of training and skill, to test out for themselves the
hypotheses of a nondirective approach. These widely spread professional
workers have had experience with students, with other adults, with
maladjusted children and their parents. They have dealt, in appropriate
settings, with such specialized areas as marital problems, vocational
problems, speech difficulties, psychosomatic conditions such as
allergies, a wide range of neurotic problems, and to some extent with
psychoses. There has not as yet been adequate time for research
investigations of the process and outcomes in each of these groups, but
the experience of these workers has been feeding back into the central
stream of thinking about client-centered therapy.

During the decade, too, therapists experienced in this orientation have
watched with interest as their cases grew longer and longer, involving
an increasing degree of personality reorganization. Thus, where ten
years ago a nondirective counselor found that his cases tended to
average five or six interviews each, and rarely to run longer than
fifteen, this same counselor finds that his cases now average fifteen to
twenty interviews, and that fifty or one hundred interviews are not
unusual. Has this development occurred because of the greater skill of
the counselor in building an understanding relationship? Or because of
the fact that as a []{#010_c1.html_lpn_11}counselor becomes well
established more seriously maladjusted individuals turn to him? Or
because some subtle change has taken place in viewpoint or technique?
Whatever the cause, the thinking about client-centered therapy has been
enriched by this range of intensity of experience.

Thus we may say that at the present time the clinical thinking in regard
to client-centered therapy has been fed by the wide range of problems
and the great variation of intensity of its work. From the mildly
misbehaving child to the psychotic adult, and from the person who gains
some help in two interviews to the individual who undergoes an extensive
reorganization of personality in one hundred and fifty interviews ---
these mark some of the greatly extended boundaries of the present
practice of client-centered therapy.

*Development of a Variety of Activities*

Ten years ago nondirective counseling was thought of as a process of
verbal interchange, useful primarily in the counseling of adolescents
and adults. Since that time the basic principles of such counseling have
been thought to be applicable to a variety of activities, some of them
very diverse indeed from psychotherapy itself. Some of these will be
discussed at length later in this book, but a brief mention may be made
here of certain directions in which client-centered therapy has been
found to have implications.

Play therapy with problem children has been found effective when carried
on from a client-centered point of view. Axline's book (14) gives a
thorough and persuasive picture of the work which has been done in this
field, where verbal interchange is often at a minimum or even lacking
entirely.

Group therapy, both with children and adults, has been carried on
effectively, operating on the same fundamental hypotheses as in
individual counseling. Work has been done with maladjusted adults, with
students who have problems, with students prior to examinations, with
veterans, with interracial groups, with children, and with parents.

Out of the experience with group therapy came the desire to conduct
college classes in a client-centered --- or more
[]{#010_c1.html_lpn_12}appropriately, a student-centered --- fashion.
Some of our most significant learnings have come from the resounding
failures and the glowing successes of our attempts to adapt the
principles and procedures of successful psychotherapy to education.

These are the major fields in which the implications of client-centered
therapy have been worked out. But equally significant contributions to
our thinking have come from other attempts, less fully explored.
Interesting experiences in using a client-centered approach in group
situations of friction and poor morale have convinced us that this
approach has a contribution to make to industrial, military, and other
groups. Especially meaningful have been our attempts to apply
client-centered principles to our own organizational administration,
committee work, and problems of personnel selection and evaluation.
There is still much to be learned in these fields, but enough progress
has been made to be stimulating indeed.

Thus in a decade, we have seen client-centered therapy develop from a
method of counseling to an approach to human relationships. We have come
to feel that it has as much application to the problem of employing a
new staff member, or the decision as to who is to get a raise, as it
does to the client who is troubled by an inability to handle his social
relationships.

*Progress in Research*

Nowhere are the advances in the field of psychotherapy indicated in such
striking fashion as in the steady progress of research. Ten years ago
there were no more than a handful of objective research studies which
were in any way related to psychotherapy. During the past decade more
than forty such studies have been published by workers with a
client-centered orientation. In addition, there are a number of studies
as yet unpublished, and more than a score of increasingly significant
research projects under way. It is difficult to exaggerate the general
effect that this work has had. Though the researches have had definite
and often serious limitations, each one has used instruments of a known
and stated degree of reliability, and the methods have been described in
sufficient detail so that any competent worker can
[]{#010_c1.html_lpn_13}verify the findings, either by restudying the
same case material or by using the same method on new material. Two of
the early studies have already been confirmed by being repeated on
current cases. All of this development has meant that it is becoming
increasingly difficult to speak in purely dogmatic terms about any
aspect of psychotherapy. Little by little it has become apparent that we
can investigate objectively almost any phase of psychotherapy about
which we wish to know, from the subtlest aspect of the counselor-client
relationship to measures of behavioral change.

The basis for this development has been first and foremost the
accumulation of complete electrically recorded case material.
*Counseling and Psychotherapy* carried the first complete verbatim
therapeutic case presented in published form. This was followed by the
*Casebook of Non-directive Counseling* (199), in which five cases were
given, with most of the interviews verbatim. At the present time the
Counseling Center of the University of Chicago has nearly thirty cases
completely recorded and transcribed, which are available to qualified
research workers. It is hoped that at least fifty more will be added,
for which the sound recording as well as the typescript will be
available. This will give a mass of basic material for research
investigation such as never has existed before. Successes and failures,
cases carried by expert counselors and by those in training, short cases
and long cases --- all will be exemplified.

In the accumulation of recorded case material and in the prosecution of
research in therapy, client-centered therapists have thus far carried
the major burden. Yet there is encouraging evidence that workers with
other views are now recording their cases, and it is only a question of
time before research studies will be made by Freudian analysts,
hypnotherapists, Adlerians, and eclectic therapists. It is these
research studies of the future which will help to remove the labels and
unify the field of psychotherapy.

*The Development of Training Programs*

When *Counseling and Psychotherapy* was being published in
[]{#010_c1.html_lpn_14}1942, the publishers wished to know what market
there would be for the book in university courses in adjustment
counseling. The answer at that time seemed to be that there were no more
than two or three such courses throughout the country. Due to a variety
of recent influences upon the psychological profession, this picture has
changed to an astonishing degree. More than a score of universities now
offer some type of graduate training in psychotherapy, with varying
degrees of emphasis being given to a client-centered point of view. In
several of these universities a full-fledged sequence of training
courses is available, with the practice of therapy under supervision a
central portion of the experience. Such training in therapy is not
simply a sporadic development. It is given formal approval by the
American Psychological Association, which has stated that the training
of the clinical psychologist is not complete without training in
psychotherapy, and that to be given the highest level of American
Psychological Association approval the graduate program in clinical
psychology must include a well-planned program in this field (160). Much
the same type of development has taken place in psychiatry, and in place
of the sporadic on-the-job training in therapy which was once so
prevalent, increasingly integrated programs are being built in various
centers.

Against this general background of growth of training programs in
therapy, there has been a constant evolution of training in
client-centered therapy. So much have our methods and procedures changed
that a later chapter in this volume is set aside to consider them. The
principle of reliance upon the individual has found its implementation
in the training program as well as in therapy itself. Our concern has
shifted from counselor technique to counselor attitude and philosophy,
with a new recognition of the importance of technique considered from a
more sophisticated level. There has been the experience of slow and
gradual training of Ph.D. candidates in clinical psychology. There has
also been the extremely valuable experience of supplying, during 1946
and 1947, a short and intensive training experience for more than a
hundred mature and qualified psychologists who were to become Personal
Counselors for the Veterans Administration. In
[]{#010_c1.html_lpn_15}attempting to train for therapy, we have
inevitably learned much about therapy.

*The Development of Theory*

As we have carried on the increasingly ramified work which is suggested
in the preceding sections, the necessity for unifying theories has
become strongly felt, and the formulation of theory has become one of
the major preoccupations of the client-centered therapist. We have
proven in our own experience Kurt Lewin's oft-quoted statement that
"Nothing is so practical as a good theory." Much of our theory
construction has revolved about the construct of the self, as will be
evident in later pages. Attempts have been made, however, to phrase
explanations in terms of learning theory, and in terms of the dynamics
of an interpersonal relationship. In this whole process, theories have
been discarded or greatly modified, as well as developed. Several years
ago the theory of therapy seemed best phrased in terms of the
development of verbalized insight. This type of formulation seems to us
today to fall far short of explaining all the phenomena of therapy, and
hence occupies a relatively small place in our current thinking.

Having viewed from inside the group the persistent and rapid flowering
of theory, it has been a matter of interest to observe how frequently
client-centered therapy has been criticized because "it proceeds from no
coherent theory of personality." This criticism seems like such an odd
distortion of the place of theory in scientific advance that a brief
counter-statement seems in order.

There is no need for theory until and unless there are phenomena to
explain. Limiting our consideration to psychotherapy, there is no reason
for a theory of therapy until there are observable changes which call
for explanation. Then a unifying theory is of help in explaining what
has happened, and in providing testable hypotheses about future
experiences. Thus, in the field of therapy the first requisite is a
skill which produces an effective result. Through observation of the
process and the result a parsimonious theory may be developed which is
projected into new experiences in order to be tested as to its adequacy.
The theory is revised []{#010_c1.html_lpn_16}and modified with the
purpose --- never fully attained --- of providing a complete conceptual
framework which can adequately contain all the observed phenomena. It is
the phenomena which are basic, not the theory.

Elton Mayo gives a succinct statement of this point of view, first in
his own words and then in the words of one of his colleagues. A
quotation may give the gist of his thinking.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Speaking historically, I think it can be asserted that a science has
generally come into being as a product of well-developed technical skill
in a given area of activity. Someone, some skilled worker, has in a
reflective moment attempted to make explicit the assumptions that are
implicit in the skill itself. This makes the beginning of
logico-experimental method. The assumptions once made explicit can be
logically developed; the development leads to experimental changes of
practice and so to the beginning of a science. The point to be remarked
is that scientific abstractions are not drawn from thin air or
uncontrolled reflection: they are from the beginning rooted deeply in a
pre-existent skill.

At this point, a comment taken from the lectures of a colleague, the
late Lawrence Henderson, eminent in chemistry, seems apposite: ". . . In
the complex business of living, as in medicine, both theory and practice
are necessary conditions of understanding, and the method of Hippocrates
is the only method that has ever succeeded widely and generally. The
first element of that method is hard, persistent, intelligent,
responsible, unremitting labor in the sick room, not in the library: the
complete adaptation of the doctor to his task, an adaptation that is far
from being merely intellectual. The second element of that method is
accurate observation of things and events, selection, guided by judgment
born of familiarity and experience, of the salient and recurrent
phenomena, and their classification and methodical exploitation. The
third element of that method is the judicious construction of a theory
--- not a philosophical theory, nor a grand effort of the imagination,
nor a quasi-religious dogma, but a modest pedestrian affair . . . a
useful walking stick to help on the way. . . . All this may be summed up
in a word: The physician must have, first, intimate, habitual, intuitive
familiarity with things; secondly, systematic knowledge of things; and
thirdly, an effective way of thinking about things." (130, pp. 17--18)
:::
::::
:::::

[]{#010_c1.html_lpn_17}Operating from this point of view it has seemed
to us that it is entirely natural that the fragile flower of theory has
grown out of the solid soil of experience. A reversal of this natural
order would seem unsound. Hence there will be found in this volume a
ramified group of theoretical formulations which have a certain unity
and which, it is felt, provide a fruitful way of thinking about
therapeutic change, and also a conceptualization of the individual
personality which is based on observation of personality change. But it
cannot be too strongly stressed that the theories are changing and
fluid. It is the phenomena that they endeavor to explain which remain as
stubborn facts. Perhaps tomorrow or next year we shall perceive a much
more comprehensive theoretical formulation which can contain a much
wider range of these basic facts. If so, then this new theory will
provide more and better hypotheses for testing, and more stimulation to
a progressive search for truth.

*An Overview*

This introductory chapter has endeavored to provide something of an
external overview of the factors which have influenced the course of
thinking in client-centered therapy during the past eight or ten years.
But what conclusions have counselors reached? How have they modified
their approach as they have dealt with more varied and more serious
cases? What do they regard as essential in being of help to the person
with problems? What fresh understandings of the process of therapy have
been achieved as they have listened, singly and in groups, to the
recordings of significant interviews? How do they explain their
failures, and what changes have entered into their thinking as they have
tried to reduce the likelihood of failure? What have been the
achievements and disappointments involved in the laborious research
analysis of this mine of recorded material? What theories have these
therapists come to hold, and why do they regard them as reasonable? Do
they have any formulations which help to give meaning to the confused
worlds of professional and personal experience? The pages which follow
represent one individual's interpretation of the current answers which
are being given to []{#010_c1.html_lpn_18}these questions --- answers
which will be at least partially out of date by the time they are
written down.

SUGGESTED READINGS

::: sl
For a consideration of the historical development of client-centered
therapy, see Raskin (158). The development of the writer's own thinking
in regard to therapy may be observed by considering the sequence of
writings, *Clinical Treatment of the Problem Child* (164), "The Clinical
Psychologist's Approach to Personality Problems" (165), *Counseling and
Psychotherapy* (166), "Significant Aspects of Client-Centered Therapy"
(170), and the present volume. For formulations of client-centered
therapy made by others, see Combs (42) and Snyder (194).

For a consideration of client-centered therapy in relation to other
therapeutic orientations, Snyder (198) gives an exhaustive review of
current literature. A brief paper on this subject, written from a
client-centered point of view, is "Current Trends in Psychotherapy"
(167).

A description of the practical functioning of a group of client-centered
therapists in practice is given by Grummon and Gordon (75).

References regarding the implications of client-centered therapy for the
fields of play therapy, group therapy, education, and personality theory
will be found in the chapters devoted to those topics.
:::

[]{#011_c2.html}

<div>

[]{#011_c2.html_c2}

</div>

# []{#011_c2.html_lpn_19}*Chapter* [2]{.chapnum} • The Attitude and Orientation of the Counselor^[5](#025_endnotes.html_e5){#011_c2.html_f5}^ {.chaptitle}

![](html/docimages/line.jpg){height="10" width="100%"}

In any psychotherapy, the therapist himself is a highly important part
of the human equation. What he does, the attitude he holds, his basic
concept of his role, all influence therapy to a marked degree. Differing
therapeutic orientations hold differing views on these points. At the
very outset of our discussion, therefore, it seems appropriate to
consider the therapist as he functions in client-centered counseling.

*A General Consideration*

It is common to find client-centered therapy spoken of as simply a
method or a technique to be used by the counselor. No doubt this
connotation is due in part to the fact that earlier presentations tended
to overstress technique. It may more accurately be said that the
counselor who is effective in client-centered therapy holds a coherent
and developing set of attitudes deeply imbedded in his personal
organization, a system of attitudes which is implemented by techniques
and methods consistent with it. In our experience, the counselor who
tries to use a "method" is doomed to be unsuccessful unless this method
is genuinely in line with his own attitudes. On the other hand, the
counselor whose attitudes are []{#011_c2.html_lpn_20}of the type which
facilitate therapy may be only partially successful, because his
attitudes are inadequately implemented by appropriate methods and
techniques.

Let us, then, consider the attitudes which appear to facilitate
client-centered therapy. Must the counselor possess them in order to be
a counselor? May these attitudes be achieved through training?

*The Philosophical Orientation of the Counselor*

Some workers are reluctant to consider the relationship of philosophical
views to scientific professional work. Yet in therapeutic endeavor this
relation appears to be one of the significant and scientifically
observable facts that cannot be ignored. Our experience in training
counselors would indicate that the basic operational philosophy of the
individual (which may or may not resemble his verbalized philosophy)
determines, to a considerable extent, the time it will take him to
become a skillful counselor.

The primary point of importance here is the attitude held by the
counselor toward the worth and the significance of the individual. How
do we look upon others? Do we see each person as having worth and
dignity in his own right? If we do hold this point of view at the verbal
level, to what extent is it operationally evident at the behavioral
level? Do we tend to treat individuals as persons of worth, or do we
subtly devaluate them by our attitudes and behavior? Is our philosophy
one in which respect for the individual is uppermost? Do we respect his
capacity and his right to self-direction, or do we basically believe
that his life would be best guided by us? To what extent do we have a
need and a desire to dominate others? Are we willing for the individual
to select and choose his own values, or are our actions guided by the
conviction (usually unspoken) that he would be happiest if he permitted
us to select for him his values and standards and goals?

The answers to questions of this sort appear to be important as basic
determiners of the therapist's approach. It has been our experience that
individuals who are already striving toward an
[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_21}orientation which stresses the significance and
worth of each person can learn rather readily the client-centered
techniques which implement this point of view. This is often true of
workers in education who have a strongly child-centered philosophy of
education. It is not infrequently true of religious workers who have a
humanistic approach. Among psychologists and psychiatrists there are
those with similar views, but there are also many whose concept of the
individual is that of an object to be dissected, diagnosed, manipulated.
Such professional workers may find it very difficult to learn or to
practice a client-centered form of therapy. In any event, the
differences in this respect seem to determine the readiness or
unreadiness of professional workers to learn and achieve a
client-centered approach.

Even this statement of the situation gives a static impression which is
inaccurate. One's operational philosophy, one's set of goals, is not a
fixed and unchanging thing, but a fluid and developing organization.
Perhaps it would be more accurate to say that the person whose
philosophical orientation has tended to move in the direction of greater
respect for the individual finds in the client-centered approach a
challenge to and an implementation of his views. He finds that here is a
point of view in human relationships which tends to carry him further
philosophically than he has heretofore ventured, and to provide the
possibility of an operational technique for putting into effect this
respect for persons, to the full degree that it exists in his own
attitudes. The therapist who endeavors to utilize this approach soon
learns that the development of the way of looking upon people which
underlies this therapy is a continuing process, closely related to the
therapist's own struggle for personal growth and integration. He can be
only as "nondirective" as he has achieved respect for others in his own
personality organization.

Perhaps it would summarize the point being made to say that, by use of
client-centered techniques, a person can implement his respect for
others only so far as that respect is an integral part of his
personality make-up; consequently the person whose operational
philosophy has already moved in the direction of *feeling* a deep
respect for the significance and worth of each person is more
[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_22}readily able to assimilate client-centered
techniques which help him to express this
feeling.^[6](#025_endnotes.html_e6){#011_c2.html_f6}^

*The Therapist's Hypothesis*

The question may well arise, in view of the preceding section, as to
whether client-centered therapy is then simply a cult, or a speculative
philosophy, in which a certain type of faith or belief achieves certain
results, and where lack of such faith prevents these results from
occurring. Is this, in other words, simply an illusion which produces
further illusions?

Such a question deserves careful consideration. That observations to
date would seem to point to an answer in the negative is perhaps most
strikingly indicated in the experience of various counselors whose
initial philosophic orientation has been rather distant from that
described as favorable to an optimum use of client-centered techniques.
The experience of such individuals in training has seemed to follow
something of a pattern. Initially there is relatively little trust in
the capacity of the client to achieve insight or constructive
self-direction, although the counselor is intrigued intellectually by
the possibilities of nondirective therapy and learns something of the
techniques. He starts counseling clients with a very limited hypothesis
of respect, which might be stated somewhat in these terms: "I will
hypothesize that the individual has a limited capacity to understand and
reorganize himself to some degree in certain types of situations. In
many situations and with many clients, I, as a more objective outsider,
can better know the situation and better guide it." It is on this
limited and divided basis that he begins his work. He is often not very
successful. But as he observes his counseling results, he finds that
[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_23}clients accept and make constructive use of
responsibility when he is genuinely willing for them to do so. He is
often surprised at their effectiveness in handling this responsibility.
Against the less vital quality of the experience in those situations
where he, the counselor, has endeavored to interpret, evaluate, and
guide, he cannot help but contrast the quality of the experience in
those situations where the client has learned significantly for himself.
Thus he finds that the first portion of his hypothesis tends to be
proved beyond his expectations, while the second portion proves
disappointing. So, little by little, the hypothesis upon which he bases
all his therapeutic work shifts to an increasingly client-centered
foundation.

This type of process, which we have seen repeated many times, would
appear to mean simply this: that the attitudinal orientation, the
philosophy of human relationships which seems to be a necessary basis
for client-centered counseling, is not something which must be taken "on
faith," or achieved all at once. It is a point of view which may be
adopted tentatively and partially, and put to the test. It is actually
an hypothesis in human relationships, and will always remain so. Even
for the experienced counselor, who has observed in many many cases the
evidence which supports the hypothesis, it is still true that, for the
new client who comes in the door, the possibility of self-understanding
and intelligent self-direction is still --- for this client --- a
completely unproved hypothesis.

It would seem justifiable to say that the faith or belief in the
capacity of the individual to deal with his psychological situation and
with himself is of the same order as any scientific hypothesis. It is a
positive basis for action, but it is open to proof or disproof. If, for
example, we had faith that every person could determine for himself
whether he had incipient cancer, our experience with this hypothesis
would soon cause us to revise it sharply. On the other hand, if we have
faith that warm maternal affection is likely to produce desirable
personal reactions and personality growth in the infant, we are likely
to find this hypothesis supported, at least tentatively, by our
experience.

Hence, to put in more summarized or definitive form the
[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_24}attitudinal orientation which appears to be
optimal for the client-centered counselor, we may say that the counselor
chooses to act consistently upon the hypothesis that the individual has
a sufficient capacity to deal constructively with all those aspects of
his life which can potentially come into conscious awareness. This means
the creation of an interpersonal situation in which material may come
into the client's awareness, and a meaningful demonstration of the
counselor's acceptance of the client as a person who is competent to
direct himself. The counselor acts upon this hypothesis in a specific
and operational fashion, being always alert to note those experiences
(clinical or research) which contradict this hypothesis as well as those
which support it.

Though he is alert to all the evidence, this does not mean that he keeps
shifting his basic hypothesis in counseling situations. If the counselor
feels, in the middle of an interview, that this client may not have the
capacity for reorganizing himself, and shifts to the hypothesis that the
counselor must bear a considerable responsibility for this
reorganization, he confuses the client, and defeats himself. He has shut
himself off from proving or disproving either hypothesis. This confused
eclecticism, which has been prevalent in psychotherapy, has blocked
scientific progress in the field. Actually it is only by acting
*consistently* upon a well-selected hypothesis that its elements of
truth and untruth can become known.

*The Specific Implementation of the Counselor's Attitude*

Thus far the discussion has been a general one, considering the
counselor's basic attitude toward others. How does this become
implemented in the therapeutic situation? Is it enough that the
counselor hold the basic hypothesis we have described, and that this
attitudinal orientation will then inevitably move therapy forward? Most
assuredly this is not enough. It is as though a physician of the last
century had come to believe that bacteria cause infection. Holding this
attitude would probably make it inevitable that he should obtain
somewhat better results than his colleagues who looked upon this
hypothesis with contempt. But only as he implemented his attitude to the
fullest extent with []{#011_c2.html_lpn_25}appropriate techniques would
he fully experience the significance of his hypothesis. Only as he made
sterile the area around the incision, the instruments, the sheets, the
bandages, his hands, the hands of his assistants --- only then would he
experience the full meaning and full effectiveness of this tentative
hypothesis which he had come to hold in a general way.

So it is with the counselor. As he finds new and more subtle ways of
implementing his client-centered hypothesis, new meanings are poured
into it by experience, and its depth is seen to be greater than was
first supposed. As one counselor-in-training put it, "I hold about the
same views I did a year ago, but they have so much more meaning for me."

It is possible that one of the most significant general contributions of
the client-centered approach has been its insistence upon investigating
the detailed implementation of the counselor's point of view in the
interview itself. Many different therapists from a number of differing
orientations state their general purposes in somewhat similar terms.
Only by a careful study of the recorded interview --- preferably with
both the sound recording and transcribed typescript available --- is it
possible to determine what purpose or purposes are actually being
implemented in the interview. "Am I actually doing what I think I am
doing? Am I operationally carrying out the purposes which I verbalize?"
These are questions which every counselor must continually be asking
himself. There is ample evidence from our research analyses that a
subjective judgment by the counselor himself regarding these questions
is not enough. Only an objective analysis of words, voice and inflection
can adequately determine the real purpose the therapist is pursuing. As
we know from many experiences in therapists' reactions to their recorded
material, and from a research analysis by Blocksma (33), the counselor
is not infrequently astonished to discover the aims he is actually
carrying out in the interview.

Note that in discussing this point the term "technique" has been
discarded in favor of "implementation." The client is apt to be quick to
discern when the counselor is using a "method," an intellectually chosen
tool which he has selected for a purpose. []{#011_c2.html_lpn_26}On the
other hand, the counselor is always implementing, both in conscious and
nonconscious ways, the attitudes which he holds toward the client. These
attitudes can be inferred and discovered from their operational
implementation. Thus a counselor who basically does not hold the
hypothesis that the person has significant capacity for integrating
himself may think that he has used nondirective "methods" and
"techniques," and proved to his own satisfaction that these techniques
are unsuccessful. A recording of such material tends to show, however,
that in the tone of voice, in the handling of the unexpected, in the
peripheral activities of the interview, he implements his own
hypothesis, not the client-centered hypothesis as he thinks.

It would seem that there can be no substitute for the continual checking
back and forth between purpose or hypothesis and technique or
implementation. This analytical self-checking the counselor may
verbalize somewhat as follows: As I develop more clearly and more fully
the attitude and hypothesis upon which I intend to deal with the client,
I must check the implementation of that hypothesis in the interview
material. But as I study my specific behaviors in the interview I detect
implied purposes of which I had not been aware, I discover areas in
which it had not occurred to me to apply the hypothesis, I realize that
what was for me an implementation of one attitude is perceived by the
client as the implementation of another. Thus the thorough study of my
behavior sharpens, alters, and modifies the attitude and hypothesis with
which I enter the next interview. A sound approach to the implementation
of an hypothesis is a continuing and a reciprocal experience.

*Some Formulations of the Counselor's Role*

As we look back upon the development of the client-centered point of
view, we find a steady progression of attempts to formulate what is
involved in implementing the basic hypothesis in the interview
situation. Some of these are formulations by individual counselors,
whereas others have been more generally held. Let us take a few of these
concepts and examine them, moving through them to the formulation which
appears to be most commonly held at the present time by therapists of
this orientation.

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_27}In the first place, some counselors --- usually
those with little specific training --- have supposed that the
counselor's role in carrying on nondirective counseling was merely to be
passive and to adopt a laissez faire policy. Such a counselor has some
willingness for the client to be self-directing. He is more inclined to
listen than to guide. He tries to avoid imposing his own evaluations
upon the client. He finds that a number of his clients gain help for
themselves. He feels that his faith in the client's capacity is best
exhibited by a passivity which involves a minimum of activity and of
emotional reaction on his part. He tries "to stay out of the client's
way."

This misconception of the approach has led to considerable failure in
counseling --- and for good reasons. In the first place, the passivity
and seeming lack of interest or involvement is experienced by the client
as a rejection, since indifference is in no real way the same as
acceptance. In the second place, a laissez faire attitude does not in
any way indicate to the client that he is regarded as a person of worth.
Hence the counselor who plays a merely passive role, a listening role,
may be of assistance to some clients who are desperately in need of
emotional catharsis, but by and large his results will be minimal, and
many clients will leave both disappointed in their failure to receive
help and disgusted with the counselor for having nothing to offer.

Another formulation of the counselor's role is that it is his task to
clarify and objectify the client's feelings. The present author, in a
paper given in 1940 stated, "As material is given by the client, it is
the therapist's function to help him recognize and clarify the emotions
which he feels" (169, p. 162). This has been a useful concept, and it is
partially descriptive of what occurs. It is, however, too
intellectualistic, and if taken too literally, may focus the process in
the counselor. It can mean that only the counselor knows what the
feelings are, and if it acquires this meaning it becomes a subtle lack
of respect for the client.

Unfortunately, our experience in conveying subtleties of emotionalized
attitude is so limited, and the symbols of expression so unsatisfactory,
that it is hard accurately to convey to a reader the delicate attitudes
involved in the therapist's work. We have learned, to our dismay, that
even the transcripts of our recorded []{#011_c2.html_lpn_28}cases may
give to the reader a totally erroneous notion of the sort of
relationship which existed. By persistently reading the counselor
responses with the wrong inflection, it is possible to distort the whole
picture of the relationship. Such readers when they first hear even a
small segment of the recording itself, often say, "Oh, this is entirely
different from the way I understood it."

Perhaps the subtle difference between a declarative and an empathic
attitude on the part of the counselor may be conveyed by an example.
Here is a client statement: "I feel as though my mother is always
watching me and criticizing what I do. It gets me all stirred up inside.
I try not to let that happen, but you know, there are times when I feel
her eagle eye on me that I just boil inwardly."

A response on the counselor's part might be: "You resent her criticism."
This response may be given empathically, with the tone of voice such as
would be used if it were worded, "If I understand you correctly, you
feel pretty resentful toward her criticism. Is that right?" If this is
the attitude and tone which is used, it would probably be experienced by
the client as aiding him in further expression. Yet we have learned,
from the fumblings of counselors-in-training, that "You resent her
criticism" may be given with the same attitude and tone with which one
might announce "You have the measles," or even with the attitude and
tone which would accompany the words "You are sitting on my hat." If the
reader will repeat the counselor response in some of these varying
inflections, he may realize that when stated empathically and
understandingly, the likely attitudinal response on the part of the
client is, "Yes, that is the way I feel, and I perceive that a little
more clearly now that you have put it in somewhat different terms." But
when the counselor statement is declarative, it becomes an evaluation, a
judgment made by the counselor, who is now telling the client what his
feelings are. The process is centered in the counselor, and the feeling
of the client would tend to be, "I am being diagnosed."

In order to avoid this latter type of handling, we have tended to give
up the description of the counselor's role as being that of clarifying
the client's attitudes.

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_29}At the present stage of thinking in
client-centered therapy, there is another attempt to describe what
occurs in the most satisfactory therapeutic relationships, another
attempt to describe the way in which the basic hypothesis is
implemented. This formulation would state that it is the counselor's
function to assume, in so far as he is able, the internal frame of
reference of the client, to perceive the world as the client sees it, to
perceive the client himself as he is seen by himself, to lay aside all
perceptions from the external frame of reference while doing so, and to
communicate something of this empathic understanding to the client.

Raskin, in an unpublished article (159), has given a vivid description
of this version of the counselor's function.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
There is \[another\] level of nondirective counselor response which to
the writer represents *the* nondirective attitude. In a sense, it is a
goal rather than one which is actually practised by counselors. But, in
the experience of some, it is a highly attainable goal, which . . .
changes the nature of the counseling process in a radical way. At this
level, counselor participation becomes an active experiencing with the
client of the feelings to which he gives expression, the counselor makes
a maximum effort to get under the skin of the person with whom he is
communicating, he tries to get *within* and to live the attitudes
expressed instead of observing them, to catch every nuance of their
changing nature; in a word, to absorb himself completely in the
attitudes of the other. And in struggling to do this, there is simply no
room for any other type of counselor activity or attitude; if he is
attempting to live the attitudes of the other, he cannot be diagnosing
them, he cannot be thinking of making the process go faster. Because he
is another, and not the client, the understanding is not spontaneous but
must be acquired, and this through the most intense, continuous and
active attention to the feelings of the other, to the exclusion of any
other type of attention.
:::
::::
:::::

Even this description may be rather easily misunderstood since the
experiencing with the client, the living of his attitudes, is not in
terms of emotional identification on the counselor's part, but rather an
empathic identification, where the counselor is perceiving the hates and
hopes and fears of the client through immersion in an empathic process,
but without himself, as counselor, experiencing those hates and hopes
and fears.

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_30}Another attempt to phrase this point of view has
been made by the author. It is as follows:

::::: block
:::: sl
::: top
As time has gone by we have come to put increasing stress upon the
"client-centeredness" of the relationship, because it is more effective
the more completely the counselor concentrates upon trying to understand
the client *as the client seems to himself*. As I look back upon some of
our earlier published cases --- the case of Herbert Bryan in my book, or
Snyder's case of Mr. M. --- I realize that we have gradually dropped the
vestiges of subtle directiveness which are all too evident in those
cases. We have come to recognize that if we can provide understanding of
the way the client seems to himself at this moment, he can do the rest.
The therapist must lay aside his preoccupation with diagnosis and his
diagnostic shrewdness, must discard his tendency to make professional
evaluations, must cease his endeavors to formulate an accurate
prognosis, must give up the temptation subtly to guide the individual,
and must concentrate on one purpose only; that of providing deep
understanding and acceptance of the attitudes consciously held at this
moment by the client as he explores step by step into the dangerous
areas which he has been denying to consciousness.

I trust it is evident from this description that this type of
relationship can exist only if the counselor is deeply and genuinely
able to adopt these attitudes. Client-centered counseling, if it is to
be effective, cannot be a trick or a tool. It is not a subtle way of
guiding the client while pretending to let him guide himself. To be
effective, it must be genuine. It is this sensitive and sincere
"client-centeredness" in the therapeutic relationship that I regard as
the third characteristic of nondirective therapy which sets it
distinctively apart from other approaches. (170, pp. 420--421)
:::
::::
:::::

*Research Evidence of a Trend*

A research study recently completed would tend to confirm some of the
preceding statements (180). Counselor techniques used by nondirective
counselors in cases handled in 1947--48 have been analyzed in terms of
the categories used by Snyder in analyzing cases handled in 1940--42
(196). This gives an opportunity for direct comparison of counselor
methods, and hence the opportunity to note any observable trend. It is
found that at the []{#011_c2.html_lpn_31}earlier date the counselors
used a number of responses involving questioning, interpreting,
reassuring, encouraging, suggesting. Such responses, though always
forming a small proportion of the total, would seem to indicate on the
counselor's part a limited confidence in the capacity of the client to
understand and cope with his difficulties. The counselor still felt it
necessary at times to take the lead, to explain the client to himself,
to be supportive, and to point out what to the counselor were desirable
courses of action. As clinical experience in therapy has continued,
there has been a sharp decrease in all these forms of response. In the
later cases, the proportion of responses of any of these types is
negligible. Eighty-five per cent of the counselor responses are attempts
to convey an understanding of the client's attitudes and feelings. It
appears quite clear that nondirective counselors, on the basis of
continuing therapeutic experience, have come to depend more fully upon
the basic hypothesis of the approach than was true a half dozen years
ago. It seems that more and more the nondirective therapist has judged
understanding and acceptance to be effective, and has come to
concentrate his whole effort upon achieving a deep understanding of the
private world of the client.

Since the completion of the second study mentioned, it seems to be true
that there has been more reaching out for a wider variety of therapist
techniques. For the most part, however, this has meant a searching for
new ways of making it clear that the therapist is thinking and feeling
and exploring with the client. It is natural to expect that with
increasing security in clinical experience there will be an increasing
variety of attempts to communicate the fact that the therapist is
endeavoring to achieve the internal frame of reference of the client,
and is trying to see with him as deeply as the client sees, or even more
deeply than the latter is able at the moment to perceive. In utilizing
this increasing variety of responses, it is quite possible that this
current formulation of the counselor's role will be discarded, just as
previous formulations have been. So far, however, this seems not to be
the case.

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_32}*The Difficulty of Perceiving Through the
Client's Eyes*

This struggle to achieve the client's internal frame of reference, to
gain the center of his own perceptual field and see with him as
perceiver, is rather closely analogous to some of the Gestalt phenomena.
Just as, by active concentration, one can suddenly see the diagram in
the psychology text as representing a descending rather than an
ascending stairway or can perceive two faces instead of a candlestick,
so by active effort the counselor can put himself into the client's
frame of reference. But just as in the case of the visual perception,
the figure occasionally changes, so the counselor may at times find
himself standing outside the client's frame of reference and looking as
an external perceiver at the client. This almost invariably happens, for
example, during a long pause or silence on the client's part. The
counselor may gain a few clues which permit an accurate empathy, but to
some extent he is forced to view the client from an observer's point of
view, and can only actively assume the client's perceptual field when
some type of expression again begins.

The reader can attempt this role in various ways, can give himself
practice in assuming the internal frame of reference of another while
overhearing a conversation on the streetcar, or while listening to a
friend describe an emotional experience. Perhaps something of what is
involved can even be conveyed on paper.

To try to give you, the reader, a somewhat more real and vivid
experience of what is involved in the attitudinal set which we are
discussing, it is suggested that you put yourself in the place of the
counselor, and consider the following material, which is taken from
complete counselor notes of the beginning of an interview with a man in
his thirties. When the material has been completed, sit back and
consider the sorts of attitudes and thoughts which were in your mind as
you read.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
*Client:* I don't feel very normal, but I want to feel that way. . . . I
thought I'd have something to talk about --- then it all goes around in
circles. I was trying to think what I was going to say. Then coming here
it doesn't work out. . . . I tell you, it seemed that it would be much
easier before I came. I tell you, I just can't make a decision; I don't
know what I want. I've tried to reason this thing
[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_33}out logically --- tried to figure out which
things are important to me. I thought that there are maybe two things a
man might do; he might get married and raise a family. But if he was
just a bachelor, just making a living --- that isn't very good. I find
myself and my thoughts getting back to the days when I was a kid and I
cry very easily. The dam would break through. I've been in the Army four
and a half years. I had no problems then, no hopes, no wishes. My only
thought was to get out when peace would come. My problems, now that I'm
out, are as ever. I tell you, they go back to a long time before I was
in the Army. . . . I love children. When I was in the Philippines --- I
tell you, when I was young I swore I'd never forget my unhappy childhood
--- so when I saw these children in the Philippines, I treated them very
nicely. I used to give them ice cream cones and movies. It was just a
period --- I'd reverted back --- and that awakened some emotions in me I
thought I had long buried. (*A pause. He seems very near tears*.)
:::
::::
:::::

As this material was read, such thoughts as the following would
represent an external frame of reference in you, the "counselor."

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
I wonder if I should help him get started talking.

Is this inability to get under way a type of dependence?

Why this indecisiveness? What could be its cause?

What is meant by this focus on marriage and family?

He seems to be a bachelor. I hadn't known that.

The crying, the "dam," sound as though there must be a great deal of
repression.

He's a veteran. Could he have been a psychiatric case?

I feel sorry for anybody who spent four and one-half years in the
service.

Some time he will probably need to dig into those early unhappy
experiences.

What is this interest in children? Identification? Vague homosexuality?
:::
::::
:::::

Note that these are all attitudes which are basically sympathetic. There
is nothing "wrong" with them. They are even attempts to "understand," in
the sense of "understanding about," rather than "understanding with."
The locus of perceiving is, however, outside of the client.

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_34}By way of comparison, the thoughts which might go
through your mind if you were quite successful in assuming the client's
internal frame of reference would tend to be of this order:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
You're wanting to struggle toward normality, aren't you?

It's really hard for you to get started.

Decision-making just seems impossible to you.

You want marriage, but it doesn't seem to you to be much of a
possibility.

You feel yourself brimming over with childish feelings.

To you the Army represented stagnation.

Being very nice to children has somehow had meaning for you.

But it was --- and is --- a disturbing experience for you.
:::
::::
:::::

As pointed out before, if these thoughts are couched in a final and
declarative form, then they shift over into becoming an evaluation from
the counselor's perceptual vantage point. But to the extent that they
are attempts to understand, tentative in formulation, they represent the
attitude we are trying to describe as "adopting the client's frame of
reference."

*The Rationale of the Counselor's Role*

The question may arise in the minds of many, why adopt this peculiar
type of relationship? In what way does it implement the hypothesis from
which we started? What is the rationale of this approach?

In order to have a clear basis for considering these questions, let us
attempt to put first in formal terms and then in paraphrase a statement
of the counselor's purpose when he functions in this way. In
psychological terms, it is the counselor's aim to perceive as
sensitively and accurately as possible all of the perceptual field as it
is being experienced by the client, with the same figure and ground
relationships, to the full degree that the client is willing to
communicate that perceptual field; and having thus perceived this
internal frame of reference of the other as completely as possible, to
indicate to the client the extent to which he is seeing through the
client's eyes.

Suppose that we attempt a description somewhat more in
[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_35}terms of the counselor's attitudes. The counselor
says in effect, "To be of assistance to you I will put aside myself ---
the self of ordinary interaction --- and enter into your world of
perception as completely as I am able. I will become, in a sense,
another self for you --- an alter ego of your own attitudes and feelings
--- a safe opportunity for you to discern yourself more clearly, to
experience yourself more truly and deeply, to choose more
significantly."

*The Counselor's Role as Implementation of an Hypothesis*

In what ways does this approach implement the central hypothesis of our
work? It would be grossly misleading to say that our present method or
formulation of the method grew out of the theory. The truth is that, as
in most similar problems, one begins to find on the basis of clinical
intuition that certain attitudes are effective, others are not. One
tries to relate these experiences to basic theory, and thus they become
clarified and point in the direction of further extension. It is thus
that we have arrived at the present formulation, and this formulation
will undoubtedly change as we solve some of the perplexities stated at
the end of this chapter.

For the present, it would appear that for me, as counselor, to focus my
whole attention and effort upon understanding and perceiving as the
client perceives and understands, is a striking operational
demonstration of the belief I have in the worth and the significance of
this individual client. Clearly the most important value which I hold
is, as indicated by my attitudes and my verbal behavior, the client
himself. Also the fact that I permit the outcome to rest upon this deep
understanding is probably the most vital operational evidence which
could be given that I have confidence in the potentiality of the
individual for constructive change and development in the direction of a
more full and satisfying life. As a seriously disturbed client wrestles
with his utter inability to make any choice, or another client struggles
with his strong urges to commit suicide, the fact that I enter with deep
understanding into the desperate feelings that exist but do not attempt
to take over responsibility, is a most meaningful
[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_36}expression of basic confidence in the
forward-moving tendencies in the human organism.

We might say then, that for many therapists functioning from a
client-centered orientation, the sincere aim of getting "within" the
attitudes of the client, of entering the client's internal frame of
reference, is the most complete implementation which has thus far been
formulated, for the central hypothesis of respect for and reliance upon
the capacity of the person.

*The Client's Experience of the Counselor*

The question would still remain, what psychological purpose is served by
attempting to duplicate, as it were, the perceptual field of the client
in the mind of the counselor? Here it may assist us to see how the
experience seems to the client. From the many statements written or
given by clients after therapy one realizes that the counselor's
behavior is experienced in a variety of ways, but there appear to be
certain threads which are frequently evident.

A first excerpt may be taken from a statement by a professionally
sophisticated client who had recently completed a series of five
interviews. She had known and worked with the counselor in another
professional capacity.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Initially we discussed the possibility of these interviews interfering
with our relationship as co-workers. I very definitely feel that the
interviews in no way altered this relationship. We were two entirely
different people in our two relationships and the one interfered not at
all with the other. I believe that this was due in large measure to the
fact that we almost unconsciously, because of the nature of therapy,
accepted each other and ourselves as being different people in our two
relationships with each other. As workers we were two individuals
working together on various everyday problems. In counseling we were
mostly *me* working together on my situation as I found it. Perhaps the
last sentence explains to a considerable extent how I felt in the
counseling relationship. I was hardly aware during the interviews of
just who it was sitting in the office with me. I was the one that
mattered, my thinking was the thing that was important and my counselor
was almost a part of me working on my problem as I wanted to work on it.

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_37}My most prominent impression of the interviews is
difficult to put into words. As I talked I would almost feel that I was
"out of this world." Sometimes I would hardly know just what I was
saying. This one may easily do if one talks for long periods to oneself
--- becoming so involved in verbalization that one is not keenly aware
of just what one is saying and very definitely not aware of what the
words actually mean to one. It was the role of the counselor to bring me
to myself, to help me by being with me in everything I said, to realize
what I was saying. I was never conscious that he was reflecting or
re-stating things I had said but only that he was right along with me in
my thinking because he would say to me things which I had stated but he
would clear them for me, bring me back to earth, help me to see what I
had said and what it meant to me.

Several times, by his use of analogies, he would help me to see the
significance of what I had said. Sometimes he would say something like
"I wonder if this is what you mean, ---------" or "---------, is that
what you mean?" and I was conscious of a desire to get what I had said
clarified, not so much to him as a person but through him, clarified to
myself.

During the first two interviews he interrupted pauses. I know that this
was because I had mentioned before counseling started that pauses made
me self-conscious. However, I remember wishing at the time that he had
let me think without interruption. The one interview that stands out
most clearly in my mind was one in which there were many long pauses
during which time I was working very hard. I was beginning to get some
insight into my situation and, although nothing was said, I had the
feeling by the counselor's attitude, that he was working right along
with me. He was not restless, he did not take out a cigarette, he simply
sat, I believe looking hard right at me, while I stared at the floor and
worked in my mind. It was an attitude of complete cooperation and gave
me the feeling that he was with me in what I was thinking. I see now the
great value of pauses, if the counselor's attitude is one of
cooperation, not one of simply waiting for time to pass.

I have seen nondirective techniques used before --- not on myself ---
where the techniques were the dominating factors, and I have not always
been pleased with the results. As a result of my own experience as a
client I am convinced that the counselor's complete acceptance, his
expression of the attitude of wanting to help the client, and his warmth
of spirit as expressed by his wholehearted giving of
[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_38}himself to the client in complete cooperation
with everything the client does or says are basic in this type of
therapy.
:::
::::
:::::

Notice how the significant theme of the relationship is, "we were mostly
*me* working together on my situation as I found it." The two selves
have somehow become one while remaining two --- "we were *me*." This
idea is repeated several times; "my counselor was almost a part of me
working on my problem as I wanted to work on it"; "it was the role of
the counselor to bring me to myself"; "I was conscious of a desire to
get what I had said clarified, not so much to him as a person but
through him, clarified to myself." The impression is that the client was
in one sense "talking to herself," and yet that this was a very
different process when she talked to herself through the medium of
another person.

Another example may be taken from a report written by a young woman who
had been, at the time she came in for counseling, rather deeply
disturbed. She had some slight knowledge about client-centered therapy
before coming for help. The report from which this material is taken was
written spontaneously and voluntarily some six weeks after the
conclusion of the counseling interviews.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
In the earlier interviews, I kept saying such things as "I am not acting
like myself." "I never acted this way before." What I meant was that
this withdrawn, untidy, and apathetic person was not myself. I was
trying to say that this was a different person from the one who had
previously functioned with what seemed to be satisfactory adjustment. It
seemed to me that must be true. Then I began to realize that I was the
same person, seriously withdrawn, etc., now, as I had been before. That
did not happen until after I had talked out my self-rejection, shame,
despair, and doubt, in the accepting situation of the interview. The
counselor was not startled or shocked. I was telling him all these
things about myself which did not fit into my picture of a graduate
student, a teacher, a sound person. He responded with complete
acceptance and warm interest without heavy emotional overtones. Here was
a sane, intelligent person wholeheartedly accepting this behavior that
seemed so shameful to me. I can remember an organic feeling of
relaxation. I did not have to keep up the struggle to cover up and hide
this shameful person.

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_39}Retrospectively, it seems to me that what I felt
as "warm acceptance with (out) emotional overtones" was what I needed to
work through my difficulties. One of the things I was struggling with
was the character of my relationships with others. I was enmeshed in
dependence, yet fighting against it. My mother, knowing that something
was wrong, had come to see me. Her love was so powerful, I could feel it
enveloping me. Her suffering was so real that I could touch it. But I
could not talk to her. Even when, out of her insight, she said, while
she was talking of my relationships with the family, "You can be as
dependent or as independent as you like," I still resisted her. The
counselor's impersonality with interest allowed me to talk out my
feelings. The clarification in the interview situation presented the
attitude to me as a *ding an sich* which I could look at, manipulate,
and put in place. In organizing my attitudes, I was beginning to
organize me.

I can remember sitting in my room and thinking about the components of
infantile needs and dependence in maladjustment, and strongly resisting
the idea that there was any element of dependence in my behavior. I
think I reacted the way I might have if a therapist in an interview
situation had interpreted this for me before I was ready for it. I kept
thinking about it, though, and began to see that, although I kept
insistently telling myself I wanted to be independent, there was plenty
of evidence that I was also wanting protection and dependence. This was
a shameful situation, I felt. I did not come to accept this indecision
in myself until I had guiltily brought it up in the interviews, had it
accepted, and then stated it again myself with less anxiety. In this
situation, the counselor's reflection of feeling with complete
acceptance let me see the attitude with some objectivity. In this case,
the insight was structured rationally before I went to the interview.
However, it was not internalized until the attitude had been reflected
back to me free of shame and guilt, a thing in itself which I could look
at and accept. My restatements and further exposition of feeling after
the counselor's reflection were my own acceptance and internalization of
the insight.
:::
::::
:::::

How shall we understand the counselor's function as it was experienced
by this client? Perhaps it would be accurate to say that the attitudes
which she could express but could not accept as a part of herself became
acceptable when an alternate self, the counselor, looked upon them with
acceptance and without []{#011_c2.html_lpn_40}emotion. It was only when
another self looked upon her behavior without shame or emotion that she
could look upon it in the same way. These attitudes were then
objectified for her, and subject to control and organization. The
insights which were almost achieved in her room became genuine insights
when another had accepted them, and stated them, with the result that
she could again state them with less anxiety. Here we have a different,
yet basically similar, experiencing of the counselor's role.

It is natural that the more articulate and sophisticated clients would
give more complete accounts of the meaning the experience had for them.
The same elements appear to be present, however, in the simple and
relatively inarticulate accounts of thoroughly naïve clients. A veteran
with little education thus writes of his counseling experience.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Much to my surprise, Mr. L. the counselor let me talk myself dry so to
speak. I thought he might question me on various points of my problem.
He did to a small extent but not as much as I had anticipated. In
conferring with Mr. L., I listened to myself while talking. And in doing
so I would say that I solved my own problems.
:::
::::
:::::

Here again it seems fair to suppose that the counselor's attitude and
responses made it easier for the client to "listen to myself."

*A Theory of the Therapist's Role*

With this type of material in mind, a possible psychological explanation
of the effectiveness of the counselor's role might be developed in these
terms. Psychotherapy deals primarily with the organization and the
functioning of the self. There are many elements of experience which the
self cannot face, cannot clearly perceive, because to face them or admit
them would be inconsistent with and threatening to the current
organization of self. In client-centered therapy the client finds in the
counselor a genuine alter ego in an operational and technical sense ---
a self which has temporarily divested itself (so far as possible) of its
own selfhood, except for the one quality of endeavoring to understand.
In the therapeutic experience, to see one's own attitudes, confusions,
ambivalences, feelings, and perceptions accurately
[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_41}expressed by another, but stripped of their
complications of emotion, is to see oneself objectively, and paves the
way for acceptance into the self of all these elements which are now
more clearly perceived. Reorganization of the self and more integrated
functioning of the self are thus furthered.

Let us try to restate this idea in another way. In the emotional warmth
of the relationship with the therapist, the client begins to experience
a feeling of safety as he finds that whatever attitude he expresses is
understood in almost the same way that he perceives it, and is accepted.
He then is able to explore, for example, a vague feeling of guiltiness
which he has experienced. In this safe relationship he can perceive for
the first time the hostile meaning and purpose of certain aspects of his
behavior, and can understand why he has felt guilty about it, and why it
has been necessary to deny to awareness the meaning of this behavior.
But this clearer perception is in itself disrupting and
anxiety-creating, not therapeutic. It is evidence to the client that
there are disturbing inconsistencies in himself, that he is not what he
thinks he is. But as he voices his new perceptions and their attendant
anxieties, he finds that this acceptant alter ego, the therapist, this
other person who is only partly another person, perceives these
experiences too, but with a new quality. The therapist perceives the
client's self as the client has known it, and accepts it; he perceives
the contradictory aspects which have been denied to awareness and
accepts those too as being a part of the client; and both of these
acceptances have in them the same warmth and respect. Thus it is that
the client, experiencing in another an acceptance of both these aspects
of himself, can take toward himself the same attitude. He finds that he
too can accept himself even with the additions and alterations that are
necessitated by these new perceptions of himself as hostile. He can
experience himself as a person having hostile as well as other types of
feelings, and can experience himself in this way without guilt. He has
been enabled to do this (if our theory is correct) because another
person has been able to adopt his frame of reference, to perceive with
him, yet to perceive with acceptance and respect.

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_42}*A By-product*

As a somewhat parenthetical comment, it may be mentioned that the
concept of the therapist's attitude and function which has been outlined
above tends to reduce greatly a problem which has been experienced by
other therapeutic orientations. This is the problem of how to prevent
the therapist's own maladjustments, emotional biases, and blind spots
from interfering with the therapeutic process in the client. There can
be no doubt that every therapist, even when he has resolved many of his
own difficulties in a therapeutic relationship, still has troubling
conflicts, tendencies to project, or unrealistic attitudes on certain
matters. How to keep these warped attitudes from blocking therapy or
harming the client has been an important topic in therapeutic thinking.

In client-centered therapy this problem has been minimized considerably
by the very nature of the therapist's function. Warped or unrealistic
attitudes are most likely to be evident wherever evaluations are made.
When evaluation of the client or of his expressions is almost
nonexistent, counselor bias has little opportunity to become evident, or
indeed to exist. In any therapy in which the counselor is asking himself
"How do I see this? How do I understand this material?" the door is wide
open for the personal needs or conflicts of the therapist to distort
these evaluations. But where the counselor's central question is "How
does the client see this?" and where he is continually checking his own
understanding of the client's perception by putting forth tentative
statements of it, distortion based upon the counselor's conflicts is
much less apt to enter, and much more apt to be corrected by the client
if it does enter.

This principle may be worded in a slightly different fashion. In a
therapeutic relationship in which the therapist enters, as a person,
making interpretations, evaluating the significance of the material, and
the like, his distortions enter with him. In a therapeutic relationship
where the therapist endeavors to keep himself out, as a separate person,
and where his whole endeavor is to understand the other so completely
that he becomes almost an alter ego of the client, personal distortions
and maladjustments are much less likely to occur.

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_43}Though this point of view has been stated here
only in general terms, it has been borne out in the experience of
clinical training. Some individuals may be so maladjusted that they
cannot perceive experience from the other person's point of view.
Clients feel that such counselors-in-training are not understanding and
tend to give up the interviews. And such counselors tend to leave the
field. With most counselors-in-training, the effectiveness of achieving
the internal frame of reference of another is sufficient reward to make
this the focus of their effort. Personal problems of their own, which
might at first have made it difficult accurately to understand or
reflect or accept attitudes, tend consequently to play a smaller and
smaller role. The deep emotional entanglement of client and therapist
which can occur where the therapist sees his role as an evaluative one
is almost absent from our experience.

*The Difficulty of Understanding the Perceptions of Another*

Thus far the explanation of the counselor's function, as it is presently
formulated, has been given without particular reference to the special
difficulties involved. It has been our experience that there are many
clinical situations in which it is genuinely difficult even for the
experienced counselor to achieve the internal frame of reference of the
client. An excerpt from client material may exemplify some of the
problems we have met.

The excerpt is from a third interview with a young man from a
psychiatric ward. The material is electrically recorded, and presented
as given by the client. If one places himself in the role of the
counselor, he may find it something of a problem to perceive with this
client.

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
A good many thoughts, a good many feelings are just right there in my
head. I just put them --- I just --- I don't know --- I feel them inside
of my head, they stop it up. (*Short pause*.) I just get down to the
things in my head and thought and mind, but it's just that I --- it's
just that I --- I don't know --- what goes on, goes on different, goes
on in the inside, that's what stops me up --- stops me up quickly. It's
just that I, I'm wondering with real force whether I could go out there
back to that ward of mine and really live, really be somebody. I just
--- It shot right out of my head. I wondered if I could possibly go
[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_44}back there and do that, really be somebody there.
(*Short pause*.) I just keep on wondering, keep on thinking about it,
and if I ever will be --- just come right straight back to something and
do something and be somebody there. (*Short pause*.) It'd probably just
help me keep on being different, a different man, a different person
back there. Here in this office I generally come out with some
commonsense thoughts, and ideas, something with some real feeling in it,
a real mind, real thought. Yesterday when I came in here I was just
living, and --- I will be today. I'm very sure of it. I can just be ---
I can get away with it just about so much up here, then I --- it's just
too much.^[7](#025_endnotes.html_e7){#011_c2.html_f7}^
:::
::::
:::::

Here the problem faced by the counselor is the fact that much of the
client's expression is confused and expressed in such private symbolism
that it is difficult to enter into his perceptual field and see
experience in his terms. It would seem that the type of empathic
thinking carried on by a counselor who was successfully client-centered
in respect to this material would include thoughts of this type:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
It seems as though feelings and thoughts block you.

It's the inside thoughts, as I understand it, that stop you up.

It's the question, the puzzle, as to whether you could possibly *be*
somebody.

I can understand that that thought leaves you abruptly as well as comes
to you.

You wonder and wonder whether you could be a *person*, back on the ward.

You feel that some of your reactions are real, and sensible.

It seems to you that here in the therapy hour you are actually alive.

That thought is just overpowering --- more than you can face.
:::
::::
:::::

If the counselor maintains this consistently client-centered attitude,
and if he occasionally conveys to the client something of his
understanding, then he is doing what he can to give the client the
experience of being deeply respected. Here the confused, tentative,
almost incoherent thinking of an individual who knows he has been
evaluated as abnormal is really respected by being deemed well worth
understanding.

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_45}On the other hand the therapist may find thoughts
running through his mind which are of an evaluative nature, judging this
material from his own frame of reference, or of a self-concerned nature,
in which his attention has shifted from the client to himself. Such
thinking might include themes such as the following:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
The thinking here is confused and the expressions inarticulate.

There seem to be feelings of unreality.

Is this a schizophrenic?

Am I understanding his meaning correctly?

Should I encourage his desire to be a self?

Here is a striking example of the conscious self struggling to regain a
sense of control over the organism.

He reacts with some panic to the thought of living and being a person.

What will I respond to this?
:::
::::
:::::

Such thoughts as these will occur to any counselor at times, no matter
how basically client-centered his views may be. Yet it would appear to
be true that whether the theme is evaluative or self-concerned, there is
slightly less of full respect for the other person than in the
thoroughly empathic understandings previously cited. When the counselor
is concerned with himself and what he should do, there is necessarily a
decreased focus upon the respect he feels for the client. When he is
thinking in evaluative terms, whether the evaluation is objectively
accurate or inaccurate, he is to some degree assuming a judgmental frame
of mind, is viewing the person as an object, rather than as a person,
and to that extent respects him less as a person. On the other hand, to
enter deeply with this man into his confused struggle for selfhood is
perhaps the best implementation we now know for indicating the meaning
of our basic hypothesis that the individual represents a process which
is deeply worthy of respect, both as he is and with regard to his
potentialities.

*Some Deep Issues*

The assumption of the therapeutic role which has been described raises
some very basic questions indeed. An example from a therapeutic
interview may pose some of these issues for our
[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_46}consideration. Miss Gil, a young woman who has,
in a number of therapeutic interviews, been quite hopeless about
herself, has spent the major part of an hour discussing her feelings of
inadequacy and lack of personal worth. Part of the time she has been
aimlessly using the finger paints. She has just finished expressing her
feelings of wanting to get away from everyone --- to have nothing to do
with people. After a long pause comes the following.

:::: sl
::: topbot
*S:*^[8](#025_endnotes.html_e8){#011_c2.html_f8}^ I've never said this
before to anyone --- but I've thought for such a long time --- This is a
terrible thing to say, but if I could just --- well (*short*, *bitter
laugh; pause*), if I could just find some glorious cause that I could
give my life for I would be happy. I cannot be the kind of a person I
want to be. I guess maybe I haven't the guts --- or the strength --- to
kill myself --- and if someone else would relieve me of the
responsibility --- or I would be in an accident --- I --- I --- just
don't want to live.

*C:*^[9](#025_endnotes.html_e9){#011_c2.html_f9}^ At the present time
things look so black to you that you can't see much point in living ---

*S:* Yes --- I wish I'd never started this therapy. I was happy when I
was living in my dream world. There I could be the kind of person I
wanted to be --- But now --- There is such a wide, wide gap --- between
my ideal --- and what I am. I wish people hated me. I try to make them
hate me. Because then I could turn away from them and could blame them
--- but no --- It is all in my hands --- Here is my life --- and I
either accept the fact that I am absolutely worthless --- or I fight
whatever it is that holds me in this terrible conflict. And I suppose if
I accepted the fact that I am worthless, then I could go away someplace
--- and get a little room someplace --- get a mechanical job someplace
--- and retreat clear back to the security of my dream world where I
could do things, have clever friends, be a pretty wonderful sort of
person ---

*C:* It's really a tough struggle --- digging into this like you are ---
and at times the shelter of your dream world looks more attractive and
comfortable.

*S:* My dream world or suicide.

*C:* Your dream world or something more permanent than dreams ---

*S:* Yes. (*A long pause. Complete change of voice*.) So I don't see why
I should waste your time --- coming in twice a week --- I'm not worth it
--- What do you think?

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_47}*C:* It's up to you, Gil --- It isn't wasting my
time --- I'd be glad to see you --- whenever you come --- but it's how
you feel about it --- if you don't want to come twice a week --- or if
you do want to come twice a week? --- once a week? --- It's up to you.
(*Long pause*.)

*S:* You're not going to suggest that I come in oftener? You're not
alarmed and think I ought to come in --- every day --- until I get out
of this?

*C:* I believe you are able to make your own decision. I'll see you
whenever you want to come.

*S:* (*Note of awe in her voice*.) I don't believe you are alarmed about
--- I see --- I may be afraid of myself --- but you aren't afraid for me
--- (*She stands up --- a strange look on her face*.)

*C:* You say you may be afraid of yourself --- and are wondering why I
don't seem to be afraid for you?

*S:* (*Another short laugh*.) You have more confidence in me than I
have. (*She cleans up the finger-paint mess and starts out of the
room*.) I'll see you next week --- (*that short laugh*) maybe. (*Her
attitude seemed tense*, *depressed*, *bitter*, *completely beaten. She
walked slowly away*.)
:::
::::

This excerpt raises sharply the question as to how far the therapist is
going to maintain his central hypothesis. Where life, quite literally,
is at stake, what is the best hypothesis upon which to act? Shall his
hypothesis still remain a deep respect for the capacity of the person?
Or shall he change his hypothesis? If so, what are the alternatives? One
would be the hypothesis that "I can be successfully responsible for the
life of another." Still another is the hypothesis, "I can be temporarily
responsible for the life of another without damaging the capacity for
self-determination." Still another is: "The individual cannot be
responsible for himself, nor can I be responsible for him, but it is
possible to find someone who can be responsible for him."

In the particular excerpt cited, are the counselor responses which
indicate an external frame of reference --- "I'd be glad to see you," "I
believe you are able to make your own decision" --- the effective
responses, or are the effective responses those which view from within
the client? Or is it the deep respect, whether indicated from the
external or internal frame of reference, which is the important
ingredient?

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_48}Does the counselor have the right, professionally
or morally, to permit a client seriously to consider psychosis or
suicide as a way out, without making a positive effort to prevent these
choices? Is it a part of our general social responsibility that we may
not tolerate such thinking or such action on the part of another?

These are deep issues, which strike to the very core of therapy. They
are not issues which one person can decide for another. Different
therapeutic orientations have acted upon different hypotheses. All that
one person can do is to describe his own experience and the evidence
which grows out of that experience.

*The Basic Struggle of the Counselor*

It has been my experience that only when the counselor, through one
means or another, has settled within himself the hypothesis upon which
he will act, can he be of maximum aid to the individual. It has also
been my experience that the more deeply he relies upon the strength and
potentiality of the client, the more deeply does he discover that
strength.

It has seemed clear, from our clinical experience as well as our
research, that when the counselor perceives and accepts the client as he
is, when he lays aside all evaluation and enters into the perceptual
frame of reference of the client, he frees the client to explore his
life and experience anew, frees him to perceive in that experience new
meanings and new goals. But is the therapist willing to give the client
full freedom as to outcomes? Is he genuinely willing for the client to
organize and direct his life? Is he willing for him to choose goals that
are social or antisocial, moral or immoral? If not, it seems doubtful
that therapy will be a profound experience for the client. Even more
difficult, is he willing for the client to choose regression rather than
growth or maturity? to choose neuroticism rather than mental health? to
choose to reject help rather than accept it? to choose death rather than
life? To me it appears that only as the therapist is completely willing
that *any* outcome, *any* direction, may be chosen --- only then does he
realize the vital strength of the capacity and potentiality of the
individual for constructive action. []{#011_c2.html_lpn_49}It is as he
is willing for death to be the choice, that life is chosen; for
neuroticism to be the choice, that a healthy normality is chosen. The
more completely he acts upon his central hypothesis, the more convincing
is the evidence that the hypothesis is
correct.^[10](#025_endnotes.html_e10){#011_c2.html_f10}^

*Unsolved Issues*

The preceding paragraphs state the experience of one person, the writer,
in a positive (or, as it will seem to some, an extreme) form. Let us
drop back to considering a minimal statement regarding the attitude of
the counselor, and the effect his attitude has upon the client.

It has been the experience of many, counselors and clients alike, that
when the counselor has adopted in a genuine way the function which he
understands to be characteristic of a client-centered counselor, the
client tends to have a vital and releasing experience which has many
similarities from one client to another. A recognizable phenomenon, one
that can be described, seems to exist. Whether the present description
is an accurate one is another question. Different counselors have used
different descriptive terms, and only time and research can indicate
which description is the closest semantic approximation to the
phenomenon.

Is the crucial element in the counselor's attitude his complete
willingness for the client to express any attitude? Is permissiveness
thus the most significant factor? In counseling this scarcely seems to
be an adequate explanation, yet in play therapy there often appears to
be some basis for this formulation. The therapist may at times be quite
unsuccessful in achieving the child's internal frame of reference, since
the symbolic expression may be so complex or unique that the therapist
is at a loss to understand. Yet therapy moves forward, largely, it would
seem, on the basis of []{#011_c2.html_lpn_50}permissiveness, since
acceptance can hardly be complete unless the counselor is first able to
understand.^[11](#025_endnotes.html_e11){#011_c2.html_f11}^

Another type of formulation would stress the fact that the essential
characteristic of the relationship is the new type of need-satisfaction
achieved by the client in an atmosphere of acceptance. Thus Meister and
Miller describe the experience as "an attempt on the part of the
counselor to offer the client a new type of experience wherein his cycle
of unusual responses may be disrupted since the counselor does not
supply the reinforcement by rejection which other social contacts have
provided. The client's report of his behavior, his actual behavior, and
his need to behave as he does --- all are 'accepted.' Thus in the
counseling relationship itself the client adopts a new mode of response,
a different mode of need-satisfaction." (131, pp. 61--62)

Still another formulation places the emphasis upon the counselor's level
of confidence or level of expectancy in regard to the individual. This
view raises the question: Is it not the counselor's full confidence in
the ability of the person to be self-directing to which the client
responds? Thus in the case of Miss Gil, cited earlier, the counselor
statement, "I believe you are able to make your own decision," would be
regarded as a chance verbalization of the effective counselor attitude
which was crucial for the whole relationship. From this point of view it
is the expectancy of the counselor that "you can be self-directing"
which is the social stimulus to which the client responds.

Still another type of formulation might be that offered by Shaffer, in
which psychotherapy is seen as "a learning process through which a
person acquires an ability to speak to himself in appropriate ways so as
to control his own conduct." (181) []{#011_c2.html_lpn_51}From this
point of view the counselor attitude might be seen simply as providing
an optimal atmosphere for the client to learn to "speak to himself in
appropriate ways."

Yet another description is that the relationship is one which provides
the client with the opportunity of making responsible choices, in an
atmosphere in which it is assumed that he is capable of making decisions
for himself. Thus in any series of counseling interviews the client
makes hundreds of choices --- of what to say, what to believe, what to
withhold, what to do, what to think, what values to place upon his
experiences. The relationship becomes an area for continuing practice in
the making of increasingly mature and responsible choices.

As will be observed, these differing formulations are not in sharp
contrast. They differ in emphasis, but probably all of them (including
the formulation given in this chapter) are imperfect attempts to
describe an experience about which we still have too little research
knowledge.

*An Objective Definition of the Therapeutic Relationship*

It will have been painfully evident that the material of this chapter
has been based upon clinical experience and judgment rather than upon
any scientific or objective basis. Almost no research has been done upon
the complex problems of the subtle client-therapist relationship. A
beginning was made by Miller (132) in a small study based upon eight
interviews --- two psychoanalytic, one "non-nondirective," and five
nondirective. Using transcribed typescripts as a basis for analysis,
judges endeavored to make objective discriminations as to how the
counselor responses were experienced by the client (as separate from the
counselor's intent). The judges were to decide whether the counselor's
statement was experienced as (1) "accepting," defined as respecting or
admitting the validity of the client's position, (2) supporting, (3)
denying, or (4) neutral. By analysis of variance technique it was shown
that the differences between judgments were not great, particularly in
relation to the nondirective interviews. In fact, the categories seemed
more suitable for these interviews than for the others. The basic
finding was that the []{#011_c2.html_lpn_52}nondirective interviews were
largely characterized by a client experience of acceptance, rather than
of neutrality or support. It was also found that in an interview
regarded by the counselor as unsuccessful, there were as many responses
experienced as denying or rejecting as there were in the interviews from
other orientations. The fact that responses may be cast in a
nondirective form does not, in other words, prevent them from being, or
being experienced as, denial or rejection. This study is the first to
make the attempt to measure the relationship from the client's point of
view.

Another study has just been completed which is not only important in
itself, but holds much promise for continuing objective analysis of many
of the subtle aspects of the relationship between the therapist and the
client. It is a coordinated pair of researches by Fiedler (57, 58),
which may be described briefly in the following paragraphs.

Fiedler started from the assumption, held by almost all therapists, that
the relationship is an important element in facilitating therapy.
Consequently, all therapists are endeavoring to create what they regard
as the ideal relationship. If there are in fact, several different types
of therapeutic relationship, each distinctive of a different school of
therapy, then the ideals toward which experienced therapists of these
different schools are working will show relatively little similarity.
If, however, there is but one type of relationship which is actually
therapeutic, then there should be a concordance in the concept of an
ideal relationship as held by experienced therapists. One would in this
case expect more agreement between experienced therapists, regardless of
their theoretical orientation, than between the experienced therapist
and the novice within the same school of thought, since greater
experience should give keener insight into the elements of the
relationship.

To test this somewhat complex series of hypotheses, Fiedler first made a
pilot study using eight therapists, and then a more carefully defined
study in which ten persons were involved. In this main study there were
three therapists who were analytically oriented, three from a
client-centered orientation, one Adlerian, and three laymen. The task of
these individuals was to describe []{#011_c2.html_lpn_53}the ideal
therapeutic relationship. This they did through the use of the "Q"
technique devised by Stephenson (201,
202).^[12](#025_endnotes.html_e12){#011_c2.html_f12}^ Seventy-five
statements were drawn from the literature and from therapists, each
statement descriptive of a possible aspect of the relationship. (To
illustrate, three of the statements were "Therapist is sympathetic with
patient," "Therapist tries to sell himself," "Therapist treats the
patient with much deference.") Each of the ten raters sorted these
seventy-five descriptive statements into seven categories, from those
most characteristic of an ideal relationship to those least
characteristic. Since this meant that each rater had assigned a value of
from one to seven to each item, the sorting made by any rater could now
be correlated with that of any other rater.

The results hold much of interest. All correlations were strongly
positive, ranging from .43 to .84, indicating that all the therapists
and even the nontherapists tended to describe the ideal relationship in
similar terms. When the correlations were factor analyzed, only one
factor was found, indicating that there is basically but one
relationship toward which all therapists strive. There was a higher
correlation between experts who were regarded as good therapists,
regardless of orientation, than between experts and nonexperts within
the same orientation. The fact that even laymen can describe the ideal
therapeutic relationship in terms which correlate highly with those of
the experts suggests that the best therapeutic relationship may be
related to good interpersonal relationships in general.

What are the characteristics of this ideal relationship? When all the
ratings are pooled, here are the items placed in the top two categories.

::::::::: block
:::::::: block
::::::: topbot
*Most characteristic*

:::: block
::: bot
The therapist is able to participate completely in the patient's
communication.
:::
::::

*Very characteristic*

:::: block
<div>

The therapist's comments are always right in line with what the patient
is trying to convey.

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_54}The therapist sees the patient as a co-worker on
a common problem.

The therapist treats the patient as an equal.

The therapist is well able to understand the patient's feelings.

The therapist really tries to understand the patient's feelings.

The therapist always follows the patient's line of thought.

The therapist's tone of voice conveys the complete ability to share the
patient's feelings.

</div>
::::
:::::::
::::::::
:::::::::

Here, from the point of view of this chapter, is outstanding
corroboration of the importance of empathy and complete understanding on
the part of the therapist. Some of the items also indicate the respect
which the therapist has for the client. There is unfortunately little
opportunity to judge the extent to which reliance is placed upon the
basic capacity of the client, since very few items regarding this were
included. From the rating of these few characteristics it may be said
that such reliance is only moderately characteristic of this
heterogeneous group of therapists.

At the negative end of the scale are placed those items which describe
the therapist as hostile to or disgusted by the patient, or acting in a
superior fashion. At the extreme negative pole is the statement,
"Therapist shows no comprehension of the feelings the patient is trying
to communicate."

In a second major aspect of this research Fiedler has endeavored to
measure the type of relationship which actually is achieved by different
therapists, and the degree to which the actual is similar to the ideal.
In this study four judges listened to ten electrically recorded
interviews, and for each interview sorted the seventy-five descriptive
items to indicate the extent to which they were characteristic of that
particular interview. Of the ten interviews, four were conducted by
psychoanalytically oriented therapists, four by client-centered
therapists, two by Adlerians. In each group, half of the interviews were
conducted by experienced therapists, half by nonexperts.

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_55}The findings, based on the various correlations,
were as follows:

1\. Experts created relationships significantly closer to the "ideal"
than nonexperts.

2\. Similarity between experts of different orientations was as great
as, or greater than, the similarity between experts and nonexperts of
the same orientation.

3\. The most important factors differentiating experts from nonexperts
are related to the therapist's ability to understand, to communicate
with, and to maintain rapport with the client. There is some indication
that the expert is better able to maintain an appropriate emotional
distance, seemingly best described as interested but emotionally
uninvolved.

4\. The most clearly apparent differences between schools related to the
status which the therapist assumes toward the client. The Adlerians and
some of the analytic therapists place themselves in a more tutorial,
authoritarian role; client-centered therapists show up on the opposite
extreme of this factor.

The primary significance of these two studies is not the findings alone,
since the studies are based upon small numbers, but the fact that a
start has been made in this subtle and complex area. As the methodology
becomes more refined, it appears entirely possible that objective
answers may be found to some of the perplexing questions which are
raised about the therapeutic relationship.

It would also appear, from the point of view of this chapter, that the
findings of these studies confirm in a general way some of the elements
stressed in the preceding sections. The importance of complete and
sensitive understanding of the client's attitudes and feelings, as they
seem to him, is supported by Fiedler's work. As to the importance of
reliance upon the client's capacity the study is silent, but it is
obvious that there is now no barrier to the exhaustive study of such an
issue. This increase in methodological skill and sophistication makes
possible research which has hitherto seemed impossible. It is this
promise for the future which makes Fiedler's study basically important.
It appears clear that in time this chapter on the attitude of the
therapist, and his []{#011_c2.html_lpn_56}relationship with the client,
can be rewritten in objective, verified terms, based upon clinical
hypotheses scientifically tested.

C[ORROBORATIVE]{.sc} E[VIDENCE FOR THE]{.sc} B[ASIC]{.sc}
H[YPOTHESIS]{.sc}

In concluding this chapter, it may be well to return to its fundamental
premise, and to examine it, not as related to therapy alone, but as
related to our general experience. A basic hypothesis has been stated
concerning the capacity of the individual for self-initiated,
constructive handling of the issues involved in life situations. This
hypothesis is not yet definitively proved or disproved by research
evidence from the field of therapy. So far as clinical experience is
concerned, some clinicians state that their clinical experience supports
this hypothesis, but others look upon it with considerable skepticism
and indicate that in the light of their experience any such reliance
upon the capacity of the individual is of very doubtful validity.

In this situation, unsatisfactory from a scientific point of view, it
may be worth our while to examine the scattered evidence, from fields
outside of psychotherapy, which has relevance to the hypothesis. There
is a certain amount of objective evidence, and some experiential
evidence, from other fields.

In the well-known study of autocratic, democratic, and laissez faire
groups conducted by Lippitt and others (118), it was found that in the
democratic group where the leader's role was one of interest and
permissiveness, the group took responsibility upon itself, and in
quantity and quality of production, in morale, and in absence of
hostility, it exceeded the records of the other groups. In the laissez
faire group, where there was no consistent structure, and no leader
interest, and in the autocratic group where behavior was controlled by
the leader's wishes, the outcomes were not so favorable. While this
study is based on small numbers, and is perhaps lessened in value by the
fact that the leaders were genuine in their democratic functions and
role-playing in other groups, it is nevertheless worthy of
consideration.

In a study made many years ago by Herbert Williams (223), a classroom
group of the worst-offending juvenile delinquents in a
[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_57}large school system was brought together. As
might be expected, these boys were retarded in intelligence (average
I.Q. 82) and in school achievement. There was no special equipment save
for a large table on which a variety of readers and textbooks for
various ages were placed. There were but two rules: a boy must keep busy
doing something, and no boy was permitted to annoy or bother others.
Here is a situation of genuine permissiveness within broad and realistic
limits, with responsibility clearly placed upon the individual.
Encouragement and suggestions were given only after an activity had been
self-initiated. Thus if a boy had worked along artistic lines, he might
be given assistance in getting into a special art class; or if
activities in mathematics or mechanics had engaged his interest,
arrangements might be made for him to attend courses in these subjects.
The group remained together four months, though some were not in the
group for the whole period. During the four months the measured
educational achievement increased 11.2 months in reading age, 14.5
months in arithmetic age, and similarly in other subjects. The total
increase in educational age was 12.2 months, and if three members are
omitted whose attendance was short, the average increase is 15.2 months
--- more than four times the normal expectation for a group with this
degree of retardation. This was in a group in which reading and other
educational disabilities abounded.

In a very different area, a study of food habits was made during the
war, under the supervision of Kurt Lewin (112). It was found that when
groups were urged by a lecturer to make use of little-used meats ---
hearts, kidneys, brains --- few (10 per cent) actually carried out the
suggestion in practice. In other groups the problem of war scarcities
was discussed with the group members and simple information about the
meats given to them, following which the group members were asked to
make their own decisions about serving the meats in question. These
decisions, it was found through a follow-up study, tended to be kept,
and 52 per cent actually served one or more of these meats.
Self-initiated and responsible action proved far more effective than
guided action.

A study by Coch and French (41) comes to the same conclusion
[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_58}regarding industrial workers. With conditions of
pay held constant, some groups of workers were shifted to a new task and
carefully instructed in the way to handle it and in ways of increasing
efficiency on the new task. Other groups were shifted to the new task,
and permitted to discuss, plan, and carry out their own way of handling
the new problem. In the latter groups productivity increased more
rapidly, increased to a higher level, held a higher level, and morale
was definitely higher than in the groups which had been instructed.

A study of supervision in an insurance company was made by the Survey
Research Center (206). When units in which productivity and morale were
high were compared with those in which they were low, significant
differences were discovered in the methods and personalities of the
supervisors. In the units with high productivity, supervisors and group
leaders tended to be interested primarily in the workers as people, and
interest in production was secondary. Supervisors encouraged group
participation and discussion and group decisions in matters affecting
their work. Finally, supervisors in these "high" units gave little close
supervision to the work being done, but tended to place the
responsibility upon the worker.

Other industrial studies (62, 116, 126, 207), though less objective in
nature, bear out the two that have been cited. Various industries, in
this country and in Great Britain, have found that in quite divergent
industrial situations there is improvement in effectiveness and in
morale when workers are trusted as being capable of responsible handling
of their own situation. This has meant a permissiveness toward their
active participation in thinking about the issues, and a willingness for
them to make, or participate in making, the responsible choices and
decisions.

In addition to such industrial evidence there is significant social
experience which bears upon the topic. The way in which the
self-directing capacities of small communities were utilized in the
development of the TVA project is well described by David Lilienthal
(115). In a very different problem-situation, that of training a
striking force of Marines, General Carlson relied very heavily upon the
self-directing capacities of the individual, in developing the famous
Carlson's Raiders.

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_59}In dealing with juvenile delinquency there is
similar experience. The Area Projects, developed by Clifford Shaw in
delinquency areas, were found to be successful when they built upon the
strength of the group. If the leader was a catalyst, a person genuinely
able to accept the neighborhood as it existed and to release the group
to work toward its real purposes and goals, the result was in the
direction of socialization. The gangster, the petty politician, the
tavern keeper, when given the opportunity to express real attitudes, and
the full freedom to select goals, tended to choose goals which moved the
group toward more social objectives. On the other hand,

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
attempts to produce these changes *for* the community by means of ready
made institutions and programs planned, developed, financed, and managed
by persons outside the community are not likely to meet with any more
success in the future than they have in the past. This procedure is
psychologically unsound because it places the residents of the community
in an inferior position and implies serious reservations with regard to
their capacities and their interest in their own welfare. What is
equally important is that it neglects the greatest of all assets in any
community, namely the talents, energies, and other human resources of
the people themselves. . . . What is necessary, we believe, is the
organization and encouragement of social self-help on a cooperative
basis. (183)
:::
::::
:::::

In quite another area --- that of dealing with health problems --- we
find further relevant social experience. The famous Peckham Experiment
in London provides an opportunity to study the basic hypothesis from a
fresh vantage point. The Peckham Centre is a center organized for family
health and recreation by a group of biologists. In attempting to promote
health and richness of living for individuals and families, the
sponsoring group has learned many lessons which are deeply relevant to
our understanding of psychotherapy. Let us first listen to the manner in
which the handling of the facts of the medical examination has
developed.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Another outstanding characteristic of the biological overhaul \[health
examination\] must be emphasized. The facts elicited and their
significance are as far as possible presented to the family in their
entirety, in lay terms. *No advice is volunteered*. To the layman
[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_60}this may appear but natural, since no advice is
sought; but to anyone trained in the medical profession --- that is
specifically to give advice --- it is a most difficult attitude to
achieve. Indeed "to give advice" seems to be a wellnigh irresistible
impulse to most human beings in a situation of authority. We try then
not to give advice and to refrain from assuming the authority of special
knowledge. As one of the members put it, "The doctor simply tells you
how you stand." It is thereafter left to their own degree of
intelligence to act. It is an intensely interesting study to watch and
note the various actions undertaken (often at considerable sacrifice in
some other direction) as the family intelligence is brought to bear on
the facts stated to them after examination. It is seldom the individual
but nearly always the family as a whole that responds. A technique
leading to this result seems to be fundamental, because it gives to the
family an opportunity of exercising the responsibility that it so deeply
feels. It is difficult to understand, indeed, why a laissez-faire
attitude to a mouthful of decaying teeth should change as the result of
the new circumstances, but it does; or why a complacency to a useless
overweight in either a man or a woman should so change --- but it does;
with results in either instance of marked benefits both to the
individual and to the family. It was found in practice that when the
examinations were conducted in a spirit which led up to conclusions
which were bits of advice, often no action was taken; whereas by leaving
it to spontaneity in the individual and to his own sense of
responsibility, action is taken in the overwhelming majority of cases.
This very action represents the exercise of a faculty that has been
largely in abeyance. With exercise of a faculty, health develops. The
faculty for responsibility is no exception to this rule. (145, pp.
49--50)
:::
::::
:::::

With this type of handling, with a deep respect for the right and
capacity of the individual to be responsible for himself, 90 per cent of
the individuals in whom some disorder is discovered go for treatment.

Not only in regard to health activities is this hypothesis found to be
effective. It is also the purpose of the Centre to give families an
opportunity for recreational enrichment of living. The description of
the experience in moving realistically toward this goal provides an
interesting parallel to the progression of thinking in the formulation
of client-centered therapy.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_61}Our problem is the "man in the street." He is the
man without egotistic drive; he is the diffident and the meek. Because
he seems to lack initiative he is left to his own resources --- of which
he seems to have none. To attract him to any organization is difficult
enough; to keep him in it is still another problem. But because he forms
the bulk of the public he is most worth study, for on him the success of
any social organization depends.

The first tentative approach to encouraging the members to do things was
based on the common assumption that ordinary people like to emulate
their betters; that an exhibition of a high degree of skill, of relative
perfection, would stimulate the imitative faculty and lead to like
action. That method of approach we have found useless; the assumption is
not bourne out by the experiment.

Primarily, individuals are conscious only of their own capacity and act
accordingly. They may admire, they may even be envious of outside
standards, but they do not use them even as stimulants to try out their
own capacity. Skill beyond their own capacity tends to frighten, to
inhibit rather than to tempt them to emulation. The status "teacher"
tends inevitably to undermine self-confidence. Our failures during our
first eighteen months' work have taught us something very significant.
Individuals, from infants to old people, resent or fail to show any
interest in anything initially presented to them through discipline,
regulation or instruction which is another aspect of authority. (Even
the very "Centre idea" has a certain taint of authority and this is
contributing to our slow recruitment.)

We now proceed by merely providing an environment rich in instruments
for action --- that is, giving a chance to do things. Slowly but surely
these chances are seized upon and used as opportunity for development of
inherent capacity. The instruments of action have one common
characteristic --- *they must speak for themselves*. The voice of the
salesman or the teacher frightens the potential users.

How does this fact reflect on organization and the opportunity for
experimental observation on this material?

Having provided the members with a chance to do things, we find that we
have to leave them to make their own use of them. We have had to learn
to sit back and wait for these activities to emerge. Any impatience on
our part, translated into help, has strangled their efforts --- we have
had to cultivate more and more patience in ourselves. The alternative to
this cultivation of patience is, of course, obvious --- the application
of compulsion in one or other of its many forms,
[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_62}perhaps the most tempting of which is persuasion.
But having a fundamental interest in the source and origin of
spontaneous action --- as all biologists must --- we have had to discard
even that instrument for initiating activities. Even temptation, the
gentlest form of compulsion, does not work because human beings, even
children, recognize carrots for what they ultimately mean; we have at
least progressed beyond the donkey!

We do not suggest that communion, teaming, regulation, system,
discipline, authority and instruction are not desirable things but
neither can we agree that there is anything wrong with those who spurn
these things; we are not missionaries seeking to convert people to
desirable things, but scientists seeking the truth in the facts.

Civilization hitherto has looked for the orientation of society through
an imposed "system" derived from some extrinsic authority, such as
religion, "cultural" education, or political suasion. The biologist
conceives an order emanating from the organism living in poise in its
environment. Our necessity, therefore, is to secure the free flow of
forces in the environment so that the order inherent in the material we
are studying may emerge. Our interest is in that balance of forces which
sustains naturally and spontaneously the forms of life we are studying.

The Centre is the first experimental station in human biology. It asks
the question --- "What circumstances will sustain human beings in their
capacity for full function (i.e. in health); and what orientation will
such fully functioning entities give to human living (i.e. to society)?"
(145, pp. 38--40)
:::
::::
:::::

Here is obviously a basic willingness on the part of the sponsors of
this Centre for people to be themselves --- even when that involves
differing from the values held by the sponsors. To leave the person free
to choose or reject what we regard as "desirable things" requires an
inner questioning of basic attitudes which is no easier for the
biologist than for the psychotherapist, as the following statements
indicate.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
The training of the staff is difficult. It is in fact no easy thing for
the individual as a scientist to place himself as an instrument of
knowledge completely at the disposal of any and every member, and at the
same time, without exercising authority, to assume his right and proper
position in the community as a social entity. But he is also there to
make observations. This the members have readily come to accept,
jokingly describing themselves as the biologist's "rats."

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_63}They soon come to appreciate that the scientist's
primary concern is *to be used by the members as a means of reaching and
sustaining their own maximum capacity for health*. Moreover, they come
to sense that in carrying on their own activities and inaugurating new
ones through the method of self-service, many of them are in fact step
by step themselves growing into important members of the staff. (144, p.
78)

The active-passiveness of the observer is not easy to attain without the
essential extension of the laboratory scientist's discipline which
allows facts to speak for themselves. In human biology the facts are
actions which seriously complicate the problem but do not put it beyond
the possibility of solution.

The biological necessities of the situation then compel us to leave the
members to themselves, to initiate their own activities, their own order
of things. We have no rules, regulations nor any other restriction of
action, except a very fluid time-table. Within eighteen months the
seeming chaos and disorder is rapidly developing into something very
different. This is apparent even to our visitors, one of whom on leaving
described the life in the Centre as being like a stream allowed to form
its bed and its banks according to the natural configuration of the
land. (145, p. 41)
:::
::::
:::::

Here in this community effort is seen the emergence of the same type of
hypothesis upon which the client-centered therapist bases his work. Not
only is the hypothesis the same as regards the person, the client, but
the conclusion in regard to the role of the "leader" also has many
striking similarities.

Is there any unity in these bits of evidence gathered from such diverse
sources? Is there anything relevant to our concern with psychotherapy in
studies which cover such remote issues as whether people eat kidneys, or
decide how an industrial shop unit shall be run? I feel that there is.
If we consider the central thread which runs through these highly varied
studies and experiences, it would seem that it may be summarized in an
"if-then" type of statement.

:::::::: block
::::::: block1
:::::: topbot
<div>

*If* the individual or group is faced by a problem;

*If* a catalyst-leader provides a permissive atmosphere;

*If* responsibility is genuinely placed with the individual or group;

[]{#011_c2.html_lpn_64}*If* there is basic respect for the capacity of
the individual or group;

*Then*, responsible and adequate analysis of the problem is made;

:::: block
<div>

responsible self-direction occurs;

the creativity, productivity, quality of product exhibited are superior
to results of other comparable methods;

individual and group morale and confidence develop.

</div>
::::

</div>
::::::
:::::::
::::::::

It would appear that the hypothesis which is central to this chapter,
and basic to the function of the client-centered therapist, is an
hypothesis which has been and is being investigated in other types of
human relationships as well, and that the evidence in regard to it has a
significant and positive similarity no matter what the field of
endeavor.

SUGGESTED READINGS

::: sl
The reader who wishes to consider in more detail his own attitudes as
they actually operate in his reactions with others, and the means of
implementing his basic attitudes in therapy, will find rich food for
thought and a wealth of practical help in Porter's book, *An
Introduction to Therapeutic Counseling* (148). An earlier consideration
of implementation is contained in chapter six of *Counseling and
Psychotherapy* (166).

A thorough discussion of the psychology of the therapeutic relationship,
covering both its description and its dynamics, is contained in the
article by Estes (54). For other accounts of the attitude and
orientation of the therapist, three references might be particularly
pertinent. The first two are psychoanalytic, the third the viewpoint of
a religious counselor. They are: the chapter on "What Does the Analyst
Do?" by Horney (89, pp. 187--209); Reik, *Listening with the Third Ear*
(161); Hiltner, *Pastoral Counseling* (83, Chapter 7).

For a knowledge of the research regarding the counselor's function, one
might read Porter's study (149, 150) or Snyder (197) as early examples.
Seeman (180) and Fiedler (58, 57) represent recent work in this area,
Fiedler's studies being particularly significant for their new
methodology.

For an example of the evidence from other sources regarding the basic
hypothesis of client-centered therapy, the little study by Coch and
French (41) would be a start.
:::

[]{#012_c3.html}

<div>

[]{#012_c3.html_c3}

</div>

# []{#012_c3.html_lpn_65}*Chapter* [3]{.chapnum} • The Therapeutic Relationship as Experienced by the Client {.chaptitle}

![](html/docimages/line.jpg){height="10" width="100%"}

As our experience has moved us forward, it has become increasingly
evident that the probability of therapeutic movement in a particular
case depends primarily not upon the counselor's personality, nor upon
his techniques, nor even upon his attitudes, but upon the way all these
are experienced by the client in the relationship. The centrality of the
client's perception of the interviews has forced itself upon our
recognition. It is the way it seems to the client which determines
whether resolution of conflict, reorganization, growth, integration ---
all the elements which comprise therapy --- will occur. Our knowledge of
therapy would be far advanced if we knew the answers to these two
questions: What does it mean that the client experiences a relationship
as therapeutic? and, How may we facilitate the experiencing of a
relationship as therapeutic? We do not have the answers to these
questions, but we have at least learned to ask them.

The way in which the client perceives or experiences the interviews is a
field of inquiry which is new and in which the data are very limited.
There has been no research as yet completed in this area, and relatively
little consideration has been given to it. It is an area which appears
to have great future significance, however, and for this reason the
attempt will be made to present our []{#012_c3.html_lpn_66}very
inadequate and imperfect knowledge in this chapter. Because of the
tentative state of thinking, many direct statements by clients will be
utilized so that the reader may formulate for himself those elements
which appear significant, rather than rely too heavily upon the stated
opinions of the author. These client observations, and the comments upon
them, are presented under different headings, but it will be seen that
there is much overlapping in the presentation. Following this attempt at
organized presentation, a more complete account will be given of the way
in which therapy was experienced by one sensitive and articulate client.
In this more complete statement there appear to be many suggestive leads
for further investigation.

::: top
T[HE]{.sc} E[XPERIENCE OF THE]{.sc} C[OUNSELOR AND THE]{.sc}
C[OUNSELING]{.sc} S[ITUATION]{.sc}
:::

*Expectations*

The manner in which the client perceives the counselor and the interview
is initially influenced very deeply by his expectations. The range of
these expectations is tremendous. The client may have expected the
counselor to be a parental figure who will shield him from harm and who
will take over the guidance of his life. He may have expected the
therapist to be a psychic surgeon who will probe to the root of his
difficulties, causing him great pain and making him over against his
will. He may have expected him to be an advice-giver, and this advice
may be genuinely and dependently desired, or it may be desired in order
that the client can prove the advice wrong. He may, due to unfortunate
previous experience with psychiatric or psychological counselors, look
upon this new experience as one where he will be labeled, looked upon as
abnormal, hurt, treated with little respect, and thus may deeply dread
the relationship. He may look upon the counselor as an extension of the
authority which referred him for help --- the dean, the Veterans
Administration, the court. He may, if he has some knowledge of
client-centered therapy, view the counseling interview as a place where
he will have to solve his own problems, and this may seem to him a
positive or a very threatening possibility. []{#012_c3.html_lpn_67}Even
this enumeration of some of the most common expectations which the
client brings to therapy barely suggests all the ramifications which
they may have.

From a recorded first interview with a business executive we may extract
those statements which indicate his expectations as to the relationship.
He was referred by the personnel psychologist in his industry, who had
discovered, by means of personality tests, the existence of strain and
conflict in this man.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
"He said that I should . . . just tell you the things that I told him.
Doc seemed to think that you could correct it. Now I'm not interested in
taking your time or my time if you're going to tell me to go take up
photography or something of that sort. . . ."

"Well, I don't know how long it will take you. . . ."

"Does that tell you any of the things that I should tell you? Or am I
just sitting here, spinning my wheels?"

"I don't know of anything else I can add to that that would be of
value."

"Well now, if you want to tell me what, uh, your suggestions are and
anything about it, why, uh, I'd like to hear them."

"I'm a worrier. All right. Well, you can say to me, 'Well, go home and
don't worry.' Well, if that's the answer, why, uh, I can get my friends
to say that to me and I don't have to drive so far to do it. Uh, I'm
exaggerating here a bit on my feeling towards you and towards what you
can accomplish, but I say in no uncertain fashion that if that's the
answer then that's no answer to me at all."
:::
::::
:::::

Here in this man is evident an expectation of being made over by the
therapist. He is outwardly cooperative, wants to give the information
necessary for this remodeling of personality, but at the same time gives
ample warning that he will strongly resist any of the suggestions which
he desires. It might be mentioned that clients with this ambivalent
attitude of dependence-resistance seem to have difficulty in coming to
experience the interviews as therapeutic. Whether this is due to our
lack of skill in facilitation, or whether this type of attitude is
basically more difficult for therapy, only time and study will indicate.

[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_68}Another client, a student, puts this same basic
expectation more succinctly when he says:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
You make me think for myself and I don't like it. I want advice. I've
been going to everyone for advice. You can't lose when you get it. If
the person gives you advice you like, that makes you feel fine; if they
give you advice you don't like, they're fools, and *that* makes you feel
fine. (147, p. 26)
:::
::::
:::::

Here, as for most clients, there has been discovered a difference
between the expectation and the actual experience of therapy, and the
discovery of this difference may arouse resentment as here, or relief,
or any one of a variety of other reactions.

Since an increasing number of clients have some sort of impression of
client-centered therapy before coming for help, it may be useful to give
an account, written by a client after the conclusion of counseling,
about some of her feelings before coming. She mentions that because of
her desire for assistance she read some of the books about nondirective
counseling.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Probably because I wanted help so much myself, all I could see in these
books was a description of safety and a miraculous cure. At that time I
missed the point of client-centered therapy --- actually didn't see most
of what I was reading. Before I asked Dr. ------ to take me on as a
client, I hunted in these books for everything the clients had said
about the experience. "Was it painful? Did it work? How safe was it to
give your confidence to someone else?" were the questions I had before
counseling began.
:::
::::
:::::

This tentative, ambivalent, fearful feeling is probably the attitude
most characteristic of all clients, whether they have any knowledge of
therapy or not.

It is evident that clients come with widely varying expectations, many
of which will not match the experience they meet. Nevertheless, the
expectation will govern their perception to a considerable extent. It is
clear that the businessman quoted above will perceive the therapist as
an advice-giver, someone who is going to make him over, and that this
perception will persist to some degree, even though he receives no
advice and experiences no counselor attempt to manipulate. Likewise, the
woman cited []{#012_c3.html_lpn_69}above will see the relationship as
safe and as holding the potentialities of magic recovery, even though
the counselor's attitude and behavior may not justify the expectation.
It would appear that real progress or movement in therapy is greatly
facilitated when both client and counseler are perceiving the
relationship in similar fashion. How this may be achieved is the
question which must be continually raised. Our experience is clear on
one point. The perception does not come about by telling the client how
he ought to experience the relationship. Meaningful perception is a
matter of direct sensory experience, and it not only does not help but
it may hinder a unified perception if the therapist attempts to
describe, intellectually, the character of the relationship or of the
process. It is for this reason that counselors operating from a
client-centered point of view have tended to give up any attempts at
"structuring," though earlier these were thought to be of value.

*The Experience of Counselor Attitudes and Methods*

Something of the way in which the client experiences the therapist has
already been described (Chapter 2, pages 36--40). From the material
available from clients it would appear that such elements as the sex,
appearance, or mannerisms of the counselor play a lesser role than might
be supposed. When the counselor is favorably perceived, it is as someone
with warmth and interest for the client, someone with understanding.
Says one client of the counselor, "She was the first person who seemed
to understand how my anxieties looked to me."

On the other hand, when the therapist is experienced as a person who is
not helpful, it is usually because these qualities seem to the client to
be lacking. One student successfully completed therapy with a second
counselor some months after a single interview with a first counselor.
When the contacts were finished he was asked why it had seemed possible
to work through his problems with the second counselor, but had broken
off with the first counselor after one interview. He thought for a
moment and replied, "You did about the same things he did, but you
seemed really interested in me."

[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_70}In regard to the methods used by the
client-centered counselor, the client appears frequently to experience
these as frustrating at first, and then valuable. Some quotations from
the written reactions of unsophisticated clients as obtained by Lipkin
(117) may make this clear.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
"This type of psychological help seemed strange to me at the first
meeting. I wondered 'How in the devil can this help me --- just talking
about things that weren't even clear to me?' I won't deny that after
that first meeting I doubted whether he could help me."

"Through having to put my concerns into words and logical sentences,
which was necessary as I couldn't keep silent longer than the counselor,
I began to understand them better and saw them in different lights. Some
of my vague thoughts were put into words by the counselor so that I had
a fuller understanding of the three things I was concerned over. After I
told him of my problems and he didn't suggest any solutions which was
what I had expected from counseling, I found again that silence could be
embarrassing and found it necessary to make up some methods of
overcoming my difficulties which later, after being re-phrased by the
counselor, began to make sense."

"During the interviews my psycologist \[sic\] took my views & thoughts
and made them so that I could understand what was going on. He didn't
conclude them but stated them back to me so I could draw my own
conclusions. Things we talked about seemed clearer in my mind &
organized it to an extent where now I belive \[sic\] I can think things
out for myself." (117, p. 140)
:::
::::
:::::

From the client's point of view, the advantage of the reflection of
attitudes appears to be, as mentioned earlier from a client statement,
that "It was the role of the counselor to bring me to myself, to help me
by being with me in everything I said, to realize what I was saying."
(Chapter 2, p. 37)

Where the client undergoes, in the process of therapy, a real
reorganization of self, the relationship to the counselor and to the
counseling interview comes to involve a very special meaning of
security, which is easily upset by arbitrary change. One client who had
faced deep and significant attitudes in herself, who had met her
counselor in different offices and sometimes at irregular times,
mentions her resentment toward these aspects of counseling and describes
the situation thus (21st interview, recorded):

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_71}For example, shifting around from one day of week
to another, from one time of day to another, from place to place --- uh,
those things are all not only sources of resentment, but the resentment
is the result of feeling that there's no security anywhere. And because,
for a while, the only security there is is in the hour, any change
either just before it, or after it, or during it is, is, uh, very much
more important than it would be otherwise.
:::
::::
:::::

It appears that in the client's experience, particularly if the problems
have been deep-seated, the only stable portion of experience is the
unfailing hour of acceptance by the therapist. In this sense
client-centered therapy is experienced as supporting, as an island of
constancy in a sea of chaotic difficulty, though it is not "supportive"
or approving, in the superficial sense. It is this constancy and safety
which permits the client to experience therapy, a matter which we shall
now consider.

::: top
H[OW]{.sc} T[HERAPY IS]{.sc} E[XPERIENCED BY THE]{.sc} C[LIENT]{.sc}
:::

*The Experiencing of Responsibility*

One of the elements which appears to stand out prominently in the
initial reaction of the client is the discovery that he is responsible
for himself in this relationship. Clients have used various ways of
describing this. One veteran writes:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
I was lost in your presence, especially when I was told that I had an
hour with you. I could either sit or talk or do as I pleased. The
impression I received was of being left alone, all on my own with my
problem. But I soon discovered that by talking of my indecision and
problem I was able to see clearly that my problem was being solved of my
own initiative rather than the counseling of my interviewer, (117, p.
141)
:::
::::
:::::

It would appear that there was some structuring of the relationship by
the counselor, and this may account in part for the feeling of aloneness
which the client felt. Had he discovered the responsibility at his own
pace, there might not have been this reaction. Another veteran client
felt annoyance at the discovery --- probably a rather characteristic
reaction --- but came to recognize the value of being responsible for
self.

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_72}The counsellor was trying to make me think
everything out for myself. At times his silence would anger me, but at
the same time I felt he must have a purpose.

Because of his silence of not answering or giving opinions, 1 had to
delve in my own mind deeper and deeper. In other words, the answers were
*my own completely* & for this reason have stuck with me. (117, p. 140)
:::
::::
:::::

Still another client shows the transition between the inaccurate
expectation and the actual experience of taking responsibility.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
At first I tried to figure out what he wanted me to say or do. I was
trying to outguess him or rather to diagnose my case as I thought he
would. That didn't pan out. I did all the talking. (117, p. 141)
:::
::::
:::::

*The Experience of Exploration*

Thus far the reactions given are those which lead up to therapy, or
which make therapy possible. It is in the process of exploration of
attitudes that the client first begins to feel that this process in
which he is engaged will involve change in himself, of a sort he has not
envisaged. He both fears and desires this change which he dimly sees.
The attitude toward such exploration is described in these terms by a
client after the conclusion of therapy.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
I remember a good deal of emotional tension in the second interview
where I first mentioned homosexuality. I remember that I felt drawn down
into myself, into places I didn't want to go, hadn't quite been to
before, and yet had to see. I think I dreaded this interview more than
any of the other early ones because I had been so afraid before
counseling began that I would get to that subject. And afraid that I
wouldn't. I'm surprised that under those conditions I got to it so soon,
particularly since the immediate worry concerned someone's remark, which
I had misinterpreted, about the counselor and me. I still remember the
warm, acceptant voice of the counselor and my feeling that it was just a
little more acceptant than I could be of the fears I was expressing but
not enough different to be reassuring in a threatening way.
:::
::::
:::::

An element which frequently enters into this period of searching is the
experiencing of inconsistency in self. When it is possible to talk
freely, express attitudes freely, then contradictions
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_73}are discovered which had never been noticed
before. A clear statement of this feeling is given by Miss Har, a
teacher who, some months after counseling, voluntarily wrote her
reactions to the experience. Unlike most clients she had listened to
some of her recorded interviews after they had been held, and had also
read the transcribed interviews later. She thus commences the account of
her experience.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
I know this will be a subjective report and that in a scientific sense
it cannot be an accurate description of what "really happened." Yet I do
believe it will have value because in the past eight months --- during
and since counseling --- I have felt that in dealing with myself and
with counseling I have been and can be honest, really honest. It seems
to me that this is the first time in my life that I have been able to
feel that this was true about my relationship to anything, as if I had
to be free to be honest with myself before I could be so with anything
else.

I remember clearly when I first began to be aware of this. In the second
interview I said of the first: "After two or three days I kept wanting
to say something --- to correct impressions that weren't quite true ---
which were unfavorable to me. And then I thought --- Oh, what the heck,
it doesn't make much difference." While I was saying that, I felt
baffled because I both believed and didn't believe what I had said the
time before. I didn't see how inconsistencies could be true. At first
the inconsistencies between what I felt about myself (and said in the
counseling session) and what I thought about myself were the most
annoying. Later, inconsistencies between one interview and another
bothered me much more. I was enjoying the feeling of being honest for
the first time, and I didn't like this apparent evidence of untruth.

I couldn't say that the later statements were any more or less true than
the first. I tried to explain this to a friend during the latter part of
counseling. She said, "You mean you found out later that what you had
said before wasn't true?" When I said "No" to that, she said, "You mean
it's still true?" I had to explain "No" again. I was irritated with her
and with myself because I couldn't explain satisfactorily that there was
something deeper than the inconsistencies which made and allowed them to
be true.
:::
::::
:::::

Perhaps one explanation of therapy is that the inconsistencies
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_74}in self are recognized, faced, re-examined, and
the self is altered in ways which bring about consistency.

The safety of the relationship with the counselor, the complete absence
of any threat, which permits honesty even in the expression of
inconsistency, appears to make this exploration very much different from
ordinary conversation. One client explains that she has talked over all
these troubles with her friends, yet in actuality hasn't done so. "I was
really saying the thing next to the thing that was really bothering me."
This sense of the therapeutic interview as the place where one can talk
directly about concerns as they are felt, appears to be a significant
characteristic of the experience. This does not mean that the client is
able to communicate all that gives him concern, or that he can even
attempt this. Miss Har, after reading the transcription of some of her
first interviews, gives voice to an attitude which would undoubtedly be
shared by most clients. Speaking of these transcriptions in the fourth
interview she says, "It's not that they aren't what I said, but they're
only one tenth of what I was thinking."

This point may be enlarged. Not only is the client able to communicate
only a small fraction of the attitudes and feelings he is experiencing,
but it is also true that what he thinks through in the interview is but
a small fraction of what he works out between interviews. Mrs. Ett
mentions this experience with some surprise in her third interview:

:::: topbot
::: sl
*S:* And then I did notice this: that after I left the first two times
I, it wasn't as if I left you, and I carried on the interview for a good
hour afterwards (*laugh*). I was talking to myself and it seemed almost
peculiar, because I, I found myself talking to myself and I'd say ---
well, in other words, the effect of the interview didn't cease just as
soon as I walked out of the door, it was very invigorating, that I can
say, I found myself very much elated afterwards.

*C:* There are some things that go on after the interview itself closes.

*S:* That's right. And that's an amazing thing. It interested me,
because generally after an interview of any kind you sort of go about
your own work and thoughts. . . .
:::
::::

It is perhaps this persisting quality, the realization that some process
new to his experience is at work within him, which gives
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_75}to the client his astonishing persistence in
continuing the interviews, even in the face of intense pain. In a study
made at the Counseling Center over a three-month period it was found
that approximately 3 per cent of some 1500 appointments were broken.
Other appointments were of course changed or postponed, but in only
three instances out of 100 did the client simply fail to show up.
Considering the completely voluntary nature of all the contacts, and the
great discomfort which is often involved, and the imperfections of
counselor handling, this appears to be a surprising record. This element
is also experienced with some astonishment by the client. Mrs. Ett
states it in a way which would be characteristic of many, in her seventh
interview.

::::: block
:::: top
::: sl
I'm amazed at my tenacity at this thing. I generally start something and
after two or three tries I drop it with all kinds of silly excuses,
mostly because I don't think it's helping me or doing any good, I mean
art, music, anything. And ah --- I come here, and I think this is my 7th
or 8th visit and there's no doubt in my mind. I come here like I simply
--- like you have to go to the beauty parlor, or uh, put it on that
basis (*laugh*). You know that's silly, although in a way it is
comparable because I'm trying to develop my own personality just as much
as I'm trying to develop my own looks. I come here like I would --- I
mean I just *come* here, I can't understand *why* I come here, it's
entirely foreign to me, this driving to come here. There's a lot of
effort coming here. It means preparation for the children, the maid to
take care of them, food, drive to the train, get up real early in the
morning and dash out like mad, the children can't bear to see me go. So
it is an effort --- a definite effort, and yet it would have taken much
less to discourage me in something else, you know what I mean? . . .
It's like a mysterious drive (*laugh*) really.
:::
::::
:::::

*The Discovery of Denied Attitudes*

The outcome of the verbal exploration of attitudes and problems is the
discovery of attitudes which the client has experienced, but which he
has denied to awareness. Clients speak of talking about "things I had
never previously thought of," or use other phrases to describe this
aspect of their experience. One client, a man of limited education, puts
it this way:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_76}At first I wondered why I had to do all the
talking but as it went on I could see that it had the effect of making
me dig deep inside of me and bring up things that I hardly knew were
troubling me. I know that practically every time I'd start off hardly
knowing what to talk on but as time progressed I talked much more
freely. (117, p. 140)
:::
::::
:::::

Miss Har describes with some vividness the fact that hatred for her
father, which has been denied as having any recent existence, and love
for her father, which has been far more deeply denied, have now both
been discovered as present attitudes. The following recorded excerpt is
from her twenty-first interview.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
The statement of hating my father still is --- is something that I
wouldn't have agreed to last year. . . . I felt that I *had* got rid of
it, it hadn't --- it wasn't on the surface at least. That is, I said,
during my army experience, I didn't feel as if I hated him altho I
certainly got nauseated when people spoke of him. But after that, uh, up
to last year I still felt as if I didn't. And I thought that by saying
that I didn't and by going in the other direction, that somehow or other
things would straighten themselves out. And now I seem to have got
around to --- at least if I can believe the last couple of interviews
--- to saying that I both hate him and wish that I could like him, and
at times even do like certain things that I remember about him, and
particularly like certain qualities which I see in myself and which
before I felt I ought to hate because they resemble him.
:::
::::
:::::

Notice how even yet the acceptance of these attitudes is a doubtful one.
She is saying, "if I can believe the last couple of interviews" then
these attitudes are real. They are still looked at as something which is
partially outside of herself. The pain of including these denied
attitudes as a part of the self will be mentioned in the following
section. This experience of discovering within oneself present attitudes
and emotions which have been viscerally and physiologically experienced,
but which have never been recognized in consciousness, constitutes one
of the deepest and most significant phenomena of therapy. A veteran who
writes of himself in the third person describes this experience in
simple terms.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
During counselling, he was forced, in his own mind to admit that
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_77}several of these things were wrong. He began to
think and actually admit things to himself about himself that he had
never considered admitting before. He began to see just what was at the
root of all his actions. Why he was so often apt to cover up what he had
done with excuses. (117, p. 142)
:::
::::
:::::

*The Experience of Reorganizing the Self*

As these denied elements of experience are brought into awareness, a
process which we have come to think of as the reorganization of self is
necessitated. The picture of self which the client has had must be
altered to contain these new perceptions of experience. This may involve
a very slight change when the denied experiences are only slightly
inconsistent with the self; or it may involve the most drastic
reorganization, in which the self and the self in its relationship to
reality is so altered that few aspects remain untouched. In the first
instance there may be mild discomfort. In the case of the radical
reorganization, the client may go through the most racking torment of
pain, and a complete and chaotic confusion. This suffering may be
associated with rapidly changing configurations of personality, being a
new person one day, and sinking back into the old self on the next, only
to find that some minor episode puts the new organization of self again
in a position of regnancy. We shall try, from several client statements,
to illustrate this range of feeling associated with reorganization.

Take first the young and unlettered veteran who has found that therapy
has given him a less flattering but more realistic concept of self. This
has involved a certain amount of discomfort but not to a great degree.
He describes his experience.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
As for the consoling I hav had I can say this, It realy makes a man
strip his mind bare, and when he does, He knows then what he realy is
and what he can do. Or at least he thinks he knows him self pretty well.
As for myself, I know that my ideas were a little to big for what I
realy am, but now I realize that one must stay start at his own level.

Now, after four visits, I have a much clearer picture of my self and my
future, It makes me feel a little depressed and disappointed,
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_78}but on the other hand, It has taken me out of the
dark, the load seems a lot lighter now, that is I can see my way now, I
know what I want to do, I know about what I can do so now that I can see
my goal, I will be able to work a whole lot easyer at my own level.
(117, pp. 142--143)
:::
::::
:::::

Another veteran tells of his experience in a way which puts more
emphasis upon the wide swings in mood which appear so frequently to
accompany this portion of the process.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
I started to talk of the things that had bothered me, and, at intervals,
Mr. L. solidified my ramblings into a few clear, concise words. . . .
Many of the thoughts and fears in my mind were vague --- I couldn't put
them into exact, clear words. The fear was the thing that overwhelmed my
thoughts. I had never seen these clearly. I couldn't put it into words
that seemed to mean anything to me.

Mr. L. took these vague thoughts and fears and put them into words that
I could understand and see clearly. By doing so I could see clearly
their degree of importance. Some of the things I was afraid of now seem
unimportant as they actually were. Fear, though is something that
combats reasoning. I needed help and Mr. L. gave it to me. . . . During
the second meeting I received my first jolt. Taking my vague thoughts he
told me in a few words what they really meant. I broke out in a sweat, I
was trembling, somewhat panicky. Those few words had opened the door for
me. When I walked out into the street after that meeting it was as
though I were in a new world. The people looked different, more human,
the world seemed a better place to live in.

In school I applied some of the things I had learned and found that they
worked. I seemed to get along better with the other students, and at
times the fear and tension almost vanished. At times, though, it became
just as bad but it came in waves now that receded when I made an effort.

During subsequent meetings I learned more and more about myself, until
today, our fifth meeting, I told him the real trouble that was bothering
me --- all of my other fears that I had told him about in previous
meetings being related to this main fear.

A night ago I wrote another piece of fiction and for the first time in
six years it had everything in it that I wanted to say. It was good, and
my friends verified this.

[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_79}It was an immediate relief to get rid of these
fears, the tension and the misery that goes with it. (117, pp. 145--146)
:::
::::
:::::

An account of an experience involving deeper reorganization is given by
Miss Har. Much of her life and her pattern of selfhood has been
organized around her hatred for her father. What happens when she
realizes that she has been denying the opposite feeling is well told in
her own words.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
The eighteenth interview represents to me a mixture of feelings. In this
interview I came close to saying that I liked my father sometimes. I
felt then as if I had come to the edge of an awful canyon; I referred to
it later as a pit I had dug for myself. When I asked, "What does that
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_80}do to the basis of my whole life?" I could barely
speak. I felt more deeply than I can describe that I had reached a point
far away from everything I had ever known. Despair, fear and grief ---
all greater than any I had felt before --- were behind the question.

As soon as the interview was over I wanted to hear it played back, as we
occasionally did. I remember lying down to listen to it and shivering as
it came closer to the point where I was afraid I had said "I love my
father." I think I never did hear that part I was waiting for. I fell
asleep and slept until the recording was over. I was scared and unhappy
when I woke up. At the beginning of the next interview I talked all
around it. Throughout that following session, I was angry and confused,
afraid of what I might do or say next. In between the two sessions I had
hours of real panic. It was a disintegrating experience which ended in
better integration but was hard to bear at the rime. The three following
interviews show how hard I tried to run away from it and how impossible
it was to deny an experience that had once been brought to light. It
wasn't until the twenty-second interview, eighteen days later, that I
was able to be fairly calm about it.
:::
::::
:::::

Note that this state of disorganization preceded the remarks quoted
previously from the twenty-first interview (page 76) in which Miss Har
has begun to assimilate these contradictory perceptions. At this time
(eighteenth interview) the denied experiences have been recognized, but
they have the effect of producing chaos in the personality. The question
"What does that do to the basis of my whole life" is one which is, in
effect, asked by every client who faces significant experiences which
have been deeply denied to awareness. The resultant confusion is very
well described by Miss Har in the twenty-second interview as "the
amorphous state I've gotten into." This fluid, amorphous quality is very
hard to bear, even though it heralds the loss of an inadequate
organization of self, and holds the possibility of a more effective and
less vulnerable personality structure.

A further description of this experience of disorganization and painful
reorganization is contained in the sixteenth interview with Alfred, who
was, when he first came in, an extremely withdrawn student, a seclusive
individual living largely in fantasy. In this recorded interview he
portrays not only the conflict within, but his awareness of the
constructive even though painful nature of the reorganization.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
I certainly think in a way the problem is a lot clearer than a while
ago, yet --- maybe --- It's like the ice breaking up on a pond in the
spring, it's --- while things are a lot nearer to --- While the pond is
a lot nearer to being nothing but clear water, yet things are much more
unstable now, possibly, than when the pond was covered over with ice.
What I'm trying to bring out is that I seem to be so much in a terrible
fog all of the time lately, but I do feel a lot better off than I was
before, because then I didn't realize what was the matter. But maybe all
this fog and so-called trouble is due to the fact of two opposing forces
in me now. You know it's not really a case of just letting one be
superior, but it's a kinda breaking up and reorganizing that's going on
now that makes things seem so doubly bad. So maybe I'm better off than I
think.
:::
::::
:::::

There is one aspect of this process of reorganization of self which is
often difficult for the counselor to understand, and which may be
clearer if we listen to the client's experience of it. This is the fact
that though the client may be making much observable progress in the
exploration of his total perceptual field, may be bringing into the
light of awareness feelings and attitudes hitherto denied, may seem to
be proceeding toward a positive rebuilding of self, the moods which
accompany this process appear to bear little relationship to the
progress being made. After a deep and []{#012_c3.html_lpn_81}significant
insight, the client may be plunged into the blackest gloom, with
thoughts of suicide and feelings of despair. As conflicts and problems
appear to be resolved, the initial tension and discomfort show no sign
of abating, but often appear more marked. Perhaps a clue to the inner
experience of this aspect of therapy is conveyed in a diagram drawn by a
client, Mrs. Ett, in her eighth interview (see page 82). She has been
achieving significant insights but she concludes a statement of one of
her conflicts by saying:

:::: topbot
::: sl
*S:* Maybe that's just the way I feel this week, I don't know, but
everything is very, very tense with me.

*C:* It might be temporary, but at any rate it's strong at the moment.

*S:* Yes. In my mind I was drawing a diagram. Perhaps the whole thing
is, uh, I'm very --- well, I have no levels \[evidently meaning no
smooth level experience\] at all, you see, it's below the surface and
everything is like this, see. (*She draws a line of vigorous and
turbulent waves. See diagram*, *first stage*.) Now when I'm coming here
I feel that I've cleared this up, see (*she blocks out a portion of the
waves*) and I'm on this level (*she draws a new and shorter line of
waves on a higher level*) but it's still this. (*The waves are still
turbulent. See diagram*, *second stage*.) And now as I keep going I keep
going on higher levels like that, see. . . . Now right now of course
there's still that feeling \[of turbulence\], but I have a feeling of
progression, that part of my life has blocked itself off like this
already and one phase has been talked about and blocked off. . . . Yet
it isn't that I have managed to calm this level, it's still there, it's
still turbulent, but it's a feeling of making progressions with that
turbulence. . . . (*See diagram*, *third stage*.) It's an improvement of
course, it isn't as if I feel, well, *everything* is desperate, like I
used to. I say certain things have been settled, and yet everything *is*
still desperate, . . . but in other words I feel that, well, with these
treatments what will happen is that I will continue to go up until I
reach this point where there won't be any turbulence. (*Fourth stage of
diagram*.)
:::
::::

This description helps to explain the way in which the inner tensions
and fluctuations are experienced as therapy progresses. The "turbulence"
which remains appears just as "desperate" as did the total experience
when therapy began. The fluctuations are still violent. One client
attempted a chart of feelings experienced during therapy. On the whole
there are more experiences []{#012_c3.html_lpn_83}of unhappiness,
fearfulness, and depression during the second half of therapy than
during the first half; and rather violent fluctuations from elated to
unhappy, or from confident to depressed, are the rule rather than the
exception. It is of some interest that this client felt that the same
mood was present at the beginning and end of therapy --- namely, an
attitude of determination.

::: top
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_82}Four Stages of Diagram Drawn by Mrs. Ett
:::

[FIRST STAGE]{.sc}:

![](html/docimages/image1.jpg){height="27" width="400"}

:::: block
::: top
*"No level at all, it's below the surface and everything is like this."*
:::
::::

[SECOND STAGE]{.sc}:

![](html/docimages/image2.jpg){height="67" width="399"}

:::: block
::: top
*"I've cleared this up, and I'm on this level, but it's still this*
(*turbulent*)*."*
:::
::::

[THIRD STAGE]{.sc}:

![](html/docimages/image3.jpg){height="116" width="398"}

:::: block
::: top
*"As I keep going, I keep going on higher levels."*

*"It's still turbulent, but it's a feeling of progression with that
turbulence."*
:::
::::

[FOURTH STAGE]{.sc}:

![](html/docimages/image4.jpg){height="164" width="398"}

::: topbot
Continues the blocked out steps until they include all the turbulence.
:::

Still another aspect of this experience of reorganization of self
involves a similarity to psychodrama. The client is trying out, on a
symbolic and verbal level, the new self, the new behavior, toward which
he is struggling. One often sees evidence of this in the interviews.
Less often does the client verbalize this experience. Again we are
indebted to Miss Har for a statement bearing on this point. As she
struggles to find her true feelings for her father, the ones which match
her sensory experience, she uses the interview as a tryout ground. In
the nineteenth interview she says:

::::: block
:::: top
::: sl
Last time I was using the time a little differently from the way I do
sometimes because I was trying to get myself to say something and then
to see if it was true, or if I'd know if it were true after I said it .
. . sometimes you can sort of try out --- different expressions of
feeling to see whether they do any good or not, whether they fit or not.
:::
::::
:::::

*The Experiencing of Progress*

Contrary to what one might suppose, progress appears to be experienced
by the client almost from the first. It is the fact that he discovers
that some of the issues he has discussed, some of the denied experiences
which have been accepted, no longer cause him pain or anxiety, which
encourages the client to go forward. The realization that one segment of
personality organization has been reconstructed, and that new forms of
behavior result from it --- this it is that builds the client's
confidence in his own ability to make progress in exploring himself.

Again we may borrow from Miss Har a description of the inner feeling of
such progress. In the fourth interview she discusses the change in her
feelings which has come about primarily through catharsis.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_84}It's wonderful how relaxed I can get talking
about ideas I couldn't even think about last year, things that just
require saying, getting rid of. Last year I kept thinking what a
pleasant way out illness would be. This year in my daydreams when the
same thing happens I say, "Hell, no, that's not what I want."
:::
::::
:::::

She also tells of her progress in her behavior, and the satisfaction
which accrues to her because of it. The interview which she describes is
less than one third of the way through therapy, and much the most
painful aspects are still ahead of her. Yet important progress is
already experienced, as she explains in her account written after the
conclusion of counseling.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
My memory of several interviews is so vivid that I have thought of them
often since the final counseling session. I shall never forget the
happiness, excitement, elation, and peak of self-satisfaction that I
felt during the first part of the seventh interview when I had just come
from proving to myself that I could face in the presence of someone
other than the counselor the feeling that had been with me for years:
that everyone thought I had expressed homosexual tendencies. I felt that
it was the first evidence of the fact that I could find out what I was
apart from what people thought I was --- or, rather, apart from what I
thought they thought I was. I remember how keenly I felt my own pleasure
reflected in the eyes of the counselor whom I was looking at directly
for the first time in any interview. That in itself was something I had
wanted to do very much since the first hour. During this interview I
thought for the first time of the end of counseling; before that I could
not believe that anyone would willingly remove himself from such a safe,
satisfying situation.
:::
::::
:::::

This sense of progress and achievement is felt not only in moments of
elation and pleasure, but also when the road seems darkest, and the
confusion greatest. Thus Mrs. Ett in a mood of despair in regard to
herself, puts it this way:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
I'm sinking into a tomb. That's just what it is, little by little I'm
going into a tomb. Everything is closing up on me. (*Pause*.) If I could
only break away the walls. (*Pause*.) And yet actually, my coming here
has helped me, you see, so maybe I have to continue coming here. Maybe
that will help me get out of it. It isn't complete, that diagram
explains how I feel. I've cleared up some things.
:::
::::
:::::

[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_85}It is clear that even in her feeling of
retrogression the experience of progress is with her, and buoys her up.
This appears to be characteristic of most clients. It is not
infrequently true that the blackest moods and the deepest despair come
rather shortly before the end of therapy. Looking at it more deeply, we
may say that to face the most threatening denied attitudes the client
needs to feel considerable confidence, which comes from the recognition
that one issue after another has been resolved, that one experience
after another has been assimilated. Yet it is still true that these most
basic denials are deeply upsetting when brought out into the therapeutic
hour, and that all the past confidence cannot prevent the client from
plunging into despair as he discovers that much that is basic to his
personal organization is false, and must be painfully rebuilt.
Nonetheless the backdrop for this mood of discouragement is a series of
experiences of vital inner progress in reorganization, and black and
tragic as the present discovery may seem, the positive setting in which
it takes place is also a part of the total experience for the client.

*The Experience of Ending*

How does the client experience the ending of therapy? As in other
aspects of therapy, we find both commonality and uniqueness in the way
the client feels about the concluding phase of the interviews. In an
interview which proved to be the third from the end, Mrs. Ett gives an
account of the tentative and uncertain feeling which she has about
ending, and yet a surprising assurance too, in view of the fact that her
mood had struck a new low only a few days before. A long talk with her
husband which for her marked a crisis in the reorganization of her
behavior, had been described at length earlier in the interview, but she
summarizes an important aspect of it here. This excerpt is taken from
the concluding portion of the thirteenth interview.

:::: topbot
::: sl
*S:* I'll tell you how I feel about my coming here. I don't think I have
to come twice a week. I would like to come once a week for the time
being and see and just talk over my problems once a week. And then, if
everything goes smoothly on the once a week deal, why then I think I'm
through. The only reason I'm not stopping now, although I feel
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_86}right now I don't need any more, is that I just
want to feel a lasting final few licks, shall we say.

*C:* You want to feel quite sure that you are really through before you
quit.

*S:* Or if this is one of these quiet weeks, if it is, why then I'll
have to start coming back twice, maybe three times, I hope not.

*C:* By and large you feel that you are getting close to the end.

*S:* I think so. How does one determine?

*C:* Just the way you are determining.

*S:* Oh, is that so, just by feeling that you don't have to come as
often?

*C:* When you are ready to call it quits, why we'll call it quits.

*S:* Uh huh. And then, no return, uh?

*C:* Oh yes, if you feel you want to.

*S:* And then I'd have priority on you, is that it?

*C:* Oh, yes, yes. We don't close the door and lock it, we just say
goodbye and if you want to get in touch with me again, why feel free to
do so.

*S:* I mean, I feel as if I've just about covered almost every phase of
my difficulty and, uh, I think one could keep going talking and talking
and talking about it, if it weren't doing any good. What I mean to say,
if the cure hadn't been started, and I think it has --- I sort of have
leveled off, quite suddenly it seems to me, because last week, why is
it, last Tuesday when I was here I was in a terrible state, this
terrible state. I thought of suicide, which I hadn't even thought of for
almost a year or so, and yet Tuesday night, maybe it's darkest before
dawn or something like that, you know, platitudes.

*C:* Sometimes it is; (*S:* It is?) sometimes not, I mean, it's
interesting ---

*S:* Yes, but I had really reached a low, and it seems maybe superficial
to say that in three or four days I come back and I feel like a
different person, but I think maybe I was reaching a certain emotional
--- setting myself for an emotional revelation, subconscious revelation
which I didn't know but that it was just coming to the top like a boil.

*C:* Getting to the point where you had to do something about the whole
business.

*S:* Yes, I realized the position, that I had to get it out, and I did,
Tuesday night, and it wasn't that I sat down and I said, "Well, Arnold,
let's talk it out, leave us talk it out. . . ." I didn't do that. My
feeling of hatred towards him was so intense that I was weak already,
really I was so weak --- I said something and he misunderstood me. And
then I misunderstood him and I said, "Arnold, we just don't meet at all,
do we []{#012_c3.html_lpn_87}Arnold?" Then he said, "Well, let's talk"
so we sat down and talked. So he took the initiative, and I started to
talk to him for a whole hour and a half. Before it opened up I hated
him, I couldn't talk, "Oh, he won't understand," "We don't meet on the
same level." To myself, "Let's get away from each other. I can't stand
to be with you, you irritate me. . . ." Then all of a sudden, I said,
"Arnold, do you know that I feel sexually inferior to you," and that did
it. The very fact that I could tell him that. Which was, I think that
was the very thing, the whole thought to admit, not to admit to myself,
because I knew that all the time, but to bring it up so that I could
have admitted it to him, which I think was the whole turning point.

*C:* To be able to admit what you regarded as your deepest weakness.

*S:* Yes.

*C:* Just started the ball rolling.

*S:* This feeling of sexual inadequacy, but now that he knows it --- it
isn't important any more. It's like I carried a secret with me, and I
wanted somebody to share it and Arnold of all people, and finally he
knows about it so I feel better. So I don't feel inadequate.

*C:* The worst is known and accepted.
:::
::::

Not infrequently, in bringing therapy to a conclusion, the client
experiences fear, and sense of loss, and a temporary unwillingness to
face life alone without the underlying support of the therapeutic hour.
This was the experience of Miss Har, who paints this picture of her
leaving.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
The twenty-third interview, which I had intended for the last, was as
sad as any I remember. I felt myself wanting sympathy, comfort,
reassurance --- all the things I had come to believe through
nondirective counseling were "wrong" --- and I was so ashamed of myself
that I was sure the counselor must be, too. In this interview I had
completely forgotten the progress that had been accepted in the
preceding one. In its place were doubt, shame, and deep discouragement.
Of all the interviews, that is the one I should least like to live
through again.
:::
::::
:::::

So gloomy was the experience of this interview that she could not bring
herself to end therapy at this point, and asked for another interview.
In this final conversation her attitude had returned to one of basic
self-confidence, though some fear was also present.
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_88}Something of the basis for that fear is explained
in the account she wrote of her feelings some ten weeks later.

::::: block
:::: top
::: sl
I haven't finished the job of integrating and reorganizing myself, but
that's only confusing, not discouraging, now that I realize this is a
continuing process. This is something I didn't know during the last six
weeks of counseling when I was afraid to end the sessions because I
thought I would have to stay with whatever were my last conclusions
about myself and "How would I know they were any more right than those
in any other session?" I have worried less about it these past weeks as
I have seen my behavior reflecting some inner changes. The behavior
makes me like myself better so it is easier to accept the occasionally
contradictory shifts. It is exciting, sometimes upsetting, but deeply
encouraging to feel yourself in action and apparently knowing where you
are going even though you don't always consciously know where that is.
:::
::::
:::::

::: top
T[HROUGH THE]{.sc} E[YES OF A]{.sc} C[LIENT]{.sc}
:::

::: top
Up to this point the attempt has been made to give some generality to
the observations made, by utilizing the reactions of a number of
clients, so that some of the commonalities of their experience may be
noted. Perhaps, however, we may learn with even greater depth by trying
to understand how therapy felt, how it was experienced by one client.

The client who supplied the material from which we shall quote below was
a woman between 35 and 40 whom we shall call Miss Cam, a professional
woman who had some psychological background and had taken one course in
psychotherapy. At the time she came in for therapy she was in the city
temporarily with a friend, and was to leave for a vacation shortly. The
first interview had not been formally arranged, and consequently was
brief, not over 20 or 25 minutes in length. After this first interview
she wrote down her reactions very fully, and showed the document to the
counselor before the second contact. He encouraged her to keep such a
personal account after each interview in order to add to our knowledge
of therapy. It was mentioned that the more completely honest the
account, whether this meant []{#012_c3.html_lpn_89}positive or negative
statements, the more valuable the record would be. There was no further
mention of the document in the counseling interviews, and the counselor
did not receive it until the close of the therapeutic contacts.
:::

The statement is largely self-explanatory, though the writer will
interrupt it at times with comments. The excerpts quoted constitute a
fairly large fraction --- probably half --- of the total manuscript.
There seems to be no need to describe the general content of the
interviews, which were not recorded, beyond saying that counseling
started in regard to a minor problem, proceeded to greater depths, and
involved, so far as the counselor could see, a rather considerable
reorganization of personality. At one or two points some interview
material is described, in order to make the client's comments
understandable. From this point on it may be well to let Miss Cam speak
for herself.

*Written after the First Interview*

::::: block
:::: bot
::: sl
What did it feel like to be a client? At first I felt completely
flummoxed. Before we started, I knew and had accepted the idea that I
was going to have to do all this myself, so of course I skipped the
stage where the client is trying to figure out what the hell goes on
here. . . . But it's one thing to accept the idea and another to put it
into practice. Somehow or other I seemed to expect that what you said
would give me a lead, but most of the time it didn't. You seemed to see
it my way every time. Now that's wonderful, but if you understand me all
that well, what need is there for words? It's almost a static
equilibrium. I have the feeling that there must be movement if I am to
get anywhere --- a vital movement, a flow of communication like an
electric current, and not, I think, just running in the one direction.
But I want to get on with my problem, so what can I do? Well, maybe if I
look around in the cupboard I can find something that will tip the
balance --- something you won't understand, something you will have an
opinion about, something you know more about and can shed light on, even
if it's just catching a feeling or a meaning behind my words of which I
have little or no conscious awareness. But none of these things happen
for a while, and I ask myself whether it is possible that you see more
than I think, more than I see myself?
:::
::::
:::::

[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_90}Well, looking at your reflection of my perceptual
field from my own perceptual field, I see a mirror image, nothing more.
Perhaps if I were to get into your perceptual field and look at myself
through your eyes I would see something more? It looks as if it might be
safe --- the mirror image is so faithful, perhaps it is safe to go
behind it? Perhaps it's like that glass that is mirror from one side but
transparent from the other --- and in both cases you see the same thing?
By now the tension has mounted considerably: I came for counseling,
therefore I wanted to see myself more clearly than I now do; and a
mirror image isn't sufficient. In a sense I am already familiar with
that through private reflections. My own mirroring of myself was
wavering and distorted because the mirror itself was a split-off part of
me; and I have made some progress in that the mirror you hold up
reflects all of me --- both judge and accused. But this hasn't
accomplished what I seek, and has whetted my desire to see myself as a
real, live, flesh and blood person. There is only one obstacle to this
--- you may not want me to come in --- perhaps there are things of your
own lying around that you don't want me to see?

So I look at you fully for the first time. In this look I am asking your
permission to enter, and in some way trying to tell you that I won't
pry. I won't even ask to look at the picture of me that is hanging on
your wall, if only you will please let me come in and look out your
window at myself. Your response to this is the most completely friendly
and disarmingly casual welcome. If you had been effusive, I should have
been so embarrassed and/or occupied in responding to your welcome that I
would have been too shy or frightened of offending you to give much
attention to taking an undisturbed look out your window. On the other
hand, if you had qualified your welcome --- said, in effect, "Okay, come
in and look out the window but mind you don't look at anything else," I
would have been scared to come in, sure that your house was full of
alien and unfriendly things. Even as it was, I was too shy to take more
than the most fleeting glance out the window: but although I don't know
what I saw, I have a strong impression that this was the first positive
movement in the interview, and vitally important. No, I do remember
something of what I saw: I saw a separate person --- a person you saw
and accepted as being distinct from yourself, with an organization all
her own and a law of development peculiar to that organization. Of
specific characteristics, however, I saw nothing.

[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_91}Various elements of this statement seem typical
of many clients. The discovery that experiencing responsibility for self
is very different from knowing about it is one of these. The puzzlement
and frustration of a "one-way dialogue" is another. The fact that it
leads to presentation of more material from the "cupboard" is still
another. The feeling that a pure mirror image in the counselor is not
sufficient for therapeutic movement is worth careful thought. The
fascinating description of discovering that the counselor sees one as a
separate person may be a unique experience or may be more general. With
our present knowledge it is impossible to say. We turn again to Miss
Cam's account.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
With this, it became more hopeful, and therefore more urgent to get at
the root of the problem. Then you made the reflection that struck the
spark --- and isn't it odd that I can't remember the exact
words.^[13](#025_endnotes.html_e13){#012_c3.html_f13}^ If I remember
rightly, there had been other responses that said much the same thing:
it's as if a charge had gradually accumulated in my futile attempts to
establish an emotional flow, and finally it reached sufficient strength
to jump the gap.

Here another interesting thing happened. Somehow or other you reflected
not only my feeling of having hit something significant, but also my
pleasure in the event: *my* pleasure, not your pleasure in having
accomplished something with this case after all. I think that if there
had been any element that I could have interpreted as
self-congratulation in your response, it would have slowed me
considerably. On the other hand, if you had failed to reflect *any* of
that pleasure, something quite vital would have been missing.

Shortly after this, the interview was terminated, without having got me
any further towards the solution of my problem, as far as I could see at
the time. But I did emerge with a strong feeling that this was not going
to be solved at the problem level. Even if I did arrive at an adequate
explanation of why I engage in this particular behaviour, the
explanation in itself would have no therapeutic value.
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_92}I would have to do something before I could make
use of any explanation, and by that time, the explanation wouldn't
matter anyhow.
:::
::::
:::::

Notice, in the second paragraph above, the fact that it is beginning to
be her own feelings which are central to the whole experience, and that
this already seems so right that an intrusion of any attitude or feeling
belonging to the counselor would seem to damage the relationship. She
comments further about an additional reaction to this first interview.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
\[I found that\] I ran into the most extraordinary grammatical
difficulties in expressing myself. I was dissatisfied with the
expression, I knew I hadn't expressed what I meant, but it was the best
I could do at the time. That it was the best I could do at the time
probably indicates that it was all I could face at the time. But if
anyone had faced me abruptly with the meaning behind my expression, I
would have been thoroughly exasperated. What does he think I am anyway?
Does he think I'm so stupid I can't see that? He just doesn't understand
me, that's what, and I'm going to show him how stupid *he* is. Or maybe
it's no use, and I might as well throw in the sponge. Your response, on
the other hand, roused a response of "Sure, that's right as far as it
goes, but there's a lot of other stuff in here that I haven't told you
about yet, and I'd like to."
:::
::::
:::::

This would appear to be an excellent statement of the fact that the
reflection of attitudes by the counselor is not only experienced as
nonthreatening, but, in its very objectification of the essence of what
has been expressed, tends also to draw the client's attention to the
many things which have *not* been said.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
There were some interesting sequels to this experience. For one thing, a
real problem had just arisen. The previous afternoon I had received an
offer of a position in X University; I had to make my decision in 24
hours, and I felt completely unequal to the task. It was a very
attractive offer, and the position appeals to me in all kinds of ways.
But there's this other plan I have --- pioneering work, precarious, not
nearly so many obvious personal satisfactions, something that other
people will think pretty small potatoes until it succeeds, if it ever
does. I had a miserable, restless night, and came to our interview tired
and still undecided. Both from the standpoint of immediate personal
satisfaction, and from the standpoint of "success,"
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_93}the X University appointment was the thing. But
it isn't as easy as all that, because comfort isn't the only criterion
--- there's the little matter of growing and bearing good social fruit.
Well, I think it's no accident that after our interview I suddenly
realized that I didn't have to worry about the socially accepted
standard of success --- it's a standard that has very little meaning for
me. But there was still the question of whether I might not "grow" just
as well in one job as in the other. But how could I decide that? The
answer is still in the future and well beyond my reach. I was in
despair. Then I thought, well, why do I have to decide between the two
jobs? Why not just decide whether or not to take this one? So then it
became clear that the only objection to this job is that I would not get
the holiday I so badly need, and would have to start in feeling tired
and rushed and unprepared. But one doesn't turn down good jobs just
because one wants a holiday. And why not? Because one has to work to
eat. But I don't have to work to eat, what's that got to do with me?
Well, people who do have to, have used that against me so often that I
feel as if I have to act as if I were one of them. Well, well, came the
dawn, and I refused the offer. Following this, I was able to take
account of the fact that there's a good chance that the offer will be
repeated next year, and that there are two other excellent jobs being
kept open for me if the job I am hoping for doesn't materialize, or
folds up. So there's no real basis for a sense of pressure and haste. I
realized too, that the feeling of having to choose between two jobs also
arose from the notion that I had to act as if I had to work to eat. And
now I have the most agreeable feeling that a great many decisions, and
not just in this area either, are going to be much easier for me, and a
lot of other psychological puzzles and problems resolved in a greater
synthesis. This is a pervasive therapy --- something that gets into the
blood stream, not a poultice applied locally.
:::
::::
:::::

It is of some interest that the question of deciding about these
positions had not come into the first interview at all, perhaps because
the client did not feel safe enough to discuss important issues, perhaps
because of the brevity of the interview.

This would appear to be a good description of the way in which therapy
is a releasing agent between interviews. The client finds it safer to
look at experience as it is, and finds this most satisfying. It is this
type of occurrence which also seems to bring an inner, often
unverbalized conviction to the client that *something* is
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_94}happening in his psychological organization and
functioning, and this makes it worthwhile to bear the pain.

::::: block
:::: top
::: sl
Another sequel to our interview is the awful psychic misery ---
something I have become familiar with in the confessional. It always
precedes some real step forward, and cannot be ignored. . . . And now
there are the dreams. First the horrible one where some of the dynamics
of my "problem" were stated, but which fortunately contained the
assurance that the old motivation is dying out. Then the pleasanter one
which seems to say the new, free, vital motive has got the old one well
in hand.
:::
::::
:::::

*Written after the Second Interview*

The material is titled, significantly, "Three hours post-operatively."

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
I'm just so miserable and discouraged that I can scarcely bring myself
to write this. What's the use of it all? A sea, a rising tide of chaotic
emotions rises up from deep, deep within me, and threatens to overwhelm
me. Or is it emotions? Is it instead a thousand conflicting sensations?
All the sensations that arose out of all the separate events of my life,
both external and internal, and that under ordinary circumstances are
organized into patterns of emotion and thought? Can it be that when you
pull one little brick out, the whole structure collapses into a
shapeless pile of bricks, and has to be rebuilt in a new form? Can you
at this point, choose the architectural style --- a better or a worse,
just as you prefer?
:::
::::
:::::

One of the important things which the therapist must learn to recognize
is that he will find it difficult, usually impossible, and certainly not
profitable for therapy, to try to predict the effect an interview will
have. From the counselor's point of view, the interview which evoked
this despair was an interview in which progress was definitely
discernible. The client was beginning to get into the problems she
deeply felt, and to consider her attitudes toward herself. That it would
bring about such a catastrophic sense of discouragement was definitely
not expected by the counselor, nor would the counselor have known it
from her attitude in the next interview.

It is certain that not all clients experience this sense of one
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_95}organization coming to pieces, and another being
of necessity built to take its place. The fact that pulling "one little
brick" can cause it to collapse is doubtless significant of the fact
that the self has been organized upon an unrealistic basis. But this
problem we shall consider at greater length when we discuss a theory of
personality which matches the therapeutic facts.

Miss Cam goes on to discuss her feelings with a complicated analogy of a
pool, deeply agitated. She concludes:

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
Does the fact that the therapist has sufficient faith to accept the
client's "dangerous" experiences calmly and courageously --- as shown by
his ability to restate them --- give the client the added faith in the
outcome necessary to sustain a drastic reorganization?
:::
::::
:::::

Here we seem to find a basis for the thought expressed in an earlier
chapter, that the client finds it possible to take new attitudes toward
himself primarily because he finds the therapist taking these attitudes.
Is this mere imitation? It seems to bear little resemblance to it.

"Sixty Hours Later" is the heading which Miss Cam gives to the next
section of her reactions:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
It took four hours to write that page and a half --- four hours of
sinking down --- no, it's not sinking down, it's more like expanding, as
if bonds were loosened, and a homogeneous design got larger and larger,
until you could see that what looked like continuous lines were really
composed of rows of separate points, and as the design spreads out, the
points get farther and farther apart, until finally the connections
become so tenuous that it snaps, and the pattern collapses into a wild
jumble of unrelated bits and pieces. There is somehow a deep sense of
relief, in just letting go, in relaxing the effort to hold that crushing
multiplicity of pieces in some semblance of order and unity. It's
terribly painful, such utter confusion, such a literally staggering,
brain-stunning *number* of impressions --- it's hopeless, it's humanly
impossible ever to make sense and order out of such chaos: how wonderful
it would be to let go of the last thread of self-consciousness, my
perception of this confusion as confusion --- to lose myself in it,
become just another small piece of it, one with it, to sink down and
down into the grateful peace and oblivion of un-knowing. Yet how odd
that I should think of finding peace by yielding to what seems
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_96}chaos and disorder. How odd that when I imagine
that oblivion I have a consciousness of peace and order, of moving
easily and effortlessly among all that welter of things that seems so
chaotic and threatening when looked at from the outside. There's a deep
joy and happiness here, a real belongingness, a flawless functioning, in
which I am a steady glow, active but unchanging though bathed in an
active changing medium --- a medium composed of an infinite variety of
things, yet all harmoniously blended. They have individuality and form
yet are not rigid; they are full of light and color but not transparent;
substantial, yet not solid. The pattern moves and changes and is full of
life. It's not like a kaleidoscope, not full of bits and pieces held
together in harsh geometric patterns, nor changing with that abrupt
collapse and re-formation. There's none of that lifeless rigidity ---
rather, all the parts are alive, smoothly flowing into new, dynamic,
harmonious relationships. Why no, I've got it wrong. The pattern is not
changing, it's just that the parts are all so alive, the relationship so
vital that I can't associate it with the fixed and static, and so of
course I thought it was changing. But it's I who am moving, flowing in
and around this infinite variety, looking at it from new angles,
discovering more and more about it. It's not the pattern that changes,
it's the vantage point from which I see it. "I" am distinct from this
environment, yet I include it: it's my experience, it's mine, it's part
of me, but it is not "me." I am separate from it, yet I am intimately
related to it, in a relationship of knowledge and of love. I am outgoing
towards it, embracing it, even while it *seems* to embrace me. Whatever
it is, I love it, and it's much more fully conscious than the kind of
self-observation where you stand outside yourself and classify yourself.
But now I've held onto it as long as I can --- any more and I'll distort
it.
:::
::::
:::::

Here is material which bears reading and re-reading. The experience of
which Miss Cam obtains a fleeting glimpse is perhaps the experience of
genuine inner adjustment, in which the self is not struggling to distort
experience but accepts it, moves *with* basic experience rather than
against it, and by relinquishing "control," gains control. It is somehow
astonishing that the experience here described follows a *second*
interview. Miss Cam has most assuredly not achieved the state she
describes, but she has had a momentary insight as to what the goal may
be.

The theoretical terms in which we shall later try to describe
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_97}this experience are that the organized concept of
the self and the self-in-relationship, are congruent with the sensory
and visceral experiences of the organism. It would seem that Miss Cam's
vivid prose is one attempt to state what is meant by such a cold and
technical phrase. When the self "owns" experience, assimilates it, but
has no need to deny it or to distort it, then there is naturally a
feeling of freedom and of unity connected with the experience. There is
no longer any need for defensiveness, and Miss Cam makes this evident in
her next statement.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
You know, it seems as if all the energy that went into holding the
arbitrary pattern together was quite unnecessary --- a waste. You think
you have to make the pattern yourself; but there are so many pieces, and
it's so hard to see where they fit. Sometimes you put them in the wrong
place, and the more pieces mis-fitted, the more effort it takes to hold
them in place, until at last you are so tired that even that awful
confusion is better than holding on any longer. Then you discover that
left to themselves the jumbled pieces fall quite naturally into their
own places, and a living pattern emerges without any effort at all on
your part. Your job is just to discover it, and in the course of that,
you will find yourself and your own place. Looks as if the whole of life
is pretty nondirective, doesn't it? You must even let your own
experience tell you its own meaning: the minute *you* tell it what it
means, you get the same antagonism you would get from a client, and you
are at war with yourself.
:::
::::
:::::

"You must let your own experience tell you its own meaning" --- when
that sentence is deeply understood we will, in the writer's estimation,
know much of what we wish to know in regard to psychotherapy. What is
the usual alternative? It is to try to distort many items of experience
so that they fit in with the concepts we have already formed. I love my
child --- so this surging feeling of annoyance and dislike is a
momentary aberration, or comes because I am tired. I hate my parents ---
therefore this feeling of warmth and affection is something of which I
dare not admit the existence. I feel no wicked sex desires ---
consequently this mounting feeling toward a forbidden sex object was
never experienced. I fear nothing --- so this paralyzing anxiety, this
dread of a nameless, formless something, this pounding of my
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_98}heart, is an accident, means nothing, will
quickly be forgotten. I have done nothing wrong --- hence the
accusations of me that come to mind must have come from others, not from
myself. It is in this way that we try to twist the sensations of vision,
of hearing, of muscle tension, of heart beat, of gastric constriction to
fit the partly true and partly false formulations which we have already
built up in our consciousness. Could we but let experience tell us its
own meaning --- could we recognize hate as hate, love as love, fear as
fear --- and assimilate those basic meanings into our own structure of
self, then there would be none of the inner strain which is so common to
all of us. It is this that Miss Cam seems to be suggesting.

If we ask, as some do, whether the relinquishing of this artificial and
tense control would not bring complete disorganization, perhaps Miss
Cam's next paragraph gives a partial answer.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
When I left off the first entry, I was in a wretched state. I longed to
let go and just become one with my wretchedness. I quit writing only
because I had an appointment and had to pull myself together for it. At
first it was difficult --- I was sluggish and exhausted. But gradually,
as I focused on the things that had to be done, a sort of emergency
organization developed, and the confusion receded. This was effective
enough to carry me easily and cheerfully through two very busy days,
though it was at the back of my mind that I must get back to this as
soon as possible. And now that I look back on it, that must have been
something more than an emergency organization. There's some new element
in it, something comparatively stable, because it's held all this time
and is still holding without any effort. But it *is* new to me, and
subtly different. Whatever the meaning of this semi-mystical nonsense I
have been writing, it does describe a real experience, it does represent
a real release from some unknown tension. But it represents it in an
exaggerated form, I think --- more like a vision of perfection than a
permanent psychological state. But still, there was that feeling of
describing a fact, so perhaps it would be closer to the truth to say
that a reorganization of the personality may for a moment be quite
flawless; but since I am so habituated to directing my experience, and
since every second adds new data of experience, that perfect patterning
or organization will quite likely be distorted in short order. Already I
feel, though only []{#012_c3.html_lpn_99}by a dim contrast, subtle
disorder and dis-ease, a premonition of return to confusion and pain.
Can it be that in therapy, and in life, the process is one of coming
again and again through confusion to a momentary perfection of
organization; those moments coming more and more frequently, and lasting
longer each time, until finally that easy receptivity is firmly
established --- at least sufficiently so for ordinary purposes! Each
time you face a terrifying, disorganizing fact, it leads, not to
destruction, but to a new ease and enjoyment of life, and so confidence
is built; and the periods of disorganization become fewer, because you
accept experience as it comes, and as it is, feeling no need to warp it
to an arbitrary pattern of defense; and since you perceive clearly, the
data will be permitted to find its own natural place, and you will be
slow to accumulate irritating, alien matter, and to shove things into
places where they don't belong, throwing the smoothly functioning
pattern out of alignment and creating strain and friction.
:::
::::
:::::

The astonishing point about these paragraphs is that they were written
after the second interview, and yet appear to describe the very inner
sense of what is achieved in therapy. The writer has known other
clients, too, who seem to have experienced the essence of therapy in
one, two, or three interviews, even though the total reorganization is
far from achieved. If this insight is at all common, it helps to explain
why the client keeps returning in spite of the suffering he is causing
himself.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
How this reorganization came about, I don't quite know. There was,
however, a sequence of events which may contain a clue. First, the utter
confusion and disorganization. Then the necessity of going about my
business. When the latter arose, I simply left the confusion as it
stood. It was too much for me, quite hopeless to think of doing anything
to restore order. So I simply turned away from it, and focused my
attention on what had to be done. And it does look as if when I turned
my back on that confusion, it simply organized itself, and much better
than I could have managed deliberately. In fact, it looks as if I ought
to be grateful for the necessity that demanded my attention. Otherwise I
should probably have tried to push and shove the mess into some sort of
shape, and made a botched job of it, no doubt. Most people undergoing
therapy have to attend to the routine of living when they leave the
therapeutic session. And perhaps that []{#012_c3.html_lpn_100}shift in
focus is a vital part of the therapeutic process. We do so love to think
that all the important things go on under our watchful eyes!
:::
::::
:::::

One is somehow reminded here of Angyal's contention that the conscious
self often "tends to take over the government of the total personality,
a task for which it is not qualified." (9, p. 118) At least it would
appear that the organization of personality is, like a good golf stroke,
not always best achieved by focusing consciously on it.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
In the past couple of days, my mind has returned again and again to our
interview, and odd thoughts and insights have flashed into
consciousness. Sometimes they have been quite clear, and have remained
so long enough to think about them and follow through on them quite a
way. But then quite suddenly they are gone and I can't even remember
what they were. They stay longest in the bath, and I wonder if that's
because I am removed from paper and pencil, so that they are safe from
being caught and objectified? I know they disappear like magic when I
think of writing them down. There is one insight that crops up again and
again, but I can't for the life of me think what it is --- I just know
it's something I always mean to bring up at our next interview.
:::
::::
:::::

Both in and out of the interview, many clients have experiences
comparable to this one. The proof of the efficacy of our total
physiological and psychological organization, if any is needed, lies in
the efficiency with which we protect ourselves from having to recognize
attitudes or experiences which have been denied to awareness because
they are threatening to the self. One client, whose life had been built
upon the basis of denying a great proportion of her actual experience,
demonstrated amazingly the psychic struggle which may exist. She would
recognize within herself a significant facet of experience which she had
not faced. She would start to voice it in the interview. She would
forget completely, in the middle of the sentence, what it was she was
about to say. She would sit and wrestle with herself until the material
again appeared in awareness, or she would, if necessary, start talking
about some related topic until she could again capture and
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_101}resolutely meet and assimilate the experience
that she so obviously wanted to accept, and so obviously wished to
deny.^[14](#025_endnotes.html_e14){#012_c3.html_f14}^

Miss Cam related still further her experience of the second interview.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Having started at the end, and gone on to the middle, I have finally
come to the beginning --- to the interview itself.

I had quite a bad case of stage fright when I came to the interview ---
part fear, part hope, part embarrassment. Fear that nothing would
happen, that I would never find my way out into that lovely world of
freedom glimpsed for a flashing moment at our previous interview; hope
that I would find it, or rather, that you would find it for me, that you
held the key which would unlock the prison door. The embarrassment is
due to the fact that I would like you to think well of me, and here I am
showing you all my foolishness and inadequacy without any opportunity to
demonstrate my competence and control (Oh-oh!). . . . After the initial
nervousness wore off, I kept looking for a repetition of that experience
of the first interview --- the feeling that something had clicked, that
there was a real unity of perception. . . . So I hauled out all kinds of
personal history hoping to touch off that response. And it's funny about
that, isn't it? As far as I can recall, it was mostly quite historical
and objective, very little of my emotional response to it. But I did
have powerful emotional responses, I was perfectly well aware of them,
and I remember them, but I always thought of them as accidents, just
something to be coped with among other things --- and when I speak of
past events, the way I felt about them seems irrelevant in comparison
with the events themselves. I don't think I like not having any feeling
of those feelings. It's almost as if some portion of my own experience
were inaccessible to me. It's robbery somehow, makes me feel less than
myself, cut off.

Well, anyway, as I brought out those things, nothing at all happened ---
at least not what I hoped for. Sure, you caught the sense of what I
said, the mirror image was as true as before, but it had lost its
novelty, it was flat and dead compared with the view through your
windows. As time wore on, I grew awfully discouraged, disappointed,
slightly desperate. I wanted a repetition of that experience so much,
and when it didn't come, the emphasis seemed to shift from
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_102}the longing for release to a longing for just
contact with you, any kind of contact. I looked at you occasionally,
hoping that what didn't happen with words might be accomplished in a
look, and failing of that I just looked at you in hopes of reassurance.
Maybe you would look at me as if you liked me, or sympathized with me,
or *something*. But that didn't happen either, though you still looked
perfectly calm and friendly, and open, and sort of easily ready. Ready
for what? To accept anything I said? To look at all of it, without
setting any limits, but without getting tied up in emotional knots? If
you can look at all the horrid possibilities of life with such a clear
gaze, maybe I can too? It's not as if my experience were so remote from
you that it doesn't affect you at all. It can't be too remote, because
you seem to understand it so well. And you're human too --- it happened
to me, it could happen to anyone, you included. We are all aware of
that, I think, and that's why we refuse so often to accept other
people's experience, because when we do, we are faced with the
possibility that it might happen to us. But by your understanding and
acceptance you seem to accept the possibility that it might happen to
you too, and you still face the prospect with unruffled calm. That holds
out interesting prospects for me, but right now I'm awfully disappointed
and I want immediate reassurance. I would like to touch you, to put my
head on your shoulder and cry. Maybe you would put your arms around me
and pat my shoulder and say, "There, there, it's all right, don't cry";
and I'd feel soothed and relieved and could just stop struggling with
all these things. It would feel so comfortable, but at the same time I
have the feeling that it would spoil something. It would make life easy
and palatable, but I would lose something --- what, I do not know --- so
precious, so much my best self, that I would forever after be hounded by
a subtle feeling of loss and failure. If I didn't know already, if I
hadn't at least partially accepted the fact that you aren't going to
provide one with that commodity, I might fight for it, or work towards
securing that, rather than towards the solution of problems which seem
hopeless. And if I weren't wise to your tricks (!!) the thing that would
sustain me would be your unspoken assumption of something better. Or no
--- that's right in a way, but I've got it wrong end to. That experience
of freedom which I long to repeat wasn't achieved by petting, either
actual or symbolized, nor has past experience of the usual expressions
of sympathy given rise to it. Sympathy may have been restful and enabled
me to go back into action with renewed vigor, but it's never
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_103}been of direct help in solving my problems. For
a while it has created the illusion that the environment, other people,
are going to change so that I won't have to do anything. But that
illusion disappears rapidly when I go into action again. In the long
run, sympathy just hasn't worked and I'm forced to the conclusion that
I've got to do something so that action won't be so difficult.

When I come to you, there are two things in my mind: (1) I hope that I
can act freely, but I haven't had much experience of it, so I'm not sure
that I can. (2) Sympathy has given me some relief in the past, I'm sure
of that, so if worst comes to worst I can fall back on it. I still have
a lingering hope that you will do something so that action will become
easy for me, and that inclines me further towards passivity. Since this
problem isn't solving itself easily, my doubt of my own ability is very
prominent, and if you were to give me sympathy at this point, you would
confirm my worst suspicions. . . .

But you don't confirm my doubts; you support my hope. I'm not grateful
for it, I don't experience it as a bell ringing, but in a dim way it
enables me to carry on on my own. But I still cling to the interesting
possibility of more personal contact with you --- I'm not sure enough of
myself yet, and that's my ace in the hole. I know enough about therapy
to know how far I'll get with that one, but even so I can't quite put
the idea out of my mind. It's nice to feel free to express myself, it's
interesting to discover that there's more to express than I had
suspected, and there's a dim satisfaction in plodding on in the face of
obstacles; this continues to look like a nice safe atmosphere in which
to do those things, but in case you ever weaken or withdraw that
atmosphere, I'll hang on to the other possibility. If necessary, that
can serve the double purpose of defending my weakness and destroying
your seeming independence.
:::
::::
:::::

Two points in this excerpt call for comment. Here is an instance of
those attitudes which in other therapies might well be the beginning of
a positive transference. (See Chapter 5 for a more extended discussion
of this point.) But here at least the client herself recognizes that the
possibility of a transference *relationship* is a distinctly second-best
goal. Other clients experience the relationship in a somewhat different
fashion, as will be evident in the following chapter (Chapter 4, pages
167--171).

The other point is the way in which she seems to confirm to
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_104}some extent the theory of the therapist's role
which was offered earlier. To see another person, the therapist,
accepting experience rather than rejecting it, particularly when it
seems that it could have happened to him, makes it easier to accept the
experience oneself.

*Written after the Third Interview*

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
When I came to our interview today, I wasn't anything like as nervous as
I was on the previous occasion. There was a certain submerged
excitement, but not the stage fright. I'm not so scared or concerned
about your opinion any more. It certainly hasn't been in evidence, and
under those circumstances, solving the mystery of my own peculiar
behavior emerges as a more and more interesting and challenging
occupation. At the very least, I've got to fill in the time somehow,
haven't I? If I can't occupy myself in dealing with your opinions about
my problem, the only thing for it is to root around and see if I can
discover what my problem is. Because by now I realize that I don't know
what it is.
:::
::::
:::::

The feeling of "butterflies in the stomach" just prior to an interview
is an interesting phenomenon which is common to many if not most
clients. It is of interest that it should arise in an atmosphere which,
above all else, is experienced as nonthreatening. The answer of course
lies in the fact that although counselor and situation are
nonthreatening, the experiences with which one is trying to deal are
very threatening indeed.

An aspect of therapy which is not sufficiently clear to many beginners
is that the "problems" which are brought to therapy are not resolved
directly, and that a frequent experience in therapy is the gradual
realization that the problem is what is not known in consciousness. In a
very true sense the client never knows what the problem is until it is
well on its way to resolution. Another way of stating this phenomenon is
that the problem appears to be the same in all cases; it is the problem
of assimilating denied experience into a reorganized self.

But Miss Cam is at no loss for material.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Anyway there is something I really want to talk about this time. Maybe
that's what the anticipatory excitement was all about? This
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_105}is something new; maybe I'll get somewhere now?
I do have some feelings about this, but I'm a bit doubtful as to how
it's going to be received. I'd like to do it with style, I'd like to fit
the manner to the matter, but I don't quite know how to do it. I'm not
sure what characteristics the manner ought to have. If that's the case,
and I'm still curious about where this will lead me, the only course is
just to plunge in any old how. This doesn't arouse any disapproval, and
is quite a relief. It's good to say what I mean for once in a way. I try
it again, with a little more confidence. This is still more pleasant,
and I gradually come to the point where I can just savor the fun of
expressing myself, let the chips fall where they may. I still can't let
go altogether --- after all, I mustn't look like the sort of person who
goes to extremes (and why not?) and anyway there's still the chance that
you will condemn me when you find out what I'm really like. But the
emphasis is shifting from what you may think or say, to the exhilarating
feeling of expressing my own feelings. You recede quite far in
importance; and in fact, in some ways it would suit me very well if you
just sat there and didn't say anything. When you do speak, it quite
frequently seems like an interruption, and I just wait more or less
impatiently for you to finish so that I can go on. I can't place those
occasions, but I *do* know that they *weren't* the times when you caught
my feeling of having to conform somehow to other people's opinions. That
was arresting, not interrupting. Once you laughed with me quite
spontaneously, and while that was very agreeable, I seemed to detect a
faintly personal note in your laughter which made me uneasy. Not that I
interpreted that personal note as mocking or derogatory --- rather it
was like the easy laughter which friends share at each other's foibles.
But here I've been toying with the idea of a more personal relationship,
yet when I see anything that remotely resembles it, I'm brought up
short. Isn't that odd? It's one thing to imagine such a possibility, but
if that possibility is realized, it's going to involve me in some sort
of situation which is painful and threatening. Some sort of emotional
complication that I'm terribly afraid I can't handle.
:::
::::
:::::

Here it is clear that client and therapist are both perceiving the
situation in the same way, and the sense of working together in the
relationship is definitely more evident. It is probably a rather
frequent experience for at least some of the therapist's responses to be
regarded as an interruption. Clinical experience would give
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_106}two reasons for occasional responses, however.
In the first place, the quick objection of the client to an inaccurate
reflection of attitude is some evidence of the meaning that
understanding has for him. He has come to accept it rather casually, but
if it falters he is at once aware of this fact. The other reason for
avoiding silence is that it can facilitate projection and transference.
If the therapist has shown by his words, as well as by his attitudes and
behavior, his understanding and acceptance of the painful attitudes
being explored, then that fact is carried away in the memory and is
difficult to distort. If the therapist has maintained silence, however,
then it is easier for the client, in the period after the interview, to
project meaning into that silence. The therapist may have been
approving, disapproving, contemptuous, bored --- the client's needs make
it easy to project in this fashion, when there is little evidence to go
on.

::::: block
:::: top
::: sl
When I came to the interview, I also brought a resolution not to look
for the exciting experience of the first interview. . . . At first it
was a little difficult to keep from casting longing glances in that
direction, but as I got more absorbed in expression of my immediate
feelings, it faded into the background. And although the interview ended
without any repetition of that prized experience there was none of the
discouragement and despair and confusion that I felt before. Instead I
felt as if I were getting somewhere --- had something to get my teeth
into now, and it was a great nuisance that the interview should end at
that point.

Afterwards, I thought of all kinds of things I would like to talk about
the next time I see you. I've forgotten most of them now, and it's quite
exasperating, but I'm not terribly worried. I'm beginning to feel a bit
like Mr. Micawber --- "Something will turn up."

I didn't make any attempt to get at this writing immediately after the
interview. I was surfeited with myself and my problems and didn't feel
that I could even see them if I tried to. So I just obeyed that impulse
and went for a ride and otherwise enjoyed myself until the following
evening. After looking at myself for so long, it's very refreshing to
look around outside. Of course I find me very interesting, but I get
awfully fed up with such a limited subject after a while. Perhaps the
interviews do regularly work that way to some extent? The exclusive
double focus on self produces satiety, so that the
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_107}environment looks pleasant and refreshing for a
change. One commonly escapes from the environment into the self, but now
the procedure is reversed, and the environment is seen in a new light as
satisfying a positive need. There's a primitive sort of acceptance of
the environment.
:::
::::
:::::

*Written after the Fourth Interview*

It appeared to the counselor that Miss Cam arrived at some fresh
insights into certain aspects of her behavior in the fourth interview.
He would not, however, have guessed the depth of excitement which
accompanied this experience.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Golly, golly, golly, I feel wonderful! Warm and glowing and happy and
relaxed. It's a real vascular relaxation. My skin has that
characteristic smooth, soft feeling, all over my body, too. Of all
things to happen! To drop all the elaborate analysis, think through the
simplest problems in human relationships like a small child spelling out
words, and come up with the obvious conclusions like Columbus
discovering America. And darn it, I've known those things for years, but
I had them all dressed up in such elaborate jargon I couldn't see what
they meant. . . . Another thing I like about this kind of happiness is
that it's so smooth and easy and steady. Not that sort of almost
violent, wildly exhilarating, extravagant and ultimately exhausting
happiness to which I'm accustomed. That rushed out like escaping steam
and spent itself in reckless haste, as if anticipating the inevitable
moment when the lid would be clamped down again.
:::
::::
:::::

::::: sl
\[*The next entry is dated "Next morning"*\]

:::: block
::: bot
It becomes increasingly difficult to write these reports --- whatever is
happening becomes steadier and subtler --- has more continuity, so that
separate events don't stand out with dramatic clarity, and it's very
difficult to see what's going on inside me. Moreover, by now it's a far
cry from scientific investigation, it's a highly personal experience and
that has several results: my energies are pretty well tied up in
whatever process is going on, and it takes a tremendous effort to
observe and record the process: my instinct or impulse, or what have
you, is all against analyzing and self-regarding --- I'm much inclined
to leave myself alone and just enjoy the results, or let them wash over
me when I don't enjoy them: some way or other, the whole counseling
process seems to militate against any sort of introspection
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_108}or preoccupation with self. Of course all kinds
of questions and insights and some speculations (though remarkably few)
arise between interviews, but there's very little tendency to get lost,
preoccupied, withdrawn in them; they draw your attention in much the
same way as external events do; they're more apt to crop up while you're
doing something, and they're very apt to vanish if you turn your full
attention on them and try to capture them.
:::
::::
:::::

There is something fascinating about this paragraph. The client is, in
the therapeutic hour, focusing all her attention upon self, to a degree
that she has probably never known before. Yet this situation is
experienced as a process which leads away from preoccupation with self.
The question is worth raising as to whether therapy is not an
experiencing *of* self, not an experience *about* self. Thus the
intellectualizing, introspective interest in self drops away in favor of
a more primary experience.

Her reference to the fact that insights crop up at odd moments, when
attention is fastened elsewhere, is a very common experience of clients.
A number of clients have mentioned that the way these significant
self-understandings seem to come "out of the blue," when they are least
expecting it, is for them additional evidence of the strength of the
process which has been set in motion.

Miss Cam next refers to an experience of progress which is common to
many clients, the realization that some painful constellations of
experience have lost their threatening character. It is evident that it
is not always necessary for such material to have been mentioned in the
interview. It is the attitude of the self toward it which appears to
have altered.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
I'm still feeling relaxed and very pleased and interested in life. I
noticed a most extraordinary thing last night! Tuesday evening, before
our interview, I happened to think of an incident in my childhood, just
about the only one I remember. It was a quarrel between my mother and
father, in which mother was twisting the handle of a mirror I had been
given for Christmas and which I dearly loved. I was afraid mother would
break it, and she did. I think I was about five or six, but I can
remember every detail of that scene (except the words) --- looks, tones,
location; and up to and including Tuesday
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_109}evening I have never been able to think of that
occasion without experiencing the awful childish agony and terror as if
it were yesterday. Well, last night I thought of it again, and do you
know, every bit of that emotion has vanished, and it's just something
that happened to me once. There were other subsequent occasions --- all
associated with the relationship between my parents --- which gave me
the same pain to recall. So I took a look at those, and lo and behold,
they are just ancient history too. Moreover, I can recall some of the
normal events of childhood, for which I have heretofore had a complete
amnesia. And that clears up a point which has been bothering me in our
interviews. I'm supposed to be suffering from denied attitudes and
experiences (labels, yet!) and I couldn't find any. There are very few
feelings I have refused to admit to consciousness. Sure, I both loved
and hated my parents but I always knew and accepted that; and so on all
down the line. Furthermore, I have always, as far back as I can
remember, acknowledged the right of other people to run their own lives
in their own way, and I've even extended that right to myself. So I
admitted the right of my parents to break up their home, even if it was
rather hard on me. I understood that they had no intention of hurting
me, and that when they did it was accidental; I just happened to be in
the middle when they attacked each other, or engaged in defensive
maneuvers, and I was sorry for them. But the one thing I didn't admit to
awareness was that in spite of knowing that they didn't intend to injure
or attack me, I *felt* as if they did. I felt sorry for myself, too, and
though I admitted that to some extent, I had no patience with it, and
denied a good bit of it.
:::
::::
:::::

The person who is psychologically sophisticated tends to feel that he
has not rejected his own attitudes and feelings, because he has accepted
those which are commonly denied. But if there is internal strain and a
lack of integration, it seems always to be due to the fact that
sensations and feelings which organically exist are prevented from
entering into awareness.

Miss Cam then discusses another attitude which she has held which she
feels was not basically her own. "It was *an* attitude, not wholly *my*
attitude." She continues:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
As a result . . . the things that would enable me to respect myself
weren't mine either, and I devaluated myself quite thoroughly. I was
worth precisely nothing, and I couldn't convince myself otherwise,
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_110}in spite of all evidence to the contrary. Say
something unpleasant about me, and I'd agree immediately and
wholeheartedly; but try to tell me something nice about myself, and I'd
spend hours trying to convince you, to explain in great detail how wrong
you were. It wasn't false modesty either, I really felt desperately
uncomfortable and dishonest in accepting appreciation.
:::
::::
:::::

This would appear to be a good example of the tenacity with which the
individual holds to the concept of self around which he has organized
experience. It is as difficult to accept experience which would expand
this self as to accept material which would constrict it --- both types
of experience are inconsistent with the picture we maintain of self, and
are rejected.

The client's description of the interview itself contains some elements
that are new and significant.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
I was eager to come to the interview this time: I had things I wanted to
tackle, and it couldn't be too soon for me. It's maddening the way those
things disappear when you come to say them --- my mind is a complete
blank, not even any irrelevancies to seize on. The trick in dealing with
it seems to be not to force things --- just resign yourself to the
blank, and wait for it to yield up something.

I'm scarcely conscious of you any more; or perhaps it would be better to
say I'm not *self*-conscious of you. I'm not scared of your opinion of
me (or at least, the tiny remnants just amuse me) though in a sense I'm
much more aware of the fact that you must have one, and I'd be quite
genuinely interested in hearing it. And quite undisturbed by it, I
think. I'm always interested in what you say, now, and perfectly willing
to postpone something I was just going to say in order to listen --- and
*really* listen --- to you. You said a lot of things this time that
penetrated so far behind what I said that I had some difficulty in
seeing that it was what I really meant. And yet you were right, and in
spite of your outstripping me so far, I was interested and stimulated,
rather than frightened into retreat. Oh golly, I was frightened once,
wasn't I? Right near the beginning, when I said something about being
rather better off than most people and you rephrased it so that I looked
downright conceited. You scored a bull's eye with that one, as I
subsequently realized very clearly indeed, but at the time I ran rapidly
in the opposite direction. At one point, you said something about
relationships that I couldn't []{#012_c3.html_lpn_111}see at all. Yet I
had the feeling that it was somehow right, so I just agreed without
understanding and went on. Judging from the results, the interview was a
howling success, and all your remarks went in the direction I was trying
to go. Yet I imagine that some people on reading a record of it, would
say that it was a beautiful demonstration of the contention that
counselors *do* introduce their own evaluations and do direct the
client. But if I say to you, "Pardon me, but what direction am I
traveling?" and you reply, "North," I can't see what ground there is for
saying that you shoved me in that direction. It's rather difficult to
prove, though. A lot of your responses got home with a small shock ---
particularly the recurrent theme of "labels" and "conformity," and a lot
of that you dug out of quite unpromising looking material. But those
shocks were pleasant --- it was a relief to have the pretense stripped
away. I want to get rid of it, but I can't quite manage it myself, so
you are just carrying out my own, real wish. But there again, anyone
looking at the situation from an external point of reference, would
probably accuse you of selecting in terms of your own opinions and
values.
:::
::::
:::::

It is of great interest to the therapist in this case that his responses
in this interview seemed to the client to be of a somewhat different
order, that they penetrated far behind what she said, that they went
beyond her, even though in the direction she was going. The counselor's
perception of the situation is quite different. In his opinion, his
responses were of the same order as those in earlier interviews, simply
reflecting the attitudes expressed. From his vantage point, the
difference appeared to be that the client was now really exploring in
territory that was unknown to herself, and that her tentative statements
were of the type that other clients have described as "I hardly knew
what I was saying." When these statements of attitudes which are
borderline in consciousness are taken and briefly rephrased by the
counselor, the perception of them in more definite form seems to the
client to be a new experience. It takes her further in her own thinking,
is seen as going deeper into her meaning than she has gone herself, is
even seen as frightening, something to run away from. Which of these
perceptions of the experience comes closer to the objective reality is
of some interest, since it would shed further light upon the process of
therapy. Obviously what is needed are cases in which we have *both*
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_112}the recordings and the introspective reactions
of the client (and perhaps the introspective reactions of the counselor)
so that comparisons may be made.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
You are beginning to look much more like a person than one of the class
"counselors." It seemed to me in this interview that you sounded much
more like your whole self than just the part of you that's a counselor.
Of course I know that's largely because I've allowed you to come in, but
I wonder if you feel a little freer and more "yourself"? Now when you
laugh, it does sound much more like the sort of laughter which friends
share, and it doesn't startle me as it did that once in the previous
interview. On the contrary, I like it very much. It makes me feel very
brisk and competent and eager to get on with my investigations. After
all, if we can share the same jokes, and I can catch up with your
projections of my own meaning, maybe I'm just as competent as you seem
to be, maybe I'm quite a capable person after all. As a matter of fact,
when you start penetrating as far as this into my meaning, it is getting
closer to the normal, friendly interchange, isn't it?
:::
::::
:::::

The counselor agrees that he was, and would seem, more of a whole self
in this and following interviews. In initial sessions, when attitudes
being expressed are relatively superficial, the process of understanding
the client may not take a total effort on the part of the therapist, and
the reflection of attitudes runs more risk of being a technique rather
than an expression of the whole personality of the counselor. But as the
interviews lead into dim and somewhat incoherent thinking, as the client
is genuinely exploring the unknown, the counselor becomes wholly engaged
in trying to keep step with this puzzled and puzzling search. His
attention is completely focused upon the attempt to perceive from the
client's frame of reference, and thus it is no longer a technique in
operation, but the implementation of an absorbing personal purpose. In
this attempt to struggle along with the client, to glimpse with him the
half-understood causes of behavior, to wrestle with feelings which
emerge into awareness and slip away again, it is entirely possible that
the simple concept of "an accurate reflection of feeling" no longer fits
the therapist's behavior. Rather than serving as a mirror, the therapist
becomes a []{#012_c3.html_lpn_113}companion to the client as the latter
searches through a tangled forest in the dead of night. The therapist's
responses are more in the nature of calls through the darkness: "Am I
with you?" "Is this where you are?" "Are we together?" "Is this the
direction you are heading?" As might be expected, the answer to these
questions is sometimes "No," sometimes "Yes." The counselor is sometimes
with the client, at times he may be on ahead, at times he lags behind in
his understanding. Such minor deviations from the course are relatively
unimportant since it is so clear that the therapist is in general
saying, "I'm trying to keep right with you as you make this perilous and
frightening search." This point appears to be borne out by Miss Cam's
continuing statement.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
You said some things that didn't seem to be quite what I meant. But far
from being threatening, they were positively encouraging. It's nice to
find that a misunderstanding isn't irrevocable --- that I can correct
it, and that you will understand and accept the correction. It isn't
necessary to be perfectly clear and understood every time I speak.
There's no need to be scared to death every time I open my mouth for
fear I'll say something that's not perfectly accurate and entirely
beyond reproach or criticism. No need to pick my words with such care
that I end up by expressing myself much less clearly than if I had just
said the first thing that came into my head.
:::
::::
:::::

Here is the answer to those who question, "Isn't client-centered therapy
*really* directive, because the counselor selects the elements he will
respond to, and thus subtly guides the client toward certain areas and
certain goals?" As indicated here, if the attitude of the therapist is
to follow the client's lead, the client not only perceives this, but is
quick to correct the counselor when he gets off the track, and
comfortable in doing so.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Towards the end of the interview, when I was picking up speed at a great
rate, I began to feel simply wonderful all over --- warm and relaxed and
happy. You were much more present to me than you've ever been before. In
a way, indispensable to my happiness at that point --- I felt much more
myself in your company than I would have felt by myself. But it's not
dependent in the derogatory sense --- I suppose it's what has been
called "freedom of dependence." If you can say a fish is dependent on
water, then you can say my personality, []{#012_c3.html_lpn_114}my self,
is dependent on association, relationship with other selves for life and
growth and freedom to move around. And golly! it *is* a repetition of
that first exciting experience --- it just looks different at first
glance because it's steady and continuous, rather than fleeting and
startling. Something I've grown into, rather than plunged into. But what
is it? I can say it's a communion, a mutuality, even though limited, of
experience; and I haven't explained a thing. There it is, and it's the
most natural thing in the world; and like all the fundamentals of life,
it simply refused to yield up its mystery. No more feeling of going into
your house. I'm at home in my own house now, and you're a very welcome
guest. I'm very pleased to show you all over the house, even though it's
rather untidy in some rooms. But after all, I just moved in, and what
can you expect? It'll look better when I've had time to settle down.
:::
::::
:::::

As Miss Cam here suggests, the communication of one's real self, one's
real attitudes, to another, may well be the basis of deep social
experience, of friendship, of interpersonal development, as well as of
therapy. Certainly another facet of therapeutic growth is well described
in her phrase, "I'm at home in my own house now, and you're a very
welcome guest."

Some idea of the fluctuation in mood and attitude which occurs in the
client as the self is being reorganized, is conveyed in the next
excerpts from Miss Cam's material.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
I'm beginning to feel sort of remote again; I can't find anything I want
to do, and I can't seem to settle down to anything. What happened
yesterday happened for good, and I'm not worried about it turning out to
be just an accident or an illusion. But can it be that there's still
something I haven't discovered? Just when I thought I hadn't a care in
the world? It feels almost as if something were getting ready to pounce
on me. Or maybe I'm just getting a cold?
:::
::::
:::::

"Can it be that there's still something I haven't discovered?" It is a
most interesting fact, discussed more fully by Miss Cam at a later time,
that once some denied attitudes are admitted to awareness, there is a
strong tendency for others to appear also. Perhaps it may be put in this
way. Experiences have been distorted or denied because it seems that to
admit them would be too destructive to the self. In the safety of the
therapeutic []{#012_c3.html_lpn_115}relationship it is discovered that,
though the admission to awareness and the reorganization which is
necessitated are both painful, yet the gain in internal comfort and
release from tension clearly outweighs the pain. Hence there seems to
arise a strong tendency to look at material still more deeply denied.
The foregoing excerpt appears to be the first feeling of anxiety
presaging further self-revelations to come.

::::: block
:::: top
::: sl
I phoned mother; as usual she told me what I ought to do, as usual I
feel discouraged and hopeless, and I *am* getting a cold. Why did it
have to happen now, just when I'm looking forward to the next interview
and going on vacation? . . . Oh, dear, I thought that problem \[of
mother\] was well in hand, and here it is again. Won't I ever be able to
cut loose from mama's apron strings? What's the use --- I've tried *so*
hard, and I just can't keep it up for ever.
:::
::::
:::::

*The Fifth Interview*

The following day Miss Cam came in for the fifth interview. She had,
from the first, planned to leave town for her vacation within a couple
of days after this interview. During the contact she went very deeply
into many areas of her experience, including her relationship with her
mother. She felt it was impossible to change that relationship. She
stated at one point, "I'm just a baby. But it's so disgusting to be a
baby girl when you're as old as I am." At the conclusion of the
interview, which to the counselor did not seem at all characteristic of
the ending of therapy, she bade the counselor goodbye, stating that she
would try to carry on by herself. The following material was written a
few hours after the interview.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
What a desperately discouraging occasion! So flat and hopeless, like
being up against an insensate blank wall --- immovable, impenetrable,
unscalable, a dead end to life and growth, a sterile, uncaring wall of
mystery cutting me off from myself. It's difficult to convey the
peculiar quality of hopelessness, of *deadness*, as if the whole
universe were really and truly senseless --- no point in trying to solve
the mystery of yourself, no point in *anything*, because if life is
meaningless, it can only end in frustration and death, and what looks
like mystery is only the revelation of ultimate futility and negation.
It []{#012_c3.html_lpn_116}isn't that there is *something* you don't
understand, but rather that there is *nothing* to be understood. *You*
might just as well not be there for all the good you can do, for all the
good this interview or anything else can do. With the best will in the
world, you can't solve the insoluble. I'm just pointlessly discussing a
pointless existence which you pointlessly reflect. It's non-sense; it's
no-thing, it just is not. And just to make everything worse, you look
disapproving. Now I know perfectly well that you don't actually look
that way, and in a sense, I don't really care any more whether you
approve or disapprove. But you see, last time your face suddenly looked
different --- as if it had been black with coal dust, and then was
washed clean to reveal an altogether unsuspected freshness and
individuality. I was delighted with that discovery, and I'm as blackly
disappointed as a child to have lost that clear vision. And there's
something awfully wrong and confusing about the way you look to me now.
I keep wanting to rub my eyes, as if I were brushing away fog and
cobwebs. And I'd like to wash your face. I can see it covered with black
coal dust, and it's a little relief to imagine taking lots of soap and
water and a nice rough cloth and washing it shiny clean. Somehow or
other that soot on your face seems a great wrong done to you, and I feel
that I want to right it and make amends. But it's too late, maybe it
always was too late. It's all over now, and here I am in a hell of
misery from which I'll never escape without help. And since there isn't
any help, I'll never escape. Period. But I dug that pit for myself, and
when I started to dig, I contracted to face the consequences. What if I
dug a little deeper than I expected? What if I never do find the way
out? Then I'll just have to learn to live here; and the condition of
that learning is an unwavering faith that there is a way out even if I
never do find it myself.
:::
::::
:::::

This complete despair makes an interesting contrast to the relaxed,
steady happiness which followed the fourth interview (see page 107) and
illustrates the tremendous swings of feeling which may, in some clients,
accompany the strenuous process of alteration of self. Such utter
desolation is only likely to occur, in the author's experience, in
situations where a basic and extensive reorganization of self is taking
place.

The vivid description of the changes in perception of the counselor
relate very significantly to personality theory. In the fourth interview
the counselor's face, which had appeared dark, is
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_117}suddenly seen as clean, fresh, and individual.
Note how closely this matches the client's perception of herself in the
fourth interview (review pages 107--114 for evidence). But now that she
sees herself as having reached an insoluble dead end of a pointless
existence, the counselor's face blackens, and takes on a disapproving
look. In a later chapter some of our research evidence corroborating
this experience will be reviewed. It appears to be very significantly
true that the client perceives others in much the same terms that he
perceives himself, and alteration in self-perception brings about
changes in the way others are perceived.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
It's extraordinary to me how autonomous, how uncontrollable this process
is once it gets started. Wednesday \[fourth interview\] I was in
wonderful shape, on much better terms with myself and the world than I
have ever been, and cheerfully equal to years and years of problems and
stresses and strains. That left Friday to tidy up all the loose ends and
the whole thing was just ideal. And then there was that utterly
involuntary rising of an inexplicable misery. I dismissed it as silly
and gave my attention to other things --- I certainly did not encourage
and magnify some slight feeling by giving it undue attention. No, once
you have given your consent the process follows its own course and
returns to tranquility only when the immediate job of reorganization is
complete --- and it seems as if one's conscious judgment of when the job
is complete is not very reliable, nor does it have much power.
:::
::::
:::::

Here again is evidence, in an unexpected area, that "experience must
tell you its own meaning." She has thought that therapy was complete,
but she is not experiencing it as completed. The experiencing of the
inevitability of the process which she describes is certainly a frequent
phenomenon, though it is possible that sufficient fear or defensiveness
can halt the process for some time. This whole matter deserves more
careful attention.

The next painful paragraphs were written later that Friday evening, the
day of the fifth interview.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
I've been wandering around like a ghost all evening, trying to find the
answer, telling myself it isn't so, I just *can't* be as miserable as
all []{#012_c3.html_lpn_118}that, it doesn't make sense, and then I'm
swamped with the realization that it is so, sense or not, I *am* that
miserable. So then I collapse in a chair and try to look full at that
pain, let it wash right over me, in hopes, I suppose, that it may work
like a crisis --- that if I take the full force of it at once, it may
knock me into darkness and oblivion from which I will emerge a new
person. Well, it didn't work that way, but as I was crouching there in a
miserable huddle, not improved by the fact that my cold is rapidly
getting worse, your face with its disapproving expression rose vividly
in my mind's eye. Perhaps I was addressing my thoughts to you ---
really, I can't remember, but anyway I was carrying on a despairing
struggle to solve the riddle of my relationship with my mother, when
suddenly, two things happened --- and for the life of me I can't
remember which happened first, but whichever way it was, they trod right
upon each other's heels. For one thing, it suddenly occurred to me that
of course Mother, too, has a right to make her own choices and to be any
kind of person she chooses to be. As simple as all that, the answer is.
The other thing was that as I looked at your face, it was as if a hand
reached out and quite literally peeled a heavy shadow away from it,
revealing the fresh, individual face which I was so disappointed to lose
this afternoon. It was the most extraordinarily vivid experience; it
wouldn't be at all adequate to say it was *like* a hallucination --- it
*was* a hallucination. Not the face, that is, that was just a vivid
memory, but the shadow of my own feelings, which I had projected on it.
Isn't it astonishing how that insight corrects, not only present
feelings, but reaches back to correct the distortions of stored
memories? And that explains the haunting, but elusive sense I've had of
something odd and baffling in your appearance, so that I've been torn
between nervous reluctance to look at you, and a desire to stare and
stare in hopes of penetrating and dispelling the enigma. Then there were
two or three times when I would have sworn you laughed, but when I
looked you were perfectly sober, and you quite obviously hadn't and
couldn't have been even smiling. And on one of those occasions when I
looked at you, something seemed to move rapidly from your face towards
my left hand and disappear. Hallucinations, of all things! It may not
surprise you, but it simply staggers me.

Anyway, the misery has melted away, and though I feel tired and rather
afraid to believe it, and my cold is a perfect horror, life is more than
bearable again, and in fact I'd almost like to go home at once, to
practice the new approach.
:::
::::
:::::

[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_119}Here, as so often, the significant insights
occur between interviews, and while the insight appears simple enough,
it is the fact that it comes to have emotional and operational
*meaning*, which gives it its newness and vividness. When this same
insight was verbalized in the next interview, it seemed significant, but
the counselor would never have guessed the depth and sharpness of the
experience which preceded it.

The "hallucinations" are very uncommon, although not unique in
experience in client-centered therapy. In general, in clients undergoing
drastic self-reorganization, behaviors which would be labeled as
"psychotic" from a diagnostic frame of reference are encountered with
some frequency. When one sees these behaviors from the internal frame of
reference their functional meaning appears so clear that it becomes
incomprehensible that they should be regarded as symptoms of a
"disease." To regard all behavior as the meaningful attempt of the
organism to adjust to itself and to its environment --- this appears
more fruitful for understanding personality processes than to try to
categorize some behaviors as abnormal, or as constituting disease
entities.

The next entry was written on Monday.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Well, here we go again --- and it's another quite frightening example of
the autonomous character of this business. Like being a devotee of
Juggernaut --- after the first voluntary act of throwing yourself in
front of it, you get run over whether you like it or not and you get run
over all the way, you can't say, "Stop it, that's enough, I'm only
willing to be partially run over." It's all or nothing. And somehow, the
only answer that has any dignity at all is to give your full consent to
what you cannot avoid anyway.

Saturday morning I wanted to phone and tell you that all was well,
because I was sure you'd be pleased to know that the job was more or
less satisfactorily completed. But although the spirit was so cheerful
and willing, the flesh was awfully sick with cold, and I just couldn't
drag myself out of bed to go to the phone. . . .

Towards evening I found that incomprehensible pain and fear starting to
wash over me again. By ten o'clock the thing had reached a new high, and
this time it was dominated by a wild, irrational fear --- a fear so
terrible that by a strange mercy, I couldn't absorb the full impact of
it. (Heretofore I think that fear has been subordinate
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_120}to pain.) For a long time, I cast frantically
about for the cause of that fear, and just when I thought I couldn't
endure it another minute, it suddenly burst upon me --- why, I'm afraid
of death! That revelation was utterly surprising to me! I have always
thought of death as somehow the crown of life, a supremely interesting,
one-of-a-kind experience, for which you should prepare well beforehand
because if you muff it, you will never have another chance, and I've
always felt that you should be in good health to die. Somehow the
element of shock seemed to numb the fear long enough to let me think a
moment. And of course my first thought was that in such straits, God is
the only refuge. But when I turned to Him, I faced the ultimate horror,
utter reversal and betrayal --- He who claimed to be Love itself, was
the death-dealer, the cruel avenger, the destroyer, and I hated and
feared Him: in my bitterest need, the Friend to whom I turned revealed
Himself as the Enemy. Unless you know, I can't tell you what it's like
to come to the end of everything, and find it infinitely more terrible
than anything you ever suspected or dreamed.

Well, I wrestled with this awful thing, but you can't face such a horror
indefinitely --- the mind recoils, and in that recoil there's a certain
relief. In one of these periods, my thought turned from the God whom I
couldn't change to the fear of death, for which I just might be able to
find some other relief. And there was the thought, ready to hand ---
why, death is only fearful in anticipation! It's something that *is not*
as long as there is life, and life is always being alive in the present
moment, a sort of eternal now. Life and death are so completely opposite
that you cannot possibly have any knowledge or experience of death until
you *are* dead. Even when you are approaching death, and up to the very
second of death, you are busy *living*. You can't possibly be afraid of
death, really, you can only be afraid of life. It was as simple as that,
perhaps even simpler, and all the fear melted away. With that gone, I
was free to face the cruelly painful problem of this God who seemed to
have betrayed me. It took a lot of tries to get my head above the waves
of pain that washed over me at the thought, but finally I struggled
through to the realization that it was the choice again, in a different
guise: is God Love or is He Hate? I can't prove either proposition, and
I must believe one or the other on faith. He can't be a little of each,
either, because they're mutually exclusive. I feel Him to be cruel and
hateful now, but at other times I have felt Him to be Love. But His
nature is not determined by the way I feel about Him, and I must make my
choice []{#012_c3.html_lpn_121}on some other basis. I don't know what
that basis is --- I only know the choice is perfectly clear --- He is
Love. But if that is so, why should I fear and hate Him? I suppose it
must be because at some forgotten time, some close love relationship has
exposed me to pain and apparent betrayal, so that ever since I have
feared and distrusted love. Well, then, there's nothing wrong with God,
there's only something wrong with me. You wouldn't think it would be
such a comfort to find there's something wrong with yourself, would you?
But if that's so, I can do something about it: it may be difficult, it
may be painful, maybe even, I'll never succeed, but at least I can try,
and there is a chance of success.

Having got that far, the crisis was somehow over. True, it's a rather
precarious feeling, more like a respite than a solution: there is still
the doubtful business of "doing something about myself," but at the time
it was such a relief to get it in those terms that I couldn't worry
about it. So I slept peacefully, and yesterday they tucked me up in rugs
and cushions and drove me out in the country to bake the cold out in the
sun. I felt quite cheerful and relaxed into the role of pampered
invalid.
:::
::::
:::::

This deep conflict and confusion, this facing of fearful attitudes
within oneself, calls for little further comment, except perhaps to
point out again that often the most crucial struggles occur outside of
the interview itself.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
It wasn't till I got home in the evening that I came up against the
terrifying thought that maybe I wouldn't be able to solve the riddle of
myself no matter how hard I tried, maybe I would have to go around the
rest of my life with some unknown, inimical "thing" locked up within me,
never knowing when it would spring, always and forever terrified of
myself. So of course I thought of you with longing --- and I also
thought that it would be an imposition, and that you must want some
holidays and so forth. . . . I can safely leave you to imagine how
little the added conflict did for my morale! But although it was pretty
painful, somehow or other I could control my feelings a little this
time. Finally, I came to the shaky conclusion that I could at least ask
for your help without imposing on you. So I decided that I would phone
you in the morning --- well, probably --- and finally drifted off to
sleep. I woke up fairly cheerful. . . . I thought about what I would say
to you and canvassed all sorts of politely apologetic
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_122}phrases, but discarded them one by one. . . . I
finally found something that was close as I could come to leaving you
free to reply in any way you chose. . . . When I called you were so nice
about it, and it was all so easy that I felt quite buoyant and hopeful.
But my friend was packing to leave this afternoon, and as time wore on,
I got more and more frightened at the thought of her going.
:::
::::
:::::

Here, as with any client, the responsibility for reopening the
therapeutic contacts is left with the client. There may be circumstances
in which some modification of this point of view is desirable, but for
the most part the keeping of the locus of responsibility in the client
is far more therapeutic. Consider, for example, how terrifying it would
have been to this client, if at the end of the fifth interview the
therapist had suggested she return. It could only have meant that the
therapist was concerned and emotionally involved in her struggle for
health, and that he evaluated her progress negatively. It would have
precipitated, in all likelihood, a much more serious conflict. Here she
has herself decided to postpone her vacation in order to continue the
difficult task she has set herself.

Note, also, in the early portion of this quotation, how closely matched
the struggle seems to be. In this client, as in most others, the
hypothesis that one has the capacity to deal with one's own conflicts is
not an easy or optimistic hypothesis. The forces which make for growth
tend to overbalance the regressive and self-destructive forces, but not
by some large margin. Instead, the outcome, both to the client and to
the therapist, appears in many, many cases, to hang in the most delicate
balance.

::::: block
:::: top
::: sl
Tuesday A.M. I wandered around all last evening suffering all the
tortures of the damned. I did a number of little chores, but none of
them gave me any relief --- it's almost easier just to give in
completely, and let the torment have its way with you. Finally I went to
bed, where it came over me in waves of almost indescribably physical
sensations. You can almost see and feel a wave of blackness washing over
your brain, and there's a queer sort of ringing in your ears. It seemed
to me that if only I could give in to it, if only the blackness would
close over me and I could sink down and down into unconsciousness, then
I would come out of it perfectly clean and healed and
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_123}entirely new. But though I tried over and over
again, just at the last moment, when I'd think I was going to make it,
I'd be swept back to full consciousness. . . . I finally fell asleep.
And this morning I woke up just as cheerful as can be --- I might even
be somewhat euphoric if I'd let myself. I've tried to feel miserable
(!!!) and I just can't. I even feel rather provoked at being cheerful,
entertaining the quaint conviction that I'm much more apt to get
somewhere in our interview this afternoon if I'm good and miserable.
Golly, what fools we mortals be!
:::
::::
:::::

*Written after the Sixth Interview*

Tuesday afternoon Miss Cam came in for the sixth interview. The material
of the interview was much concerned with early and later sexual
conflicts. It did not seem to the counselor to have as much concern with
current emotionalized attitudes as some of the other interviews, but by
some therapeutic orientations the material would be judged as very deep.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Wednesday A.M. There's nothing to say about yesterday's interview --- it
was flat, lifeless, almost as if I were doing it because I said I would,
but we both understood it was a formality --- the business of dying like
a gentleman. Hollow and neutral, and you looked neutral too --- like
someone politely playing out a role that's been assigned to him. . . . I
recaptured the pain I so ridiculously sought --- not because I sought
it, but because the interview was such a dead end. Last night was just a
repetition of Monday, including putting myself through various little
activities, and the weird sensations when I went to bed. It seems as if
there's nothing but pain in the whole universe --- so cruel, so utterly
incomprehensible, so fruitless. I keep saying why --- why, why, why
should it happen to a relatively innocent person? I can't believe I ever
did anything to *deserve* this --- and somehow I am convinced that it
has nothing to do with deserts, it has to do with something else I don't
understand. There is no growth without some pain, but it's impossible to
believe --- no, not believe --- to feel that anything creative can come
out of anything that seems so wantonly destructive. . . . I long to go
on my vacation. I reach towards it with all the desperate longing of a
drowning man towards the distant shore. I don't know how I can bear to
wait, and yet at the same time, I know it would be no good to me now.
There []{#012_c3.html_lpn_124}is no rest for me anywhere as long as I
carry the torment within myself.
:::
::::
:::::

Some clients are able to achieve reorganization with a minimum of
suffering. With others, as in this case, the "torment within" becomes
almost unbearable as deep inconsistencies in experience are explored.
Yet it is a definite aspect of progress to recognize the conflict as
being entirely within, and to know that no vacation, no rest, can be a
rest from oneself.

*The Seventh and Eighth Interviews*

The seventh interview was held on Wednesday, and the eighth on Thursday
morning. A portion of the seventh interview must be given from the
therapist's notes in order to make some of the comments understandable.
Deep confusion and uncertainty were evident in the interview, but the
client felt she was coming to some final decision which seemed like life
or death --- at least psychological life or death. She told how during
the past year tensions and conflicts have steadily mounted, with many
deep reactions on her own part.

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
I have felt it inside as though it were a little animal coming out of a
cave --- just a little defenseless animal, who has been beaten
unmercifully, defeated, horribly lacerated and bleeding. He just seems
completely and utterly helpless. I have felt as though this were sort of
separate, so that I could stand off and look at it, but that it was also
something inside of me. At times the poor animal would go back in, but
there was always the chance that he would come out again. (*Pause*.) Now
I don't feel any longer as though I see him. I feel as though I *am*
that little animal, whipped and helpless and terribly wounded.
:::
::::
:::::

Following the seventh interview which contained this material, and the
eighth interview on Thursday morning, the following was written.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Thursday A.M. Yesterday's interview was the same as the one before it,
lifeless and futile. The only difference was that it was a bit more
actively despairing because failure seemed still closer --- and it
began, as well as ended, in despair. Wednesday was a repetition
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_125}of Tuesday and Monday, except that the longing
for the unattainable peace that my vacation represents grew more acute.
Everything grew more acute --- more and more of the same thing.
:::
::::
:::::

She tells how Wednesday evening she went to confession, which she felt
gave her some relief. After this:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
But as I was walking down the street, it popped up a tentative head ---
"Who beat up on you? Who's responsible for the horrible condition of the
little tortured animal? Could it be you?" There was no use in --- and
anyway I was too tired to pin that idea down firmly. It insisted upon
being treated lightly and delicately. So I went quietly to bed --- not
happy, but not in such distress of mind; exhausted, but more at peace,
with a tentative hope, but not demanding. Not wholly resigned, but
somehow more able to face the prospect of things not turning out just as
I want them. I woke up quite bright and cheerful --- as you saw this
morning. Our interview this morning \[eighth interview\] was nice.
Hopeful, but with a good down-to-earth practical feel about it.
Everything came alive and positive again --- you and me and things in
general. I knew I hadn't found the whole solution, but I felt as if I
had enough material to carry on with, and that it was time to *do*
something now, not just think about it. But do you know, in spite of the
fact that you have changed aspect in these last interviews, it hasn't
had the hallucinatory quality I noticed before. I can't describe it ---
I just know it's different from what it was before that shadow was
peeled from your face.

I felt a bit awkward about terminating the interviews --- partly because
you might think I was cutting and running when the going got tough, but
mostly because I can't be entirely sure that that *isn't* what I'm
doing. But I don't think that's so, really. I think this just *is* the
time to stop. . . . Here in Chicago where I'm away from my own
environment, and have no responsibilities and no friends, it is pretty
largely "imaginary" practice. Well, I can certainly testify to the
wisdom of keeping on with your work and normal contacts during
psychotherapy!
:::
::::
:::::

In the beginning of the eighth and final interview she expands the
insight suggested at the outset of this quotation, realizing that she
has been self-punishing, that she is the one who has "tortured the
little animal," that she is the one who has been making harsh judgments
about herself, and that this need not necessarily be.
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_126}The interview closed on the note that "I can see
that things aren't hopeless, that it is in me, and that I can do
something about it. I don't mean it's going to be easy. But I think I
ought to be gentle with myself, not punishing myself as I have." This
tentative and cautiously positive note is very characteristic of the
conclusion of therapy.

*Some Weeks Later*

The next entry was written some weeks later, while on vacation.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
On Vacation. My arrival was a disappointment --- though a disappointment
for which I was not unprepared. I'm too emotionally exhausted to
experience pleasure in anything. The days roll by, and I keep on feeling
like a convalescent --- neither sick nor well, neither dead nor alive.
And I'm just fantastically irritable. The least little thing is apt to
annoy me out of all reason, and it just seems to be a completely
irrational sensitivity. Well, no, perhaps there is some pattern to it
--- I get particularly violent when someone interrupts what I'm doing,
or suggests that we go North when I had thought we might go South, or
when someone else gets in a stew and I am required to accommodate myself
to them. And my irritation seems to be in proportion to the amount of
energy required to make the adjustment. So perhaps it's partly just
fatigue. But a lot of it --- most of it, maybe --- is that I'm so tired
I really do need a rest; and I've interpreted that to mean that the
world owes me a rest, and I'm just as mad as a hornet when they don't
give it to me. Awfully easy to forget the hard-won lesson that it was I
who chose to feel beaten up by the world! There's a funny thing here ---
that anger seems to rise quite involuntarily, but at the same time, I
have a perfectly clear awareness of complete freedom to choose whether I
will or will not be angry. It's not just a question of being able to
suppress the appearance or actions of anger, but of having a choice of
being angry and being positively friendly. As objective as having a
stone in your hand and deciding whether you'll throw it or lay it down
on the ground. Not like my occasional outbursts in the past when it has
seemed completely, frighteningly involuntary, as if I were possessed.
And I am not happy to have to admit that I'm choosing to be angry a lot
of the time. I think maybe I expected my new insights to do things *for*
me, and I'm rather resentful to find that I have to do them
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_127}myself. Perhaps I'm getting better without
noticing --- I always expect things to burst upon me with the dramatic
suddenness of a comet, and never notice slow growth --- but I don't
really know whether I'm getting better or worse, and it worries me
terribly. What if I went through all that torture for nothing? I know
that's an irresponsible sort of notion, but I can't seem to find any
sort of criterion for deciding about myself, and that makes me feel
awfully exposed and defenseless. But perhaps I'm just not used to the
way it feels when you refrain from passing judgment on yourself; maybe I
do lots of quite constructive things and don't know it because I don't
spot the effortless feel of letting things happen spontaneously.
:::
::::
:::::

In the discussion of her feelings about anger there appears to be an
astonishingly clear description of what it feels like, from an internal
frame of reference, to let experience come freely into awareness. Where
heretofore anger was denied until it broke forth in an uncontrolled
burst which was not a part of self, now anger rises at once into
consciousness. But where experience is freely symbolized in awareness,
it is also far more subject to control. Expression of anger becomes a
choice, feelings of anger can be considered along with feelings of
friendliness, and either may be consciously chosen for expression. This
is not necessarily more pleasant; it is simply that there is less of
experience which is denied or distorted, and hence a greatly reduced
bill to pay in the form of defensive tension. Whether the reader accepts
this type of explanation or not, the quotation seems to convey the
living "feel" of what is involved in being more freely one's real self.

The fact that it is only the pattern of reorganization which is laid
down in therapy, and that there is much to be done to implement that
pattern, is borne out by both clinical and research experience. When the
therapeutic experience is deeply assimilated, change in personality and
behavior continues for a long period after the conclusion of the
interviews themselves.

After mentioning her feeling of "suspended animation" while on vacation,
with none of the usual demands to meet, Miss Cam continues:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
There is only one hopeful thing I've discovered, and it isn't giving me
any consolation right now --- one of the principal reasons I'm not
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_128}getting much joy out of this vacation home is
that it used to be the only place in the world where I felt at home and
at ease and among friends; but now I'm well on the way to being at home
everywhere and with everyone, and that takes the special,
out-of-this-world glow from this spot.
:::
::::
:::::

It is worth observing that reorganization of the self means a new
perception of everything, including experiences formerly deemed
satisfying. An alteration in the structure of the self means that the
individual is living, quite literally, in a new world, made new by the
change in perceptions. Small wonder, then, that the going is a bit rough
for a time at least.

*Three Months Later*

Our glimpses into the inner world of Miss Cam's experience must close
with a note written some three months after therapy in response to an
inquiry from the counselor. She discusses some of her present interests,
and continues:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
In the meantime, since you are good enough to ask, the client is
progressing favorably --- I think --- but I'm so thoroughly tired of
looking at myself, and so weary of emotional upheavals that I can't give
a very accurate report. I still feel rather raw emotionally and am
subject to (increasingly infrequent?) attacks of "misery"; but I'm
beginning to suspect that they are in part an aftermath of the storm,
and in part reactions from doing, or anticipating doing, things which I
have always muffed or avoided before. And partly discouragement because
I didn't see any signs of improvement. I guess I expected change to be
registered in a series of "Aha's!" --- and so I didn't notice until
lately that there are changes which must have sprung quite spontaneously
from a change in attitude. I get along quite happily with Mother, and
manage to do some sort of justice to both of us without feeling abused
or dominated. I file things with scarcely a whimper \[a task at which
she had formerly rebelled\], and I think I'm getting steadily better at
doing the thing I'm doing now, without worrying about what I have to do
two hours or two days from now. I'm quieter, more relaxed, and with no
inclination to show off in groups --- I nearly missed that one. I was so
amused when I suddenly realized how different I was being. And I'm much
more observant of and interested in other people. Golly, that's a
surprising total, isn't it --- []{#012_c3.html_lpn_129}and I guess there
are other things too, but maybe that'll give you a rough idea. I haven't
indulged in much self-evaluation (thank God!) --- really, I'm not so
much interested in seeking myself as I am in losing myself. It's such a
relief to get rid of that load.
:::
::::
:::::

Several points characteristic of most clients emerge here. The first is
that behavioral changes take place so spontaneously, grow so naturally
out of the present organization of attitudes, that they are not noticed
until some outside circumstance focuses attention on them. Another is
the raw, unsteady, "newborn" feeling which accompanies personality
change. A final characteristic is the very interesting fact that
client-centered therapy, with the intense focusing upon self which it
involves, has as its end result, not more self-consciousness, but less.
One might say that there is less self-consciousness and more self.
Another way of putting it is that the self functions smoothly in
experience, rather than being an object of introspection. Or as one
client states in a follow-up interview one year after the conclusion of
therapy: "I'm not self-conscious like I used to be. . . . I don't
concentrate on being myself. I just *am*."

The presentation of such a wealth of material from this one client is
not done with the implication that hers is a typical experience. No
doubt it is atypical in as many ways as it is typical. The point is that
all therapy is a completely unique experience for the client, and the
more completely we sense this fact, the more it may be possible for us
to facilitate this unique experience in others. Certainly it appears to
be true that our knowledge of psychotherapy will be more firmly based
when it is possible to understand thoroughly, and with sensitive
perception, the private worlds of many clients undergoing therapy, as we
have been privileged to perceive the experience with this one client.

SUGGESTED READINGS

::: sl
There has been very little effort to explore systematically the way in
which therapy is experienced by the client. The article by Lipkin (117),
from which several quotations have been drawn, is one such
[]{#012_c3.html_lpn_130}attempt. A somewhat less systematic account is a
recent article by Axline (16) which gives a vivid description of play
therapy as it is experienced by the young participants, both at the time
and several years later. In regard to psychoanalysis, an article by Wood
(227) gives the reactions of one psychologist to his analysis. Others
--- for example, Boring (35), Landis (107), and Shakow (182) --- give
somewhat less intimate accounts of their experiences in analysis in a
single issue of the *Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology*. All of
these suffer from having been written long after therapy was concluded.
A chapter by Kilpatrick in Horney's book (89) is entitled "What Do You
Do in Analysis," and attempts to describe the client's reactions. It is,
however, an account by a therapist, not a first-hand account. Some
further light on the client's experience may be gained by reading the
verbatim cases in Snyder's *Casebook of Nondirective Counseling* (199),
paying particular attention to those portions where the client is
describing his or her experiencing of the process, rather than the
problems or conflicts which are usually in focus. The reader who follows
any of these suggested references will discover, among other things, how
little this whole field has been explored.
:::

[]{#013_c4.html}

<div>

[]{#013_c4.html_c4}

</div>

# []{#013_c4.html_lpn_131}*Chapter* [4]{.chapnum} • The Process of Therapy {.chaptitle}

![](html/docimages/line.jpg){height="10" width="100%"}

In every therapeutic orientation people are helped. They feel more
comfortable within themselves. Their behavior changes, often in the
direction of a better adjustment. Their personalities seem different,
both to themselves and to others who know them. But what *really
happens* in successful therapy? What are the psychological processes by
which change comes about? In all the rich nuances of changing thoughts
and feelings, as illustrated in the last chapter, are there any
discernible generalities, any objective and scientifically accurate ways
in which the process can be described for all clients? It is to a
discussion of these questions in their particular relationship to
client-centered therapy that this chapter is devoted.

Let it be said at the very outset that in the present state of our
knowledge we do not really *know* what is the essential process of
therapy. We have become more and more deeply impressed with the many
ramifications of the process, and the way in which it takes on different
meanings depending upon the point of view of the observer, but we
recognize that its definitive description is still a task for the
future. Rather than dogmatically attempting to make perfectly clear that
which is not perfectly clear, it seems best to present the many
hypotheses which are currently held in regard to the process of
client-centered therapy, and the research evidence which supports some
of them. Perhaps the very variety of the hypotheses will serve to
broaden professional thinking and will stimulate the discovery of more
accurate and inclusive hypotheses.

[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_132}In a general way, therapy is a learning process.
Mowrer (136, 138) has effectively helped to point this out, as have
others (190, 191, 184, 185). The client learns new aspects of himself,
new ways of relating to others, new ways of behaving. But what,
precisely, is learned, and why? This is what we would like to know. It
is not enough to take learning theory as it has been developed from
studies of rats, or from experiments with nonsense syllables, and impose
it upon the process of therapy. The rich experience of therapy has much
to contribute to our knowledge of what is significant learning, as well
as having much to gain from integrating previous knowledge of learning
into the known facts about therapy. Hence, in the present state of the
psychological sciences we are left with many more questions than answers
as to the process and content of the learning which takes place in
psychotherapy.

In such a situation it seems best to look, as closely as we can, at the
facts as we have them, whether they are clinical observations or
verified research findings. Consequently, in the material which follows
there are grouped, under convenient general headings, some of the
changes which are known to be, or hypothesized to be, characteristic
parts of this therapeutic learning process, characteristic aspects of
what is thought of as the "movement" of the client in therapy. The order
of presentation is not significant, except that some of the aspects for
which we have the most research evidence have been placed first.
Following these descriptive formulations, which in some instances
overlap and in some instances appear to contradict each other, an
inclusive theory of the process of therapy will be presented which, it
is hoped, is sufficient to contain the evidence thus far available.

::: top
C[HARACTERISTIC]{.sc} C[HANGE OR]{.sc} M[OVEMENT IN]{.sc} T[HERAPY]{.sc}
:::

*In Type of Material Presented*

One of the first aspects of the therapeutic process to be studied by
research methods was the movement in the type of verbal content
presented by the client. It was observed that though the individual
first tended to talk about his problems and his symptoms for a majority
of the time, this type of talk tended to be
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_133}replaced, as therapy progressed, by insightful
statements showing some understanding of relationships between his past
and present behavior and between current behaviors. Still later there
seemed to be an increase in the discussion by the client of the new
actions which were in accord with his new understanding of the
situation. This process of exploration of feelings and attitudes related
to the problem areas, followed by increased insight and
self-understanding, followed by discussion of reoriented behavior in
terms of the new insights, was the sequence most emphasized by the
writer in describing client-centered therapy in his earlier book (166).

There is now considerable objective evidence to back up this
description. Snyder, in a study completed in 1943 (196, 197), and
Seeman, six years later (180), found very similar results. Statements
falling within the category of discussion of problem declined, in the
latter study, from 52 per cent of the total client conversation during
the first fifth of counseling, to 29 per cent during the final fifth.
Statements of insights and changed perceptions experienced as a result
of counseling increased from 4 per cent in the first fifth to 19 per
cent in the concluding quintile. The discussion of plans, which usually
involved a reorientation of behavior, was almost nonexistent during the
first three-fifths of counseling, hovering between 1 and 2 per cent, but
rose to nearly 5 per cent during the last quintile. A more complete
factual picture of Seeman's findings is given in the accompanying Table
I.

Snyder's study was based on an analysis of the several thousand client
statements in six cases, and Seeman's upon ten cases, all electrically
recorded. The reliability of categorization by different judges was
high, the Seeman investigation showing 87 per cent concordance in
judgment on the content categories we have been discussing, and 76 per
cent concordance in categorizing the attitudes mentioned below. Hence
the trends outlined appear to be rather reliable descriptions of at
least one aspect of the therapeutic process. That these trends are
related to therapeutic success is suggested by the fact that an index of
these trends correlated .56 with counselor ratings of outcomes.

Still another aspect which has been studied is the type of attitude
expressed. It was observed that while the client, at the outset of
therapy, seemed to voice mostly negative feelings, there appeared to be
a change in a positive direction. This seemed to be true even though the
attitudes might be concerned with himself, with others, or even with his
physical environment. Both Snyder and Seeman studied this question and
the research results confirmed the clinical impression, adding one
significant new facet related to the tense (present or past) of the
expression. In general it may be said that the evidence (See Table I for
details) shows that, while negative attitudes predominate in the early
phases of therapy, the balance shifts as the process continues and
positive attitudes come to slightly exceed the negative. But when the
study is limited to the current feelings of the client --- those
expressed in the present tense --- the trend is found to be much more
marked. A crude approximation to the findings would be to say
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_135}that current feelings are one-third positive and
two-thirds negative during the first fifth of therapy; in the final
quintile the situation is reversed, with almost two-thirds of the
feelings being positive, and slightly over one-third negative.

::: top
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_134}Table [I]{style="font-size: 120%"} • Type of
Client Material Presented
:::

::: top
[(Percentage of Various Categories by Quintiles of Counseling
Process)]{.sl}^[15](#025_endnotes.html_e15){#013_c4.html_f15}^
:::

::: top
![](html/docimages/image5.jpg){height="179" width="497"}
:::

::: topbot
![](html/docimages/image6.jpg){height="176" width="500"}
:::

There are other ways of describing the changes which take place in the
verbal material which the client expresses during the course of therapy.
Several may be mentioned which have not yet been put to an objective
test.

Clinically it seems clear that there is movement from *symptoms to
self*. The client's exploration revolves first around the various
aspects of the problem, but gradually the concern is more and more with
self. What kind of person am I? What are my real feelings? What is my
real self? An increasing amount of the conversation centers around these
topics. Not only is there movement from symptoms to self, but from
*environment to self* and from *others to self*. That is, the client
verbally manipulates his situation, devoting a considerable portion of
his time to a consideration of the nonself elements as well as those
within himself. But gradually he explores himself almost to the
exclusion of the nonself. This seems to be due in part to the fact that
the therapist's focus is upon his feelings, perceptions, evaluations ---
in other words upon himself. It is also due to the fact that he senses
that the self elements are the aspects of the situation which
potentially are most certainly within his control. It is also because he
senses that if he were unified and clear within himself as to his
purposes and goals, he could deal with some success with the external
aspects of his problem.

Another trend in the content of the conversation is from material which
has always been available in awareness, to material which until therapy
has not been available to conscious consideration. Of this we shall have
more to say presently.

Still another change in material is from *past to present*. It may not
be correct to say that there is a steady progression in this respect,
since early interviews are often concerned with present problems. In the
consideration of any particular conflict or relationship, especially if
it is threatening or painful, the client tends to begin with some past
aspect and only gradually faces the more []{#013_c4.html_lpn_136}crucial
and often unpleasant issue as it exists in the present. Thus therapy
ends with the person dealing with himself --- his attitudes, emotions,
values, goals --- as they currently exist. He has learned that it is
safe to leave the less dangerous consideration of his symptoms, of
others, of the environment, and of the past, and to focus upon the
discovery of "me, here and now."

*Change in Perception of and Attitude Toward Self*

The two previous chapters have already indicated that much of what
occurs in the process of therapy seems best explained in reference to
the construct of the self. The self has for many years been an unpopular
concept in psychology, and those doing therapeutic work from a
client-centered orientation certainly had no initial leanings toward
using the self as an explanatory construct. Yet so much of the verbal
interchange of therapy had to do with the self that attention was
forcibly turned in this direction. The client felt he was not being his
real self, often felt he did not know what his real self was, and felt
satisfaction when he had become more truly himself. Clinically these
trends could not be overlooked.

The clinical observations have now been buttressed and amplified with a
considerable number of research studies. Raimy (153, 154) was the first
to work in this area, supplying an extensive theoretical framework of
thinking about the self-concept, which unfortunately has never been
published, and also carrying through the first objective study of
attitudes toward the self. He has been followed by a number of others.

In all of this research, the central construct is the concept of self,
or the self as a perceived object in the phenomenal field. If a
definition seems useful, it might be said that clinical experience and
research evidence would suggest a definition along these lines. The
self-concept, or self-structure, may be thought of as an organized
configuration of perceptions of the self which are admissible to
awareness. It is composed of such elements as the perceptions of one's
characteristics and abilities; the percepts and concepts of the self in
relation to others and to the environment; the value qualities which are
perceived as associated with experiences and
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_137}objects; and goals and ideals which are
perceived as having positive or negative valence. This definition has
grown out of examination of the evidence and may change as our
exploration of the phenomena of therapy continues.

With this definition in mind, let us return to our basic question: What
changes characteristically occur in the self during the course of a
series of therapeutic interviews? The several investigations mentioned
above supply at least the beginning of an answer. We find that the
attitudes toward the self as a perceived object change materially. In
cases where there is any indication that change took place, or that
therapy was "successful" (whether the criterion is client judgment,
counselor judgment, or rating by another clinician), the following
statements would be supported by the research evidence.

::::: block
:::: block1
::: topbot
There is a trend toward an increasing number and proportion of
positively toned self-references and self-regarding attitudes as therapy
progresses. (154, 180, 197, 203, 204)

There is a trend toward a decreasing number and proportion of
self-references and self-regarding attitudes which are negative in
emotional tone. (154, 180, 197, 203, 204)

Attitudes of ambivalence toward the self, in which positive and negative
feelings are expressed together, tend to increase slightly until
somewhat beyond the midpoint of therapy, and then to decrease slightly.
At no period are ambivalent attitudes a frequent expression. (2, 154,
180)

At the conclusion of therapy there are more positively toned
self-references than negative. (2, 154, 180, 197, 203, 204)

These trends are not found, or are found in lesser degree, in cases
regarded as unsuccessful. (154, 195)

In the initial phases of therapy self-references tend to be negative
expressions, emotional in tone or objectively negative; at the
conclusion of therapy the self-references tend to be either objective
expressions, neutral in emotional tone, or objectively positive
expressions. (203)
:::
::::
:::::

There are certain findings, less general in their nature, which tend to
qualify these statements.

::::: block
:::: block1
::: topbot
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_138}The sharpest and clearest measure of the above
trends is in terms of positive and negative feelings toward the self
which are expressed as being currently held. The elimination of past
attitudes from consideration heightens the slope of both curves. (180)

In the individual case, though the general trends are as described,
there may be wide fluctuations from interview to interview in the
self-regarding attitudes. After a slow rise in positive attitudes,
negative attitudes may become sharply predominant for a time, etc. (49)

Within the general trends described there is more variability in
self-regarding attitudes in the later stages of therapy than in the
early stages. (180)

There is often an initial decrease in the positively toned
self-regarding attitudes, before the general upward trend becomes
evident. (154, 180)

The "unsuccessful" case may remain consistently high in negative
feelings about the self, or consistently high in positive
self-attitudes. (154, 195)
:::
::::
:::::

This material has to do with the feelings and attitudes which the client
has toward himself, and the way in which those feelings change. Probably
the more basic change is in the way he perceives himself. Unfortunately
this is a complex and perplexing problem to investigate with research
methodology; studies to date are few, and the findings meager in number
though suggestive in their significance. The major study is that made by
Sheerer, and so far as her results have reference to the self, they may
be summarized as follows.

::::::: block
:::::: block1
::::: top
There is a tendency for the "acceptance of self," operationally defined,
to increase during therapy. Acceptance of self, according to the
definition used, means that the client tends:

:::: block
::: bot
to perceive himself as a person of worth, worthy of respect rather than
condemnation;

to perceive his standards as being based upon his own
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_139}experience, rather than upon the attitudes or
desires of others;

to perceive his own feelings, motives, social and personal experiences,
without distortion of the basic sensory data;

to be comfortable in acting in terms of these perceptions. (188, 189)
:::
::::
:::::
::::::
:::::::

The study upon which these statements are based is confirmed by others,
most of them less rigorous in nature. From these other studies it would
appear that the individual in "successful" therapy tends:

:::::: block
::::: block1
:::: block
::: topbot
to perceive his abilities and characteristics with more objectivity and
with greater comfort; (174)

to perceive all aspects of self and self-in-relationship with less
emotion and more objectivity; (203)

to perceive himself as more independent and more able to cope with life
problems; (117, 174)

to perceive himself as more able to be spontaneous and genuine; (117)

to perceive himself as the evaluator of experience, rather than
regarding himself as existing in a world where the values are inherent
in and attached to the objects of his perception; (101)

to perceive himself as more integrated, less divided. (117, 174)
:::
::::
:::::
::::::

How may we summarize these changes in self-perception? The essential
elements would appear to be that the individual changes in three general
ways. He perceives himself as a more adequate person, with more worth
and more possibility of meeting life. He permits more experiential data
to enter awareness, and thus achieves a more realistic appraisal of
himself, his relationships, and his environment. He tends to place the
basis of standards within himself, recognizing that the "goodness" or
"badness" of any experience or perceptual object is not something
inherent in that object, but is a value placed on it by himself.

[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_140}These changes in the perception of self deserve
far more study than has yet been given to them. At the present writing,
further investigation is being made of this problem, using the "Q"
technique developed by William
Stephenson.^[16](#025_endnotes.html_e16){#013_c4.html_f16}^ This permits
a detailed analysis of the perception of self before and after therapy,
as well as the self-ideal as it is perceived before and after therapy.
Results from the first few cases indicate that the self-ideal changes
somewhat during therapy, perhaps in the direction of a more realistic or
achievable ideal. The perceived self changes even more markedly, and in
a direction which brings it closer both to the pre-therapy ideal and the
post-therapy ideal. The correlation between self and ideal is initially
low, but becomes much higher as []{#013_c4.html_lpn_141}a result of
therapy due to the changes in a converging direction in both self and
ideal. Thus the result of therapy would appear to be a greater
congruence between self and ideal. The self and the values it holds are
no longer so disparate. These statements are highly tentative, and may
be much altered by completion of the researches under way. They are
mentioned here to indicate that the methodological pathway is now open
to a rigorous and detailed study of the perceptions of the self, in all
its ramifications. One could now study separately the perception of
self-characteristics, of self-in-relationship-to-others, of values
around which the self is organized, and of goals and ideals. These could
not only be studied intensively through intercorrelational studies, but
through relating them to ratings and judgments made by others ---
preferably using the same Q-sorting method.

*A Clinical Description*

Let us try to put in more personalized and clinical terms some of the
material which has been stated above in objective and research
terminology. The client tends to enter therapy regarding himself
critically, feeling more or less worthless, and judging himself quite
largely in terms of standards set by others. He has an ideal for
himself, but sees this ideal as very different from his present self.
Emotionally the balance of feelings about himself swings decidedly to
the negative side.

As therapy proceeds, he often feels even more discouraged about and
critical of himself. He finds that he frequently experiences very
contradictory attitudes toward himself. As he explores these he
gradually becomes more realistic in his perception of himself, and more
able to accept himself "as is." As he develops more concern in regard to
his current feelings and attitudes, he finds that he can look at them
objectively and experience them neither as a basis for emotional
self-condemnation nor self-approval. They are simply himself observed in
action. This self "as is" is seen as being worthwhile, as being
something he can live with. This process is by no means a smooth one;
there may be interviews in which his evaluation of self sinks to a very
low ebb, and he feels himself quite worthless and hopeless.
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_142}Nevertheless, in general he develops less fear
of the attitudes he discovers within his experience; he becomes less
fearful of how he will be judged by others and spends more of his time
deciding what are his own basic values. As these changes take place, he
feels himself to be more spontaneous in his attitudes and behavior;
experiences himself as a more *real* person, a more unified person. He
slowly discovers that what he wishes to be has shifted to a point where
it is a more achievable goal, and that actually he is himself changed to
a degree which brings him much more in accord with his ideal. His inner
life becomes more comfortable, more free of tension. This would seem to
be the clinical description of the changes in self during therapy, as
revealed by objective studies.

*Change in the Manner of Perception*

Another cluster of phenomena which exhibit movement or change during
therapy all have to do with a process of increased differentiation in
the perceptual field. These phenomena could have been dealt with under
the heading of "movement in learning," since learning is essentially an
increased differentiation of the field (200, p. 38). They could have
been called "the development of a more adequate process of thinking," or
"change in the direction of a more soundly based reasoning." The
essential point about therapy, when viewed from this angle, is that the
way the client perceives the objects in his phenomenal field --- his
experiences, his feelings, his self, other persons, his environment ---
undergoes change in the direction of increased differentiation. This is
an important way of looking at therapy, and it is unfortunate that as
yet there is too little research in this field, except some research on
perception of the self, already mentioned, and the study by Beier (21),
noted below.^[17](#025_endnotes.html_e17){#013_c4.html_f17}^

[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_143}Characteristically the client changes from
high-level abstractions to more differentiated perceptions, from wide
generalizations to limited generalizations closely rooted in primary
experiences. The client who commences therapy with the stated feeling
that he is a hopeless and useless person comes, during therapy, to
experience himself as indeed useless at times, but at other times
showing positive qualities, at still other times exhibiting negative
aggression. He experiences himself as being quite variable in
functioning --- in short, as a person who is neither all black nor all
white, but an interesting collection of varying shades of gray. He finds
it much easier, as has been indicated, to accept this more
differentiated person.

Or take the client whose expressed attitude, early in therapy, is that
"My mother is a bitch!" During therapy she begins to perceive in
differentiated fashion her varied experiences of her mother. Her mother
rejected her in childhood, but occasionally indulged her; her mother
means well; she has a sense of humor; she is not well educated; she has
a violent and unreasonable temper; she wants very much to be proud of
her daughter. The relationship with mother in childhood is examined and
differentiated from the relationship with mother today. As this process
goes on, the overall generalization, "Mother is a bitch and I can't
possibly get on with her," is seen to be quite inadequate to fit the
complex facts of primary experience.

With almost every client this process can be observed. He moves from
generalizations which have been found unsatisfactory for guiding his
life, to an examination of the rich primary experiences upon which they
are based, a movement which exposes the falsity of many of his
generalizations, and provides a basis for new and more adequate
abstractions. He is customarily in the process
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_144}of formulating these new guides for himself as
therapy concludes. Certainly in the most successful therapy he has also
internalized the desirability of building more closely on direct
experience, particularly when the guides he has been using for his
living prove questionable.

It is obvious that this process does not just happen. It is facilitated
by the special conditions of the therapeutic relationship --- the
complete freedom to explore every portion of the perceptual field, and
the complete freedom from threat to the self which the client-centered
therapist in particular provides.

The reader will have noted that what we have been saying is in basic
accord with some of the fundamental thinking in semantics (81, 98, 105).
Putting some of these same thoughts in semantic terminology, we may say
that the client has been living by a map. In therapy he discovers first
of all that the map is not the territory --- that the experiential
territory is very different, and far more complex. He also discovers
that even as a map, his map has contained serious errors. Therapy gives
him the protected opportunity to come down from the high level
abstraction of his map and to explore the territory of primary
experience. By the time that he is constructing a new map, with the new
awareness that it is only a map and not experience itself, therapy is
ready to conclude.

Using other semantic terminology, one may say that the client gradually
reduces the intensional quality of his reactions --- his tendency to see
experience in absolute and unconditional terms, to overgeneralize, to be
dominated by concept or belief, to fail to anchor his reactions in space
and time, to confuse fact and evaluation, to rely on ideas rather than
upon reality-testing --- and moves toward a more extensional type of
reaction. This may be defined as the tendency to see things in limited,
differentiated terms, to be aware of the space-time anchorage of facts,
to be dominated by facts, not by concepts, to evaluate in multiple ways,
to be aware of different levels of abstraction, to test his inferences
and abstractions by reality, in so far as possible.

Still another way of describing this matter of differentiation is to
discuss it in relation to symbolization. The human being deals with much
of his experience by means of the symbols attached to it. These symbols
enable him to manipulate elements of his
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_145}experience in relation to one another, to
project himself into new situations, to make many predictions about his
phenomenal world. In therapy one of the changes which occurs is that
faulty and generalized symbols are replaced by more adequate and
accurate and differentiated symbols. Thus, take the mother who
experiences many negative feelings toward her child. These feelings are
all lumped under the symbolic formulation, "I am irritated at him and
angry with him because he is bad." But when she is free from any threat
to herself, she can examine these attitudinal and visceral experiences,
and can attach more accurately differentiated symbols to them. Some of
them are still accurately described in the terms she formerly used, but
others become symbolized in such terms as "I am irritated with him
because I wish I had never had him," "I am angry with him because he
interrupted my career," "He causes me annoyance because he represents
adult responsibility which I have always tried to avoid." As the symbols
used correspond more closely to the basic and actual experience, then
the conclusions drawn on the basis of symbolic manipulation become more
sound because they are based upon reality.

It should be made plain that the term *differentiation*, as it is used
in this section, does not simply mean the perception of increasingly
minute aspects of the phenomenal field. It means separating out, and
bringing into figure, any significant perceptual element which has
heretofore been unrecognized. Thus Curran (49), in a significant and
exhaustive analysis of twenty recorded interviews with one case, finds
that the perception of relatedness is one of the important aspects of
the process of therapy. In early interviews the client, a very withdrawn
individual, discusses twenty-five different "problems," in quite
discrete fashion. As therapy progresses, there are more and more
instances in which the relationship of problems is seen. Thus he comes
to perceive his tendency toward shyness and withdrawal to be related to
his feeling that he is a genius and superior to others. He gradually
perceives all of himself as a much more unified pattern in which the
struggle and conflict revolves around certain basic issues. These he is
able to face and resolve, now that he has differentiated out the crucial
elements which run through so much of his life.

Still another aspect of this therapeutic experience of increased
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_146}differentiation may be described in terms of
problem-solving. Duncker (52) has given a thoughtful analysis of the
psychological processes involved when the subject is dealing with
problem-tasks and with mathematical questions. But much the same
phenomena are evident in therapy. There is the exploration of one
hypothesis after another, in a not too orderly fashion. There is the
experience of having something which has heretofore been ground in the
perceptual field, emerge into figure. There is the special change in
figure-ground relationship which Duncker describes as the looseness
versus the fixedness of a perceptual object. That is, both in
problem-solving and in therapy the person has come to accept a certain
element of the situation as something given or fixed. When he
reperceives this as something which is not fixed, he is apt to have a
real "Aha!" experience, and finds himself much nearer to a solution of
his problem. Thus Duncker's subject's sudden realization that the cork
in the ink bottle is not fixed in that perceived relationship, but is a
possible tool, a wedge to hold a stick in the desired position, has
changed it from a fixed object in his perceptual field to a loose and
manipulable one. Likewise the mother who sees her child as bad, comes in
therapy to see this not as a fixed and given aspect of the situation but
one which is manipulable, alterable, a "loose" perceptual element. Or
the client who sees his homosexuality as a settled part of the picture
comes to see this part of his behavior as being possibly alterable, as
being no more fixed than any other pattern of his behavior. This change
from perceiving elements as rigid and fixed, to perceiving them as
"loose" or changeable is one of the most important types of
differentiation which occur in therapy.

Perhaps this discussion will indicate why, for some, the process of
therapy can be wholly described in terms of differentiation. Thus Snygg
and Combs state, "we might, therefore, define psychotherapy from a
phenomenological point of view as: the provision of experience whereby
the individual is enabled to make more adequate differentiation of the
phenomenal self and its relationship to external reality. If such
differentiations can be made, the need of the individual for maintenance
and enhancement of the phenomenal self will do the rest" (200, p. 285).

[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_147}*Movement toward Awareness of Denied Experience*

One of the most characteristic and perhaps one of the most important
changes in therapy is the bringing into awareness of experiences of
which heretofore the client has not been conscious. What,
psychologically, occurs when the individual thus deals with "repressed"
material? Our experience would indicate that it is best described in
terms of greater differentiation of perception, and more adequate
symbolization, the processes just discussed.

Let us take a simple example and trace its development. A woman has
developed a dizziness and faintness, for which no organic cause can be
found. This behavior occurs at various unpredictable times, usually in
social gatherings, to the great embarrassment of herself and everyone
concerned. She can see no reason for this behavior. As she explores the
situation, she identifies the fact that it seems to occur when it causes
the most embarrassment to her husband. But this offers no help in
understanding the problem, she says, because she is fond of her husband
and has no reason for doing anything to hurt him. As all of this is
accepted she slowly moves, in succeeding interviews, to stating that if
there was any antagonism toward her husband it was completely
unconscious and unintentional; that she had felt antagonistic toward her
husband several years ago when the symptom started; that she still had a
desire to control him and that her symptom was a means of attempting
this; that she guessed it had served the purpose both of opposing him
and punishing herself for doing so; that in the light of all these newly
perceived facts she would have to find more open and direct ways of
expressing antagonism when she felt it.

If we examine this sequence from a psychological point of view, it would
seem clear that she has all along been experiencing, viscerally,
feelings of opposition toward her husband. The crucial missing element
is the adequate symbolization of these experiences. This explanation
ties in with the fact that she mentioned, early in her interviews, that
she was often tense and upset before the dizziness and faintness
occurred. This was as far as the symbolization went. It also seems clear
that the basic reason for the []{#013_c4.html_lpn_148}phenomenon of
"repression" or "denial of experience" is that the adequate
symbolization of the experience in question would be definitely and
often deeply in contradiction to the self concept of the individual. The
woman whom we have just described was not, in her own eyes, a person who
would stubbornly oppose her good husband, or a person who would
entertain unreasonably hostile feelings toward him. Hence such visceral
sensations must be given a distorted symbolization, or not be symbolized
at all. It also would appear that the release of "repressions," or the
bringing into awareness of denied experiences, is not simply a matter of
probing for these, either by the client or the therapist. It is not
until the concept of self is sufficiently revised to accept them, that
they can be openly symbolized. The change in self precedes, rather than
follows, the recovery of denied or repressed material.

But we are getting more and more deeply into a theory of the process,
which we have proposed to take up in the final portion of the chapter.
Let us return to a more descriptive level in regard to these
unsymbolized or inadequately symbolized experiences. In practice, it is
noted that the first step toward uncovering such material is usually the
perception of inconsistencies. In the case just cited, the woman comes
to recognize first a discrepancy of this order: I love my husband, yet
my behavior seems as though I wished to embarrass him. In another case
it may be: I wish to get ahead professionally, yet I fail the very
courses needed to get ahead. Or in another case: I want my marriage to
continue, but I seem to be behaving in such a way as to break it up.
When such discrepancies are clearly perceived, the client is unable to
leave them alone. He is motivated to find out the reason for the
discrepancy, whether it is due to an inaccurate description of his own
feelings (which is usually true) or to an inaccurate description of his
behavior.

Although this process of bringing experience into adequately symbolized
awareness is recognized by several therapeutic orientations as being an
important and basic element of therapy, there is as yet no objective
investigation of it. From a descriptive clinical point of view, however,
we may say that successful therapy seems to entail the bringing into
awareness, in an adequately []{#013_c4.html_lpn_149}differentiated and
accurately symbolized way, those experiences and feelings which are
currently in contradiction to the client's concept of self.

*Characteristic Movement in the Valuing Process*

As we listen to recordings of therapeutic interviews, and study the
transcribed material, it is very evident indeed that therapy has much to
do with what is perceived as "good" or "bad," "right" or "wrong,"
"satisfying" or "unsatisfying." It somehow involves the value system of
the individual, and changes in that system. This is an aspect of therapy
which has been little discussed, and thus far barely touched from a
research point of view. This discussion of it is to be regarded as
exploratory rather than in any sense definitive.

It seems to be true that early in therapy the person is living largely
by values he has introjected from others, from his personal cultural
environment. The situation might be schematically represented by giving
some of the values stated or implied by clients and placing in
parentheses the source of these values.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
"I should never be angry at anyone" (because my parents and church
regard anger as wrong).

"I should always be a loving mother" (because any other attitude is
unacceptable in my middle class group).

"I should be successful in my courses" (because my parents count on my
success).

"I have homosexual impulses, which is very bad" (according to our whole
culture).

"I should be sexless" (because my mother seems to regard sex as wicked
and out of place for any right-minded person).

"I should be completely casual about sex behavior" (because my
sophisticated friends have this attitude).
:::
::::
:::::

As therapy progresses, the client comes to realize that he is trying to
live by what others think, that he is not being his real self, and he is
less and less satisfied with this situation. But if he is
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_150}to relinquish these introjected values, what is
to take their place? There ensues a period of confusion and uncertainty
as to values, a certain sense of insecurity in having no basis for
judging what is right or wrong, good or bad.

Gradually this confusion is replaced by a dawning realization that the
evidence upon which he can base a value judgment is supplied by his own
senses, his own experience. Short term and long term satisfactions can
be recognized, not by what others say, but by examining one's own
experience. The value system is not necessarily something imposed from
without, but is something experienced. The individual discovers that he
has within himself the capacity for weighing the experiential evidence
and deciding upon those things which make for the long-run enhancement
of self (which inevitably involves the enhancement of other selves as
well). Thus a preliminary investigation by Kessler (101), analyzing the
material of three cases, indicated that evaluations at first tended to
be sensed as being fixed and residing in the object; this view tended to
be replaced by a recognition that value judgments are not necessarily
fixed but are alterable; finally there was a tendency to recognize that
evaluations were made by the individual, and that the personal
evaluation might be altered, depending on the evidence.

Another conceptualization of this process has evolved out of our
thinking about the locus of evaluation. In most statements which make or
imply a value judgment, the spatial locus of the origin of the
evaluation can be rather readily inferred. In therapy, in the initial
phases, there appears to be a tendency for the locus of evaluation to
lie outside the client. It is seen as a function of parents, of the
culture, of friends, and of the counselor. In regard to this last, some
clients make strenuous efforts to have the therapist exercise the
valuing function, so as to provide them with guides for action. In
client-centered therapy, however, one description of the counselor's
behavior is that he consistently keeps the locus of evaluation with the
client. Some of this is evident in the way he phrases his responses.
"You're angry at ------"; "You're confused by ------"; "It seems to you
that ------"; "You feel that ------"; "You think you're bad because you
------." In []{#013_c4.html_lpn_151}each of these responses the attitude
as well as the phrasing is such as to indicate that it is the *client's*
evaluation of the situation which is being accepted. Little by little
the client finds that it is not only possible but satisfying and sound
to accept the locus of evaluation as residing within himself. When this
experience becomes internalized, values are no longer seen as fixed or
threatening things. They are judgments made by the individual, based
upon his own experience, and they are also alterable if and when new
experience gives new and altered evidence.

Thus some of the accepted values which were schematically summarized
earlier may become markedly changed when evaluated in the light of the
client's own experience.

::::::: block
:::::: topbot
::::: sl
"I should be angry at a person when I deeply feel angry because this
leaves less residual effect than bottling up the feeling, and actually
makes for a better and more realistic relationship."

::: topbot
"I should be a loving mother when I feel that way but I need not be
fearful of other attitudes when they exist."
:::

"I should be successful in my courses only if they have long-range
meaning to me."

::: topbot
"I have homosexual impulses, and these are capable of expressions which
enhance self and others, and expressions which achieve the reverse."
:::

"I accept my sexuality, and value highly those expressions of it which
result in long-range enhancement of self and others; I value less highly
those expressions which give only transient satisfactions, or do not
enhance self."
:::::
::::::
:::::::

Perhaps something of the movement which takes place in this shift in
locus of evaluation may be illustrated from the case of a young woman
client. A portion of the second interview may indicate how certain
standards and values came to be introjected and the effect these had
upon her behavior. It seems fairly clear that during her earlier life
these values were satisfying guides to action, but that now there is
sensed some sort of discrepancy which is profoundly dissatisfying. She
feels that she no longer wishes to abide by these values but has nothing
to substitute in their place.

:::: topbot
::: sl
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_152}*S102:* It seems --- I don't know --- It
probably goes all the way back into my childhood. I've --- for some
reason I've --- my mother told me that I was the pet of my father.
Although I never realized it --- I mean, they never treated me as a pet
at all. And other people always seemed to think I was sort of a
privileged one in the family. But I never had any reason to think so.
And as far as I can see looking back on it now, it's just that the
family let the other kids get away with more than they usually did me.
And it seems for some reason to have held me to a more rigid standard
than they did the other children.

*C103:* You're not so sure you were a pet in any sense, but more that
the family situation seemed to hold you to pretty high standards.

*S103:* M-hm. That's just what has occurred to me; and that the other
people could sorta make mistakes, or do things as children that were
naughty, or "that was just a boyish prank," or "that was just what you
might expect," but Alice wasn't supposed to do those things.

*C104:* M-hm. With somebody else it would just be just --- oh, be a
little naughtiness; but as far as you were concerned, it shouldn't be
done.

*S104:* That's really the idea I've had. I think the whole business of
my standards, or my values, is one that I need to think about rather
carefully, since I've been doubting for a long time whether I even have
any sincere ones.

*C105:* M-hm. Not sure whether you really have any deep values which you
are sure of.

*S105:* M-hm. M-hm.

*C106:* You've been doubting that for some time.

*S106:* Well, I've experienced that before. Though one thing, when I
make decisions I don't have --- I don't think ------ It seems that some
people have --- have quite steady values that they can weigh things
against when they want to make a decision. Well, I don't, and I haven't
had, and I guess I'm an opportunist (*laughing*). I do what seems to be
the best thing to do at the moment, and let it go at that.

*C107:* You have no certain measuring rods that you can use.

*S107:* Yes. M-hm. That's what I feel. (*Pause*.) Is our time about up,
Mr. L.?

*C108:* Well, I think there are several minutes more.

*S108:* I was thinking about this business of standards. I somehow
developed a sort of a knack, I guess, of --- well --- habit --- of
trying to make people feel at ease around me, or to make things go along
smoothly. I don't know whether that goes back to early childhood, or ---
I mean, to our family situation where there was a large family, and
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_153}so many differences of opinion and all that
there always had to be some appeaser around (*laughing*) and seeing into
the reasons for disagreeing and being sorta the oil that soothed the
waters. Well, that is a role that I have taken for a long time. And ---
I --- it's gotten so it really --- I mean, before this sort of thing
came up I realized that as a person in a social situation or group of
people like at --- oh, at a small meeting, or a little party, or
something --- I could help things to go along nicely and appear to be
having a good time. And I'd see where someone else needed more punch, or
where someone didn't have a partner, or where somebody was bored with
that person, and something --- somebody was standing in a corner, and I
could go out and meet them. And sometimes I'd surprise myself by arguing
against what I really thought when I saw that the person in charge would
be quite unhappy about it, if I didn't. In other words I just wasn't
ever --- I mean, I didn't find myself ever being set and definite about
things. I could see what I thought was needed in the situation and what
was the idea I thought might be interjected to make people feel happy,
and I'd do that.

*C109:* In other words, what you did was always in the direction of
trying to keep things smooth and to make other people feel better and to
smooth the situation.

*S109:* Yes. I think that's what it was. Now the reason why I did it
probably was --- I mean, not that I was a good little Samaritan going
around making other people happy, but that was probably the role that
fell easiest for me to play. I'd been doing it around home so much. I
just didn't stand up for my own convictions, until I don't know whether
I have any convictions to stand up for.

*C110:* You feel that for a long time you've been playing the role of
kind of smoothing out the frictions or differences or what not. . . .

*S110:* M-hm.

*C111:* Rather than having any opinion or reaction of your own in the
situation. Is that it?

*S111:* That's it. Or that I haven't been really honestly being myself,
or actually knowing what my real self is, and that I've been just
playing a sort of false role. Whatever role no one else was playing, and
that needed to be played at the time, I'd try to fill it in.

*C112:* Whatever kind of person that was needed to kinda help out that
situation you'd be that kind of person rather than being anything
original or deeply your own.

*S112:* I think so. I remember one summer. We used to go to the YWCA
camp in the summers. And our family lived way out near the
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_154}edge of town. We went with the school groups
that went at a certain time during the summer. Well, we didn't know
those children very well, because we didn't see them except on Sundays
when we went to church. So going to camp wasn't an awfully satisfying
experience because I felt quite strange among the children. Well, this
summer --- I'd been to camp once before --- and I think I'd decided that
I was going to be one of the popular girls at camp. So I went to camp
with these children that I didn't know too well. And I don't remember
what I did that summer; but anyway, I came home voted the most popular
camper. What I do remember, though, is when I got ready to go to camp I
--- and I don't know how old I was then --- I was not thirteen, I don't
suppose; maybe twelve or thirteen, I don't know quite how old; I just
decided I was going to be the most popular girl at camp. So I went to
camp with that decision, and I did the things that needed to be done.
Whatever they were, I'm sure I don't --- I mean, it was probably a lot
of drudgery too; like making other people's beds and doing other things
like that --- I'm sure. But anyway I went through a set campaign and
came home and was actually chosen the most popular girl at camp
(*laughing*). And it seems that what I've done is do things like that
instead of developing a real self.

*C113:* In other words it's been kind of a planful campaign in each case
rather than because you really felt that way or really wanted to be that
kind of person. Is that it?

*S113:* Well, yes. I think so. It seems that it's more --- that it's not
realistic, or it's not honest, or not --- it's not sincere, maybe.
:::
::::

The shift in locus of evaluation in this case was profound and
far-reaching. For a brief example, a minor experience will illustrate
the type of change we have been describing. In the eighth interview this
passage occurs.

:::: topbot
::: sl
*S346:* Now --- one of the things that I was doing, ah, something that
--- that had worried me was getting, well, living at the dorm, it's hard
--- not to just sort of fall in with a group of people, ah, that aren't
interesting, but just around. Well, I, ah, found that I had been
spending a lot more time with a group of people that I didn't find
interesting --- All of them are pleasant people, and there were certain
activities I enjoyed with them, but well, there were a lot of things
that I didn't have in common. And we had gotten in the habit of eating
breakfast together, and lunch together, and dinner together, and sitting
around a lot, probably in the evening. So, now I find that I'm, ah, able
to, ah, at least I *am* getting []{#013_c4.html_lpn_155}away from that
group a little bit. And ah, being with people who are a little bit more
stimulating, and people that I really find I have more interests in
common with.

*C346:* That is, you've really chosen to draw away from the group you're
just thrown with by chance, and you pick people whom you want more to
associate with. Is that it?

*S347:* That's the idea. I --- I, ah, I mean I'm not doing anything
drastic. I haven't taken any great steps by leaps and bounds. But, well,
one of the girls lives on my floor and she would come and knock on the
door and say, ah, that she wanted to eat lunch, or let's eat lunch at
twelve, or all of us are going down to eat at twelve. Well, it used to
be hard for me to say, "Well, no. I would like to eat at twelve-thirty,
ah, so I can eat lunch and go to my one-thirty class." And so I'd stop
whatever I was doing and drag down at twelve with the group. Well, now I
say, occasionally, "Well, that isn't convenient for me. I'd rather eat
later," or "I'd rather eat earlier." Well, ah, before it was easier for
me to say, "O.K., I'll go ahead and eat now." And then another thing is
that, ah, with the group of kids that I was eating with, I felt that I
had just sort of been dragged into the group, almost. They weren't
people --- one or two of them were people that I really liked, and they
had sort of pulled me in with a group of their friends that I wouldn't
have picked, myself, especially. And ah, so that I found that all my
time was being taken up with these people, and now I'm beginning to seek
out people that I prefer myself, I mean people that I choose myself,
rather than being drawn in with the bunch.

*C347:* You find it a little more possible, I gather, to express your
real attitudes in a social situation, like wanting to go to lunch or not
wanting to go to lunch, and also to, ah, to make your own choice of
friends, and people that you want to mix with.

*S348:* So, that seems to me --- I, ah --- that also isn't going ahead
by great leaps and bounds, but I, ah ---

*C348:* It's a slow process.

*S349:* But I, ah, I think I'm getting to that. Ah --- and I don't know
whether --- I mean at first, ah, I tried to see if I was just
withdrawing from this bunch of kids I'd been spending my time with, and
I'm sincere in thinking that, ah, it's not a withdrawal, but it's more
of an assertion of my real interests.

*C349:* M-hm. In other words, you've tried to be self-critical in order
to see if you're just running away from the situation, but you feel
really, it's an expression of your positive attitudes.

*S350:* I --- I think it is.
:::
::::

[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_156}Here the client is not only asserting her own
evaluations of friends and social activities in contradistinction to the
values of the group, but she is able to check her own evaluations to see
if they are actually based upon experience. "I tried to see if I was
just withdrawing from this bunch of kids . . . but it's more an
assertion of my real interests." She finds that she is able to
determine, upon the evidence of her own experience, which of her
acquaintances have value to her and which do not, which activities
significantly enhance self and which do not, which behaviors are
escapist, which are positive assertions of purpose. Here is at least a
small example of the change which takes place in the valuing process.

Since the above discussion was written, a study has been completed by
Raskin (157) which tends to confirm some of the ideas presented. Raskin
investigated the extent to which the client's locus of evaluation could
be shown to have changed during therapy. The phrase was defined in terms
of the client's personality organization --- the extent to which his
values and standards depend upon the judgments and expectations of
others, or are based on a reliance upon his own experience. The first
step was to determine whether interview items pertinent to this concept
could reliably be selected by judges. More than 80 per cent agreement
between two judges was found. The next step was to construct a scale for
estimating the locus of evaluation. Twenty-two interview items involving
material related to this concept were rated by eighteen qualified
judges, and from these judgments an objective rating scale was
constructed with values from 1.0 to 4.0, with twelve illustrative items
whose value had been established by the eighteen experts. The third step
was the establishment of the reliability of this scale. In fifty-nine
items, one from each of the interviews rated, there was 76 per cent
agreement between the investigator and another judge, a correlation of
.91.

This scale was then applied to the fifty-nine interviews of the ten
cases studied. These same cases had been used as basic data for several
coordinated studies (43), so that various types of data were available
for each case and each interview. In general, the locus of evaluation
scale showed a shift away from placing the []{#013_c4.html_lpn_157}locus
of values in others, and toward keeping it in self. The average of the
ten first interviews was 1.97, while the average for the ten last
interviews was 2.73. When one takes the five cases which were judged by
five objective criteria as being most successful, the shift is even
sharper. For these five cases the average on the locus of evaluation
scale was 2.12 for the first interview, 3.34 for the last. However, the
most striking finding was the fact that the measure of the locus of
evaluation correlated positively with other measures which had been used
with these cases. With the self-acceptance scale developed by Sheerer
(189) the correlation was .61. The scale of attitudes toward self which
was developed by Stock (203) correlated .67. The index of insight
developed by Seeman (180) correlated .35 with Raskin's scale, and with
Hoffman's measure of maturity of behavior (86) the correlation was .45.
The correlation with the defensiveness scale as used by Haigh (76) was
negative, as would be predicted, but was only --- .19, too small to be
significant. When these five separate measures are combined into a
single index based on standard scores, the correlation with the locus of
evaluation measure is .85 for the fifty-nine interviews of the ten
cases. It is also significant that the degree of improvement on the
locus of evaluation scale correlates .60 with counselor rating of
outcome.

These correlations suggest strongly the point which has already been
mentioned, that the process of therapy appears to be a unified
phenomenon, in which all measures, crude as some of them may be, show a
strong positive correlation. Raskin concludes, "the locus of evaluation
concept operates in a consistent relationship with previously
established criteria of therapeutic progress, such as self-regarding
attitudes, understanding and insight, maturity of behavior and
defensiveness." (157, p. 41)

This study permits the conclusion that there is a change in the valuing
process during therapy, and that one characteristic of this change is
that the individual moves away from a state where his thinking, feeling,
and behavior are governed by the judgments and expectations of others,
and toward a state in which he relies upon his own experience for his
values and standards.

[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_158}*Characteristic Developments in the
Relationship*

There are a number of therapists --- in other orientations as well as in
client-centered therapy --- who take the point of view that the process
of therapy is best described in terms of the changing emotional
relationship existing between the client and the therapist. They believe
that many of the verbal and attitudinal and perceptual changes are
simply by-products of a basic emotional experience in a relationship
between two human beings. One of the arguments for this point of view is
that in play therapy, particularly, many of the processes we have
discussed either do not occur or occur only in unverbalized form, and
yet constructive change takes place. What are we to regard as essential
to psychotherapy if success occurs in dealing with a child, when there
have been no verbalized insights, little expression of attitudes toward
the self, no certain expression of denied experiences, and only a fresh
and vital experiencing of self? It is natural that we should give
increased attention to the type of relationship in which such change
occurs.

Perhaps a brief example of the perplexing sort of "success" which is
found with a fair degree of frequency, particularly among younger
clients, will serve as an introduction to thinking about the
counselor-client relationship. A counselor with a considerable amount of
experience describes, in a letter to the author, a case she has
completed.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
I have just completed the strangest counseling case I've ever had. I
think you might be interested in it.

Joan was one of my very first clients when I started counseling one
half-day each week at the local high school. She had told the girls'
adviser, "I feel so shy I couldn't even tell her what my problem is.
Will you tell her for me?" So the adviser told me before I saw Joan that
she worried about having no friends. The adviser added that she had
noticed that Joan seemed always to be so alone.

The first time I saw Joan she talked a little about her problem and
quite a bit about her parents, of whom she seemed to be quite fond.
However, there were long, long pauses. The next four interviews could be
recorded verbatim on this small piece of paper. By the middle of
November Joan remarked that "things are going pretty good."
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_159}No elaboration on that. Meanwhile the adviser
commented that the teachers had noticed that Joan was now smiling a
friendly greeting when they met her in the halls. This was unheard-of
before. However, the adviser had seen little of Joan and could say
nothing of her contacts with other students. In December there was one
interview during which Joan talked freely; the others were characterized
by silence while she sat, apparently deep in thought, occasionally
looking up with a grin. More silence through the next two and one-half
months. Then I received word that she had been elected "woman of the
month" by the girls of the high school! The basis for that election is
always sportsmanship and popularity with other girls. At the same time I
got a message from Joan, "I don't think I need to see you any more." No,
apparently she doesn't, but why? What happened in those hours of
silence? My faith in the capacity of the client was sorely tested. I'm
glad it did not waver.
:::
::::
:::::

Experiences of this kind have forced us to recognize that therapy can
move forward even though outwardly the client exhibits very few of the
elements which we have thought of as characteristic of therapeutic
progress. Whatever happened seems not to have happened as the result of
verbal interchange. It is of course possible that the outcome was due to
some factor entirely outside of therapy. When one considers a number of
cases of this sort, it seems more likely that the outcome was due to an
experience in a relationship. And if this is so in such nonverbal cases,
perhaps it is equally true in others. How then, can we formulate
therapeutic process in terms of a relationship?

One hypothesis is that the client moves from the experiencing of himself
as an unworthy, unacceptable, and unlovable person to the realization
that he is accepted, respected, and loved, in this limited relationship
with the therapist. "Loved" has here perhaps its deepest and most
general meaning --- that of being deeply understood and deeply accepted.
In terms of this hypothesis we might speculate on the case of Joan.
Feeling that she is a person who is unworthy of having friends, partly
because she is so shy and uncommunicative, she enters a relationship
with the counselor. Here she finds complete acceptance --- or love, if
you will --- as much evident in her periods of silence and shyness as in
the []{#013_c4.html_lpn_160}times when she can talk. She discovers that
she can be a silent person and still be liked, that she can be her shy
self and yet be accepted. Perhaps it is this which gives her more
feeling of worth, and changes her relationship to others. By believing
herself lovable as a shy and withdrawn person, she finds that she is
accepted by others and that those characteristics tend to drop away.

Another clinical hypothesis may be formulated in slightly different
terms. As the client experiences the attitude of acceptance which the
therapist holds toward him, he is able to take and experience this same
attitude toward himself. As he thus begins to accept, respect, like, and
love himself, he is capable of experiencing these attitudes toward
others.

One of our staff members, Mr. Oliver H. Bown, has been particularly
concerned with the point of view represented here, and some excerpts
from a memorandum which he has written will give a more vivid
description of a therapy in which the stress is upon a deep and
significant relationship, to which the client can bring everything that
he emotionally is, and in which he is met by the therapist's feelings.
This memo was a personal and informal document to the staff, but Mr.
Bown has given permission to quote from it here. He feels that the term
"love," easily misunderstood though it may be, is the most useful term

:::::: block
::::: topbot
:::: sl
to describe a basic ingredient of the therapeutic relationship. I use
this term purposely to convey a number of things:

First, that as therapist I can allow a very strong feeling or emotion of
my own to enter the therapeutic relationship, and expect that the
handling of this feeling from me by the client will be an important part
of the process of therapy for him.

Secondly, that a very basic need of the therapist can be satisfied
legitimately (or I would rather say *must* be satisfied, if the
relationship is to be healthy and legitimate) in his relationship with
his client.

And, thirdly, that therapeutic interaction at this emotional level,
rather than interaction at an intellectual cognitive level, regardless
of the content concerned, is the effective ingredient in therapeutic
growth.

These, I recognize, are bald assertions. It seems to me at the present
that they are statements which can be proved only through
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_161}subjective experience, and the data which will
eventually enter into a proof or disproof, while always present in a
relationship, are most often out of the range of a recording machine.

But, if these phenomena can be subjectively experienced, there is
obviously some way of communicating about them. In therapy, I am quite
convinced that this communication takes place, primarily, at subverbal,
subliminal or subconscious levels. I can only attempt to the best of my
ability here to bring these things to the level of words.

It seems to me that we can love a person only to the extent that we are
not threatened by him; we can love him only if his reactions to us, or
to those things which affect us, are understandable to us and are
clearly related to those basic motivations within us all which tend to
bring us closer to compatible and meaningful relationships with other
people and with the world. Thus, if a person is hostile toward me, and I
can see nothing in him at the moment except the hostility, I am quite
sure that I will react in a defensive way to the hostility. If, on the
other hand, I can see this hostility as an understandable component of
the person's defense against feeling the need for closeness to people, I
can then react with love toward this person, who also wants love, but
who at the moment must pretend not to. Similarly, and somewhat more
important to me in my experience, I feel that positive feeling expressed
by the client toward us can be a very real source of threat, provided
again that this positive expression, in whatever form it may take, is
not clearly related to these same basic motivations mentioned above. I
might add that the greatest struggle which I have had to date, in what
seems like a perpetual process of becoming an adequate therapist, has
been my searching out of these so-called basic motivations within
myself, but this process alone has made it possible for me to enter into
deeper and deeper relationships with clients of both sexes and all ages
without feeling personally threatened by my feelings toward the client
and by his toward me.

Having again placed "love" at the forefront of my consideration here, I
should like to return to the three assertions mentioned above which seem
to grow out of this concept for me, and consider them in greater detail.

First, I should like to consider why it is that in the past I have been
unwilling to let any strong feeling of mine enter into the therapeutic
relationship. At the beginning, the reason I gave myself for this
unwillingness to become in any way emotionally involved was taken from
the statements of many people who were experienced in
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_162}the field. Statements such as: "the therapist
must keep himself out of it; we must react to clients' feelings and
needs and not our own; we should not expect our client to be our
therapist; and, objectivity goes down the drain when we ourselves become
involved" --- these are familiar to us all, and when considered in the
light of specific kinds of involvement which therapists may fall into,
they are very reasonable prohibitions. At this level I was literally
stuck for a long time, fearing the worst if I should let any kind of
personal involvement enter into my relationship with my clients.
Gradually, however, I began to find another level of reason for my fear
of involvement which had reference to my own ability to accept my
feelings and needs in relation to other people, rather than to a theory
of what is "good therapy." I should like to mention a few of the
specific reasons which I found at this level as examples. The rather
deeply disturbed client is usually preoccupied with himself and with his
own problems, and I began to realize that all through my life I have
been willing to become involved with people --- that is, to really give
something of myself to them --- only when they have seemed to be in a
position to give me something which I have needed in return. More
bluntly, I have striven throughout my life to satisfy my needs, and
because clients, as I have seen them, have been poor potential
satisfiers of my needs, it has been safest not to express these needs
--- actually, not to feel them in the therapeutic relationship. This
absence of the possibility of direct and immediate satisfaction has been
one reason for my refusal to really enter a therapeutic relationship,
but there has been an even stronger reason. A lack of satisfaction is
one thing, direct and outright rejection is another, and I have thus
feared that if I allowed some of the more tender parts of myself to
become exposed in a therapeutic relationship that they would be trampled
on, misused, and perhaps ridiculed. These were some of the *real*
reasons why a lack of involvement was appealing, or even more than that,
mandatory. I assumed, of course, that the clients knew nothing of this;
that I appeared to them to be a professionally adequate person who was
dealing with them in an understanding and an empathic way. This may have
been true at the client's level of consciousness, but unconsciously, I
think he was learning directly from me, "Do not be free in this
relationship. Do not let yourself go. Do not express your deepest
feelings or needs, for in this relationship that is dangerous." What do
I mean by subconscious learning on the part of the client? At this point
I can only say that when it became less necessary for me to
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_163}hold this attitude in therapy, my clients
immediately moved into those more delicate areas which I had been
shutting off within myself, and the feelings and needs which were
involved in these areas could not only be discussed, but also
experienced freely and without fear. Formerly, I would have said that I
did not need to let my own needs and feelings interfere with the
progress of therapy; now, I would say that I was reacting in an infinite
number of little ways to my need to defend certain parts of myself, to
withhold those parts of myself in this relationship rather than to
express my more outgoing needs and feelings, on which I feel any real
relationship depends, and by which it is nourished. I am merely saying
that I feel that it is impossible for a therapist not to act in terms of
his own needs. The only choice which is involved for me is whether I
wish to react to whatever need I have to defend myself against feeling,
needing, and involvement in general, or whether I wish to develop a
sufficient acceptance of these needs and feelings so that they can be
freely operative in all relationships, therapeutic and otherwise.

At this point I should like to react to the contention which is
sometimes put forward to the effect that when the therapist satisfies
his needs in therapeutic relationship it is a distorted form of
sublimation, a rather ugly and parasitic misuse of the client's
emotional vulnerability. I certainly feel that this can happen, but
responding to this possibility by withholding any emotion which it is
feared may get out of hand, is for me an inadequate and castrating way
of dealing with the same emotionality which I feel lies at the very
heart of the best interpersonal relationships.

We may now turn to my second assertion, since the discussion immediately
above has provided a certain basis which allows me to deal with the
therapist's needs. As soon as the word "need" is mentioned in this
connection, I think that we often become concerned with rather specific
needs which usually require in our culture a fairly specific context in
which they can be legitimately satisfied. So long as these specific and
pointed needs are at the forefront of the therapist's preoccupation, it
does indeed seem ridiculous and out of taste to suggest that they be
satisfied in the therapeutic relationship.

What then are these very basic needs which I have probably made sound
mysterious and obscure, which I maintain must be expressed by the
therapist, if the client is to feel a maximum of security and freedom in
the relationship? In my previous paper I could express them only in a
negative way by saying that they were freely expressed
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_164}and operative when the therapist felt completely
free, uninhibited, and uncontrolled. To express these needs in a
positive way is somehow very difficult because all the words I can think
of sound so trivial while the feelings themselves feel so real and so
potent. They feel like the need for a very elemental kind of response
from people; a response which is composed mainly of a fundamental
penetrating warmth; a response which is simple and yet somehow absolute,
and certainly unqualified. It is a response which I feel cannot be
conveyed with words. It exists almost as a form of pure energy which can
be picked up by another person only through his feelings, rather than
through his intellect. While this may sound very garbled, I feel that it
is as simple a phenomenon as the experiencing of pain. When we actually
back into a hot stove, we don't have to think through the laws of
thermodynamics, body chemistry, and neurology before we are intensely
aware of the pain. In some such way, I believe, this very positive
response is perceived, in spite of the absence of anything very tangible
as stimulus.

Now, we may ask why it is important that the therapist feels this need
in his relationship with his client. This need, incidentally, is
referred to above as our deepest motivations toward "compatible and
meaningful relationships with people." The answer which feels
operationally correct, and I think logically so, is that I think it is
only when the therapist can experience this need, this motivation,
within himself as a live part of himself, that he can perceive it or any
fragment of it which breaks through, and all the very complex defenses
which the organism can develop to suppress this need in his client. To
phrase this somewhat more simply, my contention is that it is only when
we can express our own deepest needs that we are able to perceive the
operation of those needs in another person, and it is only then that we
have this basic response, which we need from other people, available to
give to them.

In terms of the therapeutic situation, I think this feeling says to the
client, I have a real hunger to know you, to experience your warmth,
your expressivity --- in whatever form it may take --- to drink as
deeply as I can from the experience of you in the closest, most naked
relationship which we can achieve. I do not want to change you to suit
me: the real you and the real me are perfectly compatible ingredients of
a potential relationship which transcends, but in no way violates, our
separate identities.

This whole idea seems important to me, not so much from the
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_165}theoretical standpoint, but rather because of
its apparent importance in the process which some of my clients have
been undergoing. Simple experiencing of this kind of feeling toward my
clients has left me with the feeling that I'm giving everything that I
can to the therapeutic relationship, and this in turn leaves me with no
feeling of withholding or guilt. It also seems responsible for my
increased ability to say "no" to specific demands or requests which the
client may make with no feeling of rejecting him or letting him down in
any way. Whether I'm kidding myself theoretically or not, this feeling
of emotional adequacy in a therapeutic relationship seems very essential
in creating a spontaneous and completely free relationship with clients.

My third assertion, namely, that therapeutic growth takes place as a
result of experiences which have an emotional rather than an
intellectual meaning to clients, falls more into the area of those
things about which there is considerable common agreement. We speak very
often, for example, of the emotional impact of acceptance where
rejection is expected. I only wish to add that acceptance is an
emotional phenomenon, not an intellectual one. I think it implies that
we feel something positive toward the client, rather than that we feel
neutrally toward him. I think clients are very much aware of the
difference between the counselor who listens and understands, and simply
does not react, and the one who understands, and in addition really
cares about the meaning to the client of the feelings, reactions, and
experiences which he is exploring.

Another experience which I have been having, which points out the
significance of the emotional level of interaction, is that there have
been times when a great deal of interaction has gone on on this level at
a time when the verbalization of the client has been far removed from
it. Perhaps the best illustration of this kind of interaction is
illustrated by the reactions of the client, as given at the end of this
paper, to this persistent emotional process.

In concluding this long and I'm sure not very clear discussion of the
therapist's emotional investment in therapy, I would like to say that I
feel that the client establishes the same kind of relationship with his
therapist that he forms with other people in his environment. It
contains the same inhibitions, ambivalences, conflicts, needs, values,
goals, and so on; and when the therapist can perceive these elements in
operation in the immediate present in therapy, he taps one of the most
valuable sources of deeply understanding his client.

I should like to depart at this point from the ticklish business of
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_166}trying to describe the therapeutic relationship
as I see it, and mention briefly and haphazardly some theoretical points
which have come to have importance to me.

The first of these points has to do with the question of why a need or
feeling is repressed. It has been fundamental to my thinking in this
area that somewhere along the line it has been learned, with appropriate
emotional reinforcement, that the need or feeling in question is bad and
that its expression will bring rejection from those whom we value most
in our life situation. I am quite certain that this is a fairly basic
dynamic which does appear in the personality make-up of all of us; but
I've come to recognize another dynamic to which I have been relatively
blind before, one which seems somehow even more fundamental. I believe
that some needs and feelings are repressed, not because it has been
learned that they are bad, but rather because it has been learned that,
if expressed, they will not be satisfied. I am speaking here of the
phenomenon of deprivation which I think probably we all have
experienced, too. My clients have often expressed the feeling that they
have been somehow deprived, but both they and I have thought that the
attempt to resolve this feeling is like trying to work with something
that isn't there; it is more like a "hole" in the mid-section of a
person rather than something tangible that can be examined and
manipulated. I'm finding that this repression is often so complete that
the person can become aware of this "hole" only when it is partially
filled up through a rich experience with another person. In
client-centered therapy I think we often provide this kind of experience
by our attitudes of warmth, acceptance, respect for the individual, and
the like. I'm finding further that the intensified emotional
relationship, which has been discussed above, has been very deeply
effective in searching out the "holes" which do exist within the
personality configuration, and bringing them to that level of awareness
where they can be worked through. I think it is only at this point that
the person can then become aware of all of the mechanisms, particularly
the masochistic self-denial, which are erected as a result of these
unsatisfied hungers.

Another fairly recent learning which has had a good deal of meaning for
me, is in connection with the so-called "dependent" client, who has
often been a somewhat baffling problem in a client-centered approach.
I've reached the conclusion that whenever I find myself calling a client
"dependent," I don't fully understand the nature of the feelings which
are being expressed. I think I've most often
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_167}labeled people as dependent when, in one way or
another, they are asking me for the kind of response which, for some
reason of my own, I am not willing to give. I am speaking now of some
deep emotional need of the client which is expressed, rather than a
series of specific and perhaps unreasonable requests. I have come to the
conclusion, too, that when the client begins making a number of specific
requests, it is almost always a reflection of the lack which he feels in
the relationship.

My final point has to do with the growth force which we have relied upon
so heavily as an explanatory principle. I've also heard recently such
terms as "regressive tendency," "death instinct," and "disruptive
forces" used to explain the case which seems to go downhill. My own
thinking recently leads me to doubt the validity of these two concepts.
I am tending more and more to look at the individual as an organism with
a rather definite "need" structure and with almost unlimited potential,
provided the environment gives the opportunity for the individual to
become aware of his needs and his wealth of positive expressivity. If,
on the other hand, these opportunities are sharply limited, I feel quite
sure that the organism will adapt in a way that appears regressive or
disruptive. This concept helps to explain why I feel that the
therapeutic environment must contain a number of definite ingredients,
rather than simply be free of other ingredients which we judge to be
negative in terms of their effect upon growth.

I am appending to this paper a statement given to me by a client which
expresses in an appropriate emotional way much of what I've been
struggling to report in a somewhat more systematic fashion. For me, this
document has a great deal of meaning, and I'm happy to pass it on to you
for whatever use it may be in understanding what I've tried to
communicate. It is my very real hope that this paper will serve as a
stimulus for communication at greater length on the part of all of us
who are keenly interested in people and the processes through which they
change and grow.

::: topbot
\[*The Client's Statement*\]
:::

It's hard to explain what has happened to me in the past months . . .
very hard. One reason is that I find I cannot relive the experiences
which were so important to me. I can look at them, but cannot completely
relive them. I guess I lived them so completely and fully at the time
that they simply became a part of me and now I cannot
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_168}separate the parts from the whole. I would like
to try, however, to give some of my present impressions of what
happened.

One of my first, strongest, and most persistent feelings was pain ---
all through the months I was in pain; not just mental pain, but actual
physical pain, nausea, rapid heartbeat, poor circulation, headaches, and
so on. I remember saying once that I felt as if I was putting a knife
into myself and turning it around and around so that my blood and all of
my insides would gush forth. The pain began when I realized that I had
to decide whether or not to begin therapy. I felt that you led me to the
water, simply by showing *real* interest and concern, but I had to
decide whether or not to drink. That was a mighty difficult decision ---
in fact, possibly the most difficult I ever made. Once I decided to
drink, it became a matter of desperate urgency, to me, to drink it all
as fast as I could and get to the bottom. Whenever I stopped for breath,
I berated myself for delaying the process.

My first reaction to you, I think, was one of surprise at your
sensitivity and awareness of what and how I was feeling, even when I
expressed it very inarticulately or not at all. I knew you were quick
and sensitive, but I didn't think anyone could be *that* understanding.

Then I began to get the feeling that not only were you sensitive to and
understanding of my feelings, but you also *cared* and cared very much.
This is the feeling which I think I fought vigorously for the whole
time. It simply emanated from you --- from your hands as you handled the
cigarette lighter, from your foot as you stretched it out in front of me
and moved it slowly back and forth and particularly from your eyes, when
I had the courage to look at them. Because of the strength of this
feeling, I usually found it necessary to talk to the wall or the window,
but I was always painfully and acutely aware of you. Once I remember you
attended a class (that day I felt particularly awful) and sat near me. I
didn't want to see you at all that day. Then, you stretched out your
foot and it almost touched mine. I don't know whether it was intentional
or not, but to me it said, "I know how miserable you are and I care
about how you feel because I care about you." I almost screamed. I
wanted to get up and run out of the room. Since I couldn't do that, I
closed up in a shell and waited until I could go. I couldn't talk or do
anything but be aware of you.

Throughout all of my sessions I was focused on my relationship with you.
Whenever I made any attempt to pull away from it, to
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_169}discuss other relationships on an intellectual
plane, I felt compelled to come back to you. I simply could not shake
you. I was firmly convinced that to give love meant to sell my soul, to
become completely dominated by and dependent upon the loved one, and
that love could not be received without paying this high price.
Therefore, I fought desperately against any love you might give to me. I
tried telling you how unworthy I was --- how selfish, inadequate, nasty.
I tried hating and attacking you. You could not possibly love me,
therefore you were being deceitful and cruel in pretending you did. I
tried wearing you down by demanding proof of your affection. I even
tried "curing" myself and raving about how wonderful it was. But you
were always there, like a firm rock which I beat upon to no avail and
which merely said, "I love you." I then began to see, though not too
clearly, that your love did not control me and I could not control it.

As I look at it now, I was peeling off layer after layer of defenses.
I'd build them up, try them, and then discard them when you remained the
same. I didn't know what was at the bottom and I was very much afraid to
find out, but I *had* to keep on trying. At first I felt there was
nothing within me --- just a great emptiness where I needed and wanted a
solid core. Then I began to feel that I was facing a solid brick wall,
too high to get over and too thick to go through. One day the wall
became translucent, rather than solid, and I felt hopeful that I might
really see through it. That was the day, I believe, when I realized
moral judgment had nothing to do with how I felt, only with how I acted.
It suddenly became clear that loving and hating, for example, are
neither right nor wrong, they just are. After this, the wall seemed to
disappear but beyond it I discovered a dam holding back violent,
churning waters. I felt as if I were holding back the force of these
waters and if I opened even a tiny hole I and all about me would be
destroyed in the ensuing torrent of feelings represented by the water.
(I may be overwhelming you with these images which, as you will recall,
are the same ones I used during our sessions. Whenever I felt or
experienced anything, whenever I felt anything "happened," I could find
no way of expressing the feelings or understanding I had, either to you
or to myself, except through these images. The only times I can remember
and the only times which seem important to me are those in which I
experienced the feelings expressed by these images.)

One day the water changed to tigers --- tigers who were straining
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_170}furiously at the leash onto which I was holding
desperately as I felt myself weakening. Finally I could stand the strain
no longer and I let go. All I did, actually, was to succumb to complete
and utter self-pity, then hate, then love. The tigers disappeared and I
found myself on top of a sand dune in a pure ecstasy of feeling. I felt
as if I had struggled through the deep and shifting sand to get to the
top of a large dune. Once there, I could stand on high, throw open my
arms and gather in the bright blue sky and the clear, cool lake. Then I
could run --- faster and faster --- down the dune, across the beach and
into the cold, sharp water of the lake, plunging onward until I fell
face forward and covered all my body with the exhilaration of pure
feeling. Then I could lie upon the warm sand, digging myself in until I
became a part of it and with it absorbed the soothing warmth of the sun.
This was a real experience for me, as you well know, but it was all my
own. I could watch and enjoy others running down their sand dunes, also
happy and exhilarated, but much as I wanted to, I could not go to their
dunes and they could not come to mine.

After this experience, I felt as if I had leaped a brink and was safely
on the other side, though still tottering a bit on the edge. I didn't
know what I was searching for or where I was going, but I felt then, as
I have always felt whenever I really lived, that I was moving forward.
Frequently I felt I was getting closer to the goal, whatever it was, and
then would run away. This discouraged me because I felt it was such a
waste of time. Several times I thought of quitting, but I was driven by
the feeling that if I didn't find "it" this time I never would. I also
began to realize that when I really found something, when I really had
an experience, it was always when I attempted to express or keep from
expressing my feelings toward you. I know that the pressure of your
feeling toward me kept me working on my feelings toward you (and through
you toward all others in my life).

Gradually the goal or end of my search became a light which was working
its way to the surface (as I worked down to it). Last week it was right
under the surface. I had one more layer to remove. I talked,
intellectually, of my feeling of being unloved from birth. I gave
several examples and tried to pin down and explain my feelings in
relation to these examples. As I talked I kept getting more and more
uncomfortable because you seemed to be feeling much more strongly than I
did. Then I began to feel that you weren't even listening to what I was
saying, but you were feeling all the things I was feeling, even more
than I was aware of feeling, and you were *caring*.
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_171}Suddenly I felt as if I had become a baby and
was being held comfortably, securely, with warm understanding and a
great love in my mother's arms. Then I realized that that was what I had
missed and that was what I wanted now and had wanted all my life. I also
realized that I had just been loved that way and that I could never have
discovered what was lacking until I had experienced it --- completely.
Now I could stand on my sand dune and reach across to you on your dune,
my father on his dune, my mother on her dune, and all the others in my
life that I wanted to love. We could all join hands and run down into
the lake. However, the feeling I felt this time was one of joy, not the
desperate ecstasy previously felt when I was alone on my dune.

I also discovered at this time that all of the feelings and events and
ideas of my past and present are like feathers which I have now
released. In fact, my head feels full of these feathers. They are
gradually settling down into their places, but I can never be sure where
they will land. One may seem to be settling in one place, then a new
insight will create a slight breeze which will send it scurrying off in
another direction. I've tried to catch these feathers and force them
into certain places, but that's impossible. You can't force feathers.
The only place they will fit comfortably and stay put is the place in
which they settle naturally. Hereafter, I shall let them settle
themselves and I'll simply remain alert enough to recognize when and
where they have settled and when they are shifting around.

This is getting rather lengthy, but there is one more feeling I would
like to express. As I told you last week, when the light for which I was
searching did come through, it did not seem a bit surprising to me, it
merely gently broke the surface and was recognized, but it had had a
long, hard pull up. I have no doubt, however, that this is what I have
been seeking. Also --- I greeted it with tears of sadness, not ecstasy.
The emptiness is gone, but it's sad to think that it had been there so
long.
::::
:::::
::::::

Here in this highly personal material is a reaching out --- both on the
part of the therapist and on the part of the client --- for a new type
of formulation of the process of therapy. It is not easily understood,
and reactions to it seem to be strong. It is, as far as our own group is
concerned, still in an infant and groping stage. It is clear, however,
that the stress is upon a direct experiencing in
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_172}the relationship. The process is not seen as
primarily having to do with the client's memory of his past, nor with
his exploration of the problems he is facing, nor with the perceptions
he has of himself, nor the experiences he has been fearful of admitting
into awareness. The process of therapy is, by these hypotheses, seen as
being synonymous with the experiential relationship between client and
therapist. Therapy consists in experiencing the self in a wide range of
ways in an emotionally meaningful relationship with the therapist. The
words --- of either client or counselor --- are seen as having minimal
importance compared with the present emotional relationship which exists
between the two.

This is a stimulating formulation of therapy, which is, in some
significant ways, at variance with the previous descriptions. The
hypotheses which are implicit in this formulation will be difficult ---
though not impossible --- to put to rigorous test. This is a way of
looking at the change which goes on in therapy which cannot be
overlooked.

*Characteristic Changes in Personality Structure and Organization*

Are the changes which occur in client-centered therapy simply surface
changes, or do they affect what has been thought of as the basic
"structure" of personality? Some evidence has already been given that
the organization of the self is altered, but the question still remains
whether more conventional, and presumably broader, measures of
personality would show any change.

Our best answer to this question to date consists of five studies
involving one hundred and five clients to whom the Rorschach test was
given before and after therapy; ten of these clients to whom an
additional Rorschach was given twelve to eighteen months following the
conclusion of therapy; twenty-seven clients to whom the Bernreuter test
was given before and after therapy; forty clients who were pre- and
post-tested with the Bell Adjustment Inventory; twenty-eight clients who
were pre- and post-tested with Minnesota Multiphasic Personality
Inventory; twenty-eight clients pre- and post-tested with the Hildreth
Feeling-Attitude Scale; and eleven clients who were given the
Kent-Rosanoff Word Association Test before and after therapy. One
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_173}hundred and twenty-three separate clients from
four clinics were involved in these studies. More than thirty separate
therapists carried these cases. The findings of these studies will be
briefly reviewed, organized in terms of the test
utilized.^[18](#025_endnotes.html_e18){#013_c4.html_f18}^

Since the Rorschach is one of the most widely used personality tests
today, the results in terms of the Rorschach may be presented first.
Muench (140), in the first attempt to measure objectively the
personality outcomes of any form of psychotherapy, administered
Rorschachs to twelve clients before and after therapy. He used a
quantitative method of analysis, based on signs of adjustment and
maladjustment proposed by Hertz and by Klopfer. He found significant
changes in these Rorschach indicators, in the direction of better
adjustment. These Rorschach results were confirmed by the results of
other tests mentioned below. There was considerable correspondence
between the success of the case, according to clinical judgment, and the
extent of the Rorschach change. Although Muench used no control group, a
control group was provided for him by the subsequent efforts of Hamlin
and Albee (79). They used sixteen subjects whose initial status was
similar to Muench's clients, and retested them five months later; there
had been no therapy in the intervening period. They used the same
methods of analysis and found no significant changes in the Rorschach
patterns of this group.

In a more recent study Carr (40) found results contradictory to those of
Muench. Analyzing pre- and post-therapy Rorschachs given to nine cases,
Carr used essentially the same adjustment indicators as Muench, but
found no significant change. He also had the Rorschachs analyzed
qualitatively by an experienced worker who did not know whether the
cases were regarded as successful or not. Five were regarded as showing
no change (in three of these there was even a suggestion of decrement)
and four []{#013_c4.html_lpn_174}were rated as showing slight or
moderate improvement. These ratings showed some, though not a close,
relationship to counselor judgment of degree of success. In general,
this study does not corroborate Muench's findings, and Carr admits
inability to understand the discrepancy.

Mosak (139), in a study of twenty-eight neurotic clients whose average
number of therapeutic interviews was fifteen, also used the Rorschach as
a pre- and post-test. When he used the signs of adjustment as measures
--- using the same indicators as Muench and Carr --- there was no
significant change. When the Rorschach protocols were judged by three
experienced clinicians, two of the cases were judged to have shown much
improvement, about half of the group showed slight improvement, and
nearly half were regarded as relatively unchanged in Rorschach pattern.
Obviously the subjective judgments by Rorschach workers showed more
change than the measure based upon discrete signs.

The most sophisticated study of Rorschach outcomes is that completed by
Haimowitz (78), who gave pre- and post-therapy Rorschachs to fifty-six
clients. Thirteen therapists were involved in these cases. Of these
clients, thirty-two were in individual or individual and group therapy,
and twenty-four were in group therapy alone. The number of therapeutic
hours ranged from three to thirty-eight. A distinctive feature of this
study was the use of a control group of fifteen individuals similar to
the counseled group in age, sex, and education. In analyzing the
Rorschachs, Haimowitz used the index of neurotic signs developed by
Harrower-Erickson. She also developed a series of ten rating scales for
evaluating the Rorschach in terms of the therapeutic concepts of
client-centered therapy, the brief label or title of the ten scales
being as follows: quality of reality orientation, degree of anxiety,
degree of dependency, self attitudes, degree of acceptance of
emotionality, adequacy of intellectual functioning, degree of
spontaneity-flexibility, personality integration, attitudes toward
others, and quality of adjustment to emotional problems. A detailed
manual was devised defining each concept and indicating the Rorschach
signs upon which each rating was to be based. The reliability of
application of these scales was high when the
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_175}investigator re-rated 150 ratings after a lapse
of time. When the rating was done by other judges the correlation was
only .53.

The results obtained by Haimowitz indicated significant improvement by
both methods of analysis. The mean number of neurotic signs exhibited by
the clients dropped from 3.0 to 2.0, the significance of the drop being
indicated by a critical ratio of 4.03. The analysis based upon the ten
rating scales showed a mean rating of 3.13 prior to therapy and 3.59
after therapy, a difference in the direction of improved adjustment,
with a critical ratio of 6.31. Nine of the ten rated characteristics
showed change in a positive direction, five of these being significant
at the 2 per cent level. Only on the scale for spontaneity and
flexibility was there no change. Control remained fully as great at the
end of therapy as at the beginning, a finding in contradiction to the
theoretical and clinical expectations.

The control group showed marked contrast to the experimental group.
Although in several of the control cases there had been important life
changes between the first and second test, the number of neurotic signs
remained constant (4.0 and 3.9) and the mean rating on the ten scales
showed no significant change (3.0 and 2.9). It would seem that changes
of the sort found in the therapy group do not tend to occur in a similar
population not undergoing therapy.

The information from the ten cases retested for a third time more than a
year after the conclusion of therapy is of interest. There was a mean
gain of .82 on the rating scales from pre-test to follow-up test for
these ten cases, a statistically significant figure. There was steady
gain from pre-test to post-test and post-test to follow-up, though these
smaller steps do not provide statistically significant figures. Perhaps
as significant as the overall gain is the fact that this gain came from
six of the cases, the other four failing to show further improvement
following therapy, or showing some regression toward the pre-therapy
state. It seems obvious that if we but knew the factors which
differentiated between those individuals who continued to improve in
personality adjustment following therapy, and those who did not, we
would be much further advanced in our knowledge of the therapeutic
process. Such knowledge must, however, await further study.

[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_176}Another aspect of the Haimowitz investigation
deserves comment. When the attempt was made to relate basic personality
patterns to degree of change in therapy, there was one tentative finding
which is of interest. Deeply disturbed males, with a tendency toward
intrapunitive patterns of personality reactions, seemed to respond to
client-centered therapy with the greatest degree of personality change.
While this finding is tentative, it marks the first attempt to answer,
in a scientific way, the oft-raised question, "What type of individual
is most likely to be helped by client-centered therapy?"

So much for the measurement of personality change by means of the
Rorschach test. The results on other personality tests seem to give the
same general picture. Muench used both the Bell Adjustment Inventory and
the Kent-Rosanoff Word Association Test in addition to the Rorschach.
The results on both tests showed movement in the direction of improved
adjustment. The Bell inventory showed improved scores in all five areas,
but only in the areas of health and emotional adjustment were the
changes statistically significant. The total score showed a decrease
which has nine chances in ten of being significant. Seven of the twelve
cases showed improvement on this test following therapy. Of the five
cases which showed some decrement, three were the least successful cases
in terms of the therapist's judgments. Improvement on the Bell test was
striking in the four cases regarded by the therapists as most
successful. On the Kent-Rosanoff test the overall change was in the
direction of giving more normal associations, and when the associations
were scored by the method devised by Jellinek and Shakow (97), the
difference between the pre- and post-tests was significant at the 1 per
cent level.

Mosak (139) also used the Bell Adjustment Inventory with his group of
twenty-eight, and the results are strikingly similar to those found by
Muench. The mean score dropped from 62.8 to 47.6, a highly significant
change. Again the greatest changes occurred in the areas of emotional
adjustment and health, with social adjustment the third in significance.
Improvement was shown in all five areas, including home and occupational
adjustment.

[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_177}Two tests were used by Mosak which had not been
used by previous investigators. The Minnesota Multiphasic showed
significant decreases on five of the nine diagnostic scales and on two
of the validity scales. The scales showing the greatest changes in the
direction of normality were Depression (D) and Schizophrenia (Sc).
Significant changes also occurred in the following scales:
Hypochondriasis (Hs), Hysteria (Hy), and Paranoia (Pa). Some positive
change occurred on ten of the thirteen scales. When the mean profile of
the group before therapy is compared with the post-therapy profile, the
profile pattern remains very much the same, but a general drop in
profile intensity is observed. Evidently the change which occurs is
pervasive and general, in this group of cases judged as moderately
severe neurotics, rather than narrow or specific.

The other instrument used by Mozak was the Hildreth Feeling-Attitude
Scales, devised during World War II to assess intensity of feelings and
attitudes. The scales which were rated by the client cover the
individual's feeling state, his energy level, his degree of optimism
regarding the future, his mental state, his attitudes toward work, and
his attitudes toward others. Significant improvement was shown on these
scales when the pre-therapy and post-therapy scores are compared. The
largest change was indicated in the feeling scores. The therapists also
made pre- and post-ratings on these clients, utilizing the same scales,
and their ratings showed a slightly greater increase. Interestingly
enough, the therapists rate the clients lower both before and after
therapy than do the clients themselves. While the Hildreth scale is not
a refined device, the changes seem to indicate some significant movement
on the part of the clients toward feelings and attitudes generally
regarded as constructive.

Cowen (45) studied the results of the Bernreuter Test given to
twenty-seven clients before therapy, and repeated twenty months after
the conclusion of therapy. This study was part of a larger investigation
in which follow-up interviews were used as well as the personality
inventory. Cowen recognizes the fact that the Bernreuter test is a
rather crude and unsatisfactory instrument. It is of interest, however,
that significant []{#013_c4.html_lpn_178}changes were found in the
direction of better adjustment, and these changes were in general
corroborated by the follow-up interviews. In the scores for Neurotic
Tendency, Introversion, Confidence, and Sociability, the changes were
positive, and were significant at the 1 per cent level. Scores for
Self-sufficiency and Dominance showed no significant change.

The Thematic Apperception Test is perhaps better adapted than the tests
mentioned thus far to measure the types of change which would be
expected to result from psychotherapy. Up to the present time, however,
it has been used only with scattered cases, and no significant research
study utilizing this test has been completed. Clinical analysis of a few
cases appears to corroborate the findings from the personality tests
already cited.

Let us return to the question with which this section commenced: Do the
changes which occur in client-centered therapy alter the basic structure
of personality? The studies which have been cited would seem to justify
an answer along these lines. When an investigation is made of a randomly
selected group of clients receiving client-centered therapy, it is
generally found that one outcome of the experience is a significant
degree of change in the basic personality configuration. This change
appears to be in the direction of: an increased unification and
integration of personality; a lessened degree of neurotic tendency; a
decreased amount of anxiety; a greater degree of acceptance of self and
of emotionality as a part of self; increased objectivity in dealing with
reality; more effective mechanisms for dealing with stress-creating
situations; more constructive feelings and attitudes; and a more
effective intellectual functioning. On the basis of limited evidence, it
would appear that these personality changes are relatively permanent,
often continuing in the directions already described.

There are two words of cautious interpretation to be added to these
positive findings. The personality tests which have been used to measure
change are themselves of dubious validity. Indeed, there is as much
reason for stating that the test changes occurring in conjunction with
therapy indicate some validity in the tests as there is for saying that
therapeutic change is proved by the []{#013_c4.html_lpn_179}test
results. We are dealing with two relatively unvalidated procedures, and
this fact should be thoroughly recognized. That the findings are in
accord with clinical hypotheses and clinical logic is, however,
heartening.

The second caution is in regard to the magnitude of change. While the
changes described are of sufficient magnitude to be statistically
significant even when applied to a random group containing therapeutic
failures as well as successes, and while the degree of change is even
more marked in some of the presumably highly successful cases, it is
still true that the amount of change, compared to the total personality
configuration, is small. People do not ordinarily change in overwhelming
degree as a result of client-centered therapy. They are still
recognizably the same personalities and yet significantly different than
before they entered therapy. The change is modest but important. Would
other therapies show a greater degree of personality change?
Unfortunately, this question cannot be answered at the present time
because thus far only client-centered therapists have exposed their work
to objective study of outcomes. It is probable, however, that with any
therapy it will be found that a modest amount of change in the basic
personality is the outcome to be expected.

*Characteristic Changes in Behavior*

To the man in the street the sixty-four dollar question in regard to any
psychotherapy is, "Does it improve the way the person acts?" What the
layman wishes to know of any client who has undergone therapy is simply,
"Did he stop fighting with his wife?" "Did he get better grades in his
courses?" "Is he now getting along satisfactorily in his job?" These are
very reasonable questions. It is unfortunate that any attempt to answer
them objectively involves us in great complexities. While there is ample
clinical evidence that behavior frequently changes during or after
therapy, it is difficult to prove that this change resulted from therapy
or to show that it represents improvement. Improvement, for one client,
may mean a new willingness to differ with his wife, while for another it
may mean fewer quarrels with his spouse. For one client improvement may
be indicated by the fact []{#013_c4.html_lpn_180}that he now gets an A
in courses where he formerly received C or D, but another client may
show his improvement by a lessened compulsiveness, by taking a B or a C
in courses where he formerly received nothing but A. One man may show
that he has profited from therapy by a smoother and more adequate
adjustment to his job, another by achieving the courage to leave his job
for a new field. Clinically each of these behaviors may seem to be
clearly an indication of improved adjustment, but there is no doubt that
such judgments are subjective and hence open to question.

How then are we to approach this question of the behavioral changes
which accompany therapy? A group of research studies which have been
made in client-centered therapy fall far short of answering all our
questions, but they at least represent a start toward an objective
answer. We shall present these in sequential order as they increasingly
approach the goal of externally verified evidence of behavioral change
in the direction of improved adjustment. The summarized finding will
first be stated and then some amplification will follow.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
1\) During the latter part of therapy the client's conversation includes
an increased discussion of plans and behavioral steps to be undertaken,
and discussion of the outcomes of these steps.
:::
::::
:::::

Snyder (197), Seeman (180), and Strom (204) have shown that in the last
two-fifths of the counseling process there is a rather sharp increase in
material of this sort, though it never forms more than a small portion
(5 to 12 per cent) of the conversation. It might be said that these
studies indicate that the client plans to change his behavior and
discusses ways in which he has changed it. Such evidence is, however,
entirely from the client's point of view.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
2\) In successful client-centered therapy, an examination of all
references to current behavior indicates that there is a change from
relatively immature behavior to relatively mature behavior during the
course of the interviews.
:::
::::
:::::

[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_181}In a small study which deserves expansion and
repetition, Hoffman (86) extracted from the interviews in ten cases all
references to current and recent behavior and to planned behavior. Each
of these was typed on a separate card and rated for maturity of behavior
by a judge who did not know the case, the outcome, or the interview from
which the statement had been taken. The scale was a simple three-point
scale, from immature and irresponsible behavior to mature behavior. For
the ten cases as a whole there was an increase in the maturity of
reported behavior, so determined, but this increase was not
statistically significant. The ten cases were then divided into the five
more successful and the five less successful, using as criteria the
combined results of four other objective methods of analysis. When this
was done, it was found that the more successful cases showed a
statistically significant increase in the maturity of reported behavior,
but the less successful cases showed little change. This finding
appeared to substantiate clinical thinking, that the more successful the
interviews appear to be, the greater the change in the direction of
maturity of behavior.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
3\) In successful client-centered therapy there is a decrease in
psychological tension as evidenced in the client's verbal productions.
:::
::::
:::::

Several studies (11, 99, 175, 228) have made use of the
Discomfort-Relief quotient devised by Dollard and Mowrer (51) as a
measure of the degree of psychological tension existing in the client.
This device is based upon the ratio of words expressing discomfort and
tension to words expressive of comfort, satisfaction, and enjoyment. In
these studies it has been consistently found that verbal behavior
indicative of psychological tension has decreased throughout the course
of the interviews. In a small study by N. Rogers (175) it was found that
this decrease was much sharper in a case judged by several objective
criteria as successful, than in cases similarly judged to be moderately
successful or unsuccessful. In the successful case the Discomfort-Relief
quotient decreased from 1.00 to .12 in nine interviews. In the
moderately successful case the decrease was from .83 to .62 in
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_182}seven interviews. In the unsuccessful case there
was an increase from .90 to .95 in three interviews.

Interesting as these results are, they fall short in several ways of
what we should like to know. The verbal indicators of tension are
measured only in the counseling interview, not in the verbalizations
which occur outside the interview. Also there might be some question as
to whether absence of psychological discomfort or tension is synonymous
with adjustment.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
4\) In successful client-centered therapy there appears to be a decrease
in current defensive behaviors and a greater awareness of those
defensive behaviors which are present.
:::
::::
:::::

Hogan (87) has made a significant theoretical contribution to the
definition of defensiveness. He sees defensiveness as a form of behavior
which follows upon the perception of threat to the configuration of the
self. We shall consider his thinking at greater length when we take up
the subject of a theory of personality. At this point it is necessary
only to mention that his work provided the operational definitions of
several types of defensive behavior for use in an objective study made
by Haigh (76). This study, based on ten cases, is complex, and not too
clear-cut in its findings. Much additional work needs to be done in this
field before we can state with assurance the changes which occur in
defensive behavior. Within the limitations of this first study, however,
it may be said that in the group of cases in which defensive behavior
decreases (a group which includes the cases judged most successful by
other criteria) a significant pattern of change occurs. The decrease in
defensiveness is noted in a decrease in defensive behavior as it is
reported in the interviews, but also, and perhaps more significantly, as
it is *exhibited* in the interviews. Along with these changes is an
increase in the degree to which the client is aware of his
defensiveness. Such changes are not characteristic of the group of
cases, presumably less successful, in which defensiveness increased.

Haigh's study is significant not only for thus indicating that a
behavioral change takes place in some instances in the direction of
lessened defensiveness. His study also indicated that in at
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_183}least one client defensive behavior actually
increased --- an indication of negative progress --- even though some of
the other measures of process --- insights, attitudes toward self,
reported behavior --- show a positive direction. Careful study of this
contradiction has, we feel, enriched the general theory which will be
stated at the conclusion of this chapter.

Limiting our consideration for the moment to the process which occurs
when therapy is effective, we may say that the work of Hogan and Haigh
suggests that defensive behaviors --- the self-protecting distortions of
reality and the behaviors which are in accord with those distortions ---
decrease in therapy. They are not exhibited so frequently, they are not
reported so frequently, and the client is more aware of them as
defensive when he is reporting or exhibiting them.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
5\) As a result of therapy the client shows an increased tolerance for
frustration as objectively measured in physiological terms.
:::
::::
:::::

The hypothesis investigated by Thetford (213), in a new type of study,
was as follows: "If therapy enables an individual to reorient his life
pattern, or at least to reduce the tension and anxiety he feels
regarding his personal problems, the manner in which he responds to a
stress situation, as indicated by measurements of his autonomic nervous
system, should be significantly altered by this therapy." This was the
first attempt to answer the question, Does client-centered therapy
affect the client deeply enough so that it alters his physiological
functioning? Specifically, does it produce changes in the functioning of
his autonomic nervous system when he is faced by situations involving
frustration? Thetford's study was simple and sound in its experimental
design. Nineteen individuals who were about to undergo individual or
group therapy (or both) were subjected to a standardized situation of
frustration involving failure in repetition of digits. Previous to,
while undergoing, and immediately after this frustration, various
physiological measurements were taken on the Behavior Research
Photopolygraph designed by Darrow. Shortly after this
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_184}experimental frustration these clients began
their therapeutic interviews. At the conclusion of the series of
therapeutic contacts they were again subjected to the experimental
frustration and the same type of measurements taken again. Meanwhile a
control group of seventeen individuals was subjected to the frustration
experience in the same way, and this was repeated after a length of time
comparable to that of the experimental group.

In a "recovery quotient" and the "reaction-recovery quotient," both
measures based upon the galvanic skin response, and both indicative of
the rapidity with which the individual recovers his previous state of
physiological balance, the experimental group showed a significant
difference from the controls. An index of the variation in heart rate
also discriminated significantly between the two groups. In other
physiological measurements the differences were not statistically
significant, but were consistent in their direction. In general, the
group which had undergone therapy developed a higher frustration
threshold during their series of therapeutic interviews, and a more
rapid recovery of homeostatic balance following frustration. These
results were not found in the control group. Thetford concludes, "The
findings of this study would seem to be consistent with the theory that
the organism is able to discharge more rapidly and completely the
effects of experimentally induced frustration as a result of therapy."

In simpler terms, the significance of this study appears to be that
after therapy the individual is able to meet, with more tolerance and
less disturbance, situations of emotional stress and frustration; that
this description holds, even though the particular frustration or stress
was never considered in therapy; that the more effective meeting of
frustration is not a surface phenomenon but is evident in autonomic
reactions which the individual cannot consciously control and of which
he is completely unaware. Here is an indication of a type of behavior
change which, if confirmed by future study, is significant indeed.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
6\) One behavioral outcome of client-centered therapy is improved
functioning in life tasks; improvement in reading on
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_185}the part of school children, improvement in
adjustment to job training and job performance on the part of adults.
:::
::::
:::::

Both Bills (24) and Axline (13) have shown that when maladjusted
children who are retarded in reading are given even a moderate number of
therapeutic sessions handled in a client-centered manner, there is an
improvement in the functioning of the child in reading, as measured by
standardized tests. In the study conducted by Bills, nine therapy
sessions (six individual, three group), in which reading was in no way
the focus of the experience, were accompanied by an increase of
approximately one year of reading skill during thirty school days' time.
This was in a group of eight children who showed marked retardation in
reading ability as compared with their rating on an intelligence test.

Perhaps the study which comes closest to a direct attack on the question
raised by the man in the street, is one conducted by the Veterans
Administration (18). As a part of the Personal Counseling program of the
Veterans Administration, a follow-up study was made of 393 cases handled
by the Personal Counselors. Six months or more after referral to the
Personal Counselor, each veteran was rated by his training officer as to
whether he had shown any improvement in his adjustment to his training
program or to his job (or to both). The training officer had no
knowledge of what had gone on in the counseling. Of the total group, 17
per cent were rated as having shown no improvement, 42 per cent as
showing some improvement, and 41 per cent as much improved. While this
finding seems significant, the study is a rather crude one, and the
possibility of some general bias on the part of training officers for or
against the counseling program is not ruled out. One of the subsidiary
findings is therefore of interest. It was found that when the ratings
were compared with the number of interviews with the counselor, there
was a definite relationship. The training officers did not have
information as to the number of times the veteran had seen his
counselor. Yet forty-eight men who had seen the counselor ten times or
more were almost all rated as having shown improvement, while those who
had seen the counselor two times or less were much less frequently rated
as showing improvement. This finding gives more weight to the general
conclusions, since it indicates that with regard to a factor on which
the raters could not have been biased, their ratings show a consistent
trend in accord with logical expectancies. The data on this point are
given in Table II.

:::: block1
::: top
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_186}Table [II]{style="font-size: 120%"} • Relation
of Job Adjustment to Duration of
Counseling^[19](#025_endnotes.html_e19){#013_c4.html_f19}^
:::
::::

::: topbot
![](html/docimages/image7.jpg){height="181" width="506"}
:::

What, then, is the current answer to the question, Does the process of
client-centered therapy involve any change in the behavior and actions
of the client? Pulling together the threads from these various studies,
we may say that, during the process of client-centered therapy, the
evidence at present available suggests that the client's behavior
changes in these ways: he considers, and reports putting into effect,
behavior which is more mature, self-directing, and responsible than the
behavior he has shown heretofore; his behavior becomes less defensive,
more firmly based on an objective view of self and reality; his behavior
shows a decreasing amount of psychological tension; he tends to make a
more comfortable and more effective adjustment to school and to job; he
meets new stress situations with an increased degree of inner calm, a
calm which is reflected in less physiological upset and more rapid
physiological recovery from these frustrating situations than would have
been true if they had occurred prior to therapy.

::: top
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_187}S[OME]{.sc} G[APS AND]{.sc} W[EAKNESSES IN]{.sc}
O[UR]{.sc} K[NOWLEDGE]{.sc}
:::

We have completed our summarization of the factual knowledge and the
clinical hypotheses which are available at the present time to describe
the process of client-centered therapy. To the clinically minded reader
the description may seem too static, lacking in the dynamic and moving
quality which accompanies the experience of therapy. To the research
minded, it may seem too loose, based on studies which are somewhat
crude, which are lacking in the methodological elegance which is
possible in other fields. Both these criticisms seem to be justifiable.
The first we hope to remedy to some degree in our statement of a theory
of therapy, supplying something of the dynamic element which is evident
in these changes. The second criticism we hope that time will answer, as
increasingly exact methods become possible. We should also like, in
support of our efforts thus far, to fall back on Elton Mayo's statement:
"It is much easier to measure nonsignificant factors than to be content
with developing a first approximation to the significant."

But serious weaknesses should be pointed out in the material already
given. One of these has been suggested but needs to be brought out more
clearly. The work done by Hogan and Haigh on the problem of defensive
behavior has made it appear that some of the changes we have described
may accompany an increase in defensiveness as well as real therapeutic
progress. Thus it would seem, if their work is further confirmed, that
an increase in positive attitudes, including positive attitudes toward
the self, increased acceptance of self, an increased number of
statements categorized as insight, a trend in the direction of maturity
in reported behavior, may all be indicators *either* of an increase in
defensiveness *or* of therapeutic progress in which defensiveness
decreases. This poses a perplexing problem, and casts a certain amount
of doubt upon a number of the measures which have been developed, as
long as they stand alone. Thus far, the discrepancy should be stated
only as a problem, since the measure of defensive behavior is complex,
hard to apply, and involves more subjective clinical judgment in its
application than []{#013_c4.html_lpn_188}the other measures.
Nevertheless, the one case in which this contradiction occurs is the
first instance in which any of the measures which have been devised to
gauge therapeutic progress have shown clearly discrepant results. Prior
to the findings of Haigh, the outstanding element in our research had
been the surprising unity of our measures. If one instrument showed, in
a particular case, a strong trend, it could be predicted with a good
deal of certainty that other measures would indicate the same trend.
Thus Raskin (156) found intercorrelations of from .39 to .86 between
four of the measures used. The measure of defensive behavior correlates
in general with these other measures, in this case negative correlations
indicating concordance in the findings, since defensive behaviors are
expected to decrease while the other measures increase. The obtained
correlations with the other four measures run from --.34 to --.55. Hence
in general, the defensiveness measure corroborates the others. It is the
fact that in a particular case a strongly marked trend toward insight,
self-acceptance, and greater maturity of reported behavior may accompany
a greater amount of defensiveness --- this is the element that is
puzzling and disturbing, demanding further
study.^[20](#025_endnotes.html_e20){#013_c4.html_f20}^

Another prominent weakness in the work done to date is our inability to
profit in a research way from our failures. Like every other therapeutic
orientation, we have all gradations of outcomes. There are individuals
who have clearly undergone a significant reorganization of personality
in therapy, who have []{#013_c4.html_lpn_189}shown continuing
improvement and reintegration following therapy, and give every
indication that the direction of their change is permanent. At the other
end of the scale are those who have seemed unable to profit from the
therapeutic contacts, and who are perhaps more tense as a result of this
discouraging attempt to gain help. There are all gradations in between,
including some who have made good progress in therapy, but who seem
unable to hold the reorganization they have tentatively achieved. It is
puzzling that, though we have learned a great deal from the successful
outcomes, we have not been able to learn, in any general or significant
way, from the clients whom we fail to help.

The primary lack seems to be the absence of any significant hypotheses
in regard to our failures. Clinically it is probably true that our most
frequent explanation of failure is that the counselor somehow failed to
build a therapeutic relationship. But in this area we have as yet few
research tools, and are only beginning to develop valid measures of the
therapeutic relationship with which to test this hypothesis. Another
hypothesis sometimes brought to bear is that perhaps our failures belong
to certain classifications of personality diagnosis. Perhaps there are
certain types of individuals who cannot be helped by client-centered
therapy. There may be truth in this sort of hypothesis, but we have been
loath to accept it too readily, because it could so easily lead to
stultification. For example, it seems to have been true that counselors
have been less successful with those individuals who are aggressively
dependent, who insist that the counselor shall take responsibility for
their cure. It is almost certain that a research study would corroborate
this statement. It would then be possible to sit back in comfort,
refusing such cases because they are not particularly suited for
client-centered therapy. But suppose --- as our better therapists
believe --- that the reason for our failures in this group lies not in
the personality diagnosis, but in the fact that it is much more
difficult for the therapist to be deeply accepting of a person who
immediately wishes to force responsibility upon him. This type of
hypothesis would never be investigated if we simply ruled out certain
diagnostic categories as being unlikely to be helped.

[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_190}This discussion illustrates some of the reasons
for our slowness in making research use of our less successful cases.
Whether these reasons are adequate or not, the fact remains that only
one research study, and that a very disappointing one (195), has been
built around an investigation of failure. We have not, thus far, been
able to formulate significant hypotheses in regard to lack of success
which are testable in the raw material available.

These are, in our judgment, the most serious flaws in our attempts thus
far to give a factual and objective picture of the process of therapy.
Many criticisms have been made by others, and we regard them as
containing truth, but do not see them as serious. It is true that many
of our studies have been based on small numbers, that the experimental
design of some is open to criticism, that many important issues are as
yet untouched, and that some of the research appears to be superficial
rather than to deal with the deep and subtle dynamics of therapy. We are
aware of such criticisms, and are often in agreement with them. But in a
pioneering field some crudity, some lack of elegance, is inevitable; and
as long as each year produces better and more refined research,
grappling with increasingly significant and subtle issues, we shall not
be disturbed about some of these imperfections. The two major flaws
cited are, however, matters of concern, because it seems that they might
have been avoided had we been able to perceive more deeply and more
shrewdly the process which is daily going forward before our eyes in the
lives of our clients.

::: top
A C[OHERENT]{.sc} T[HEORY OF THE]{.sc} P[ROCESS OF]{.sc} T[HERAPY]{.sc}
:::

Can we formulate a theory of therapy which will take into account all
the observed and verified facts, a theory which can resolve the seeming
contradictions that exist? The material which follows is such an
attempt, beginning with the personality as it exists before a need for
therapy develops, and carrying it through the changes which occur in
client-centered therapy. As has been mentioned before, the theory is the
fluctuating and evanescent generalization. The observed phenomena of
therapy are the more stable elements around which a variety of theories
may be built.

[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_191}Let us begin with the individual who is content
with himself, who has no thought at this time of seeking counseling
help. We may find it useful to think of this individual as having an
organized pattern of perceptions of self and self-in-relationship to
others and to the environment. This configuration, this gestalt, is, in
its details, a fluid and changing thing, but it is decidedly stable in
its basic elements. It is, as Raimy says, "constantly used as a frame of
reference when choices are to be made. Thus it serves to regulate
behavior and may serve to account for observed uniformities in
personality." This configuration is, in general, available to awareness.

We may look upon this self-structure as being an organization of
hypotheses for meeting life --- an organization which has been
relatively effective in satisfying the needs of the organism. Some of
its hypotheses may be grossly incorrect from the standpoint of objective
reality. As long as the individual has no suspicion of this falsity, the
organization may serve him well. As a simple example, the star student
in a small-town high school may perceive himself as an outstandingly
brilliant person, with a mind excelled by none. This formulation may
serve him quite adequately as long as he remains in that environment. He
may have some experiences which are inconsistent with this
generalization, but he either denies these experiences to awareness, or
symbolizes them in such a way that they are consistent with his general
picture.

As long as the self-gestalt is firmly organized, and no contradictory
material is even dimly perceived, then positive self feelings may exist,
the self may be seen as worthy and acceptable, and conscious tension is
minimal. Behavior is consistent with the organized hypotheses and
concepts of the self-structure. An individual in whom such conditions
exist would perceive himself as functioning adequately.

In such a situation, the extent to which the individual's perceptions of
his abilities and relationships were incongruent with socially perceived
reality would be a measure of his basic vulnerability. The extent to
which he dimly perceives these incongruences and discrepancies is a
measure of his internal tension, []{#013_c4.html_lpn_192}and determines
the amount of defensive behavior. As a parenthetical comment, it may be
observed that in highly homogeneous cultures, where the self-concept of
the individual tends to be supported by his society, rather grossly
unrealistic perceptions may exist without causing internal tension, and
may serve throughout a lifetime as a reasonably effective hypothesis for
meeting life. Thus the slave may perceive himself as less worthy than
his master, and live by this perception, even though, judged on a
reality basis, it may be false. But in our modern culture, with its
conflicting subcultures, and its contradictory sets of values, goals,
and perceptions, the individual tends to be exposed to a realization of
discrepancies in his perceptions. Thus internal conflict is multiplied.

To return to our individual, who is not yet ready for therapy: It is
when his organized self-structure is no longer effective in meeting his
needs in the reality situation, or when he dimly perceives discrepancies
in himself, or when his behavior seems out of control and no longer
consistent with himself, that he becomes "ripe," as it were, for
therapy. As examples of these three conditions, we might mention the
"brilliant" small-town high school student who no longer finds himself
effective in the university, the individual who is perplexed because he
wants to marry the girl yet does not want to, and the client who finds
that her behavior is unpredictable, "not like myself," no longer
understandable. Without a therapeutic experience, planned or accidental,
such conditions are likely to persist because each of them involves the
perception of experiences which are contradictory to the current
organization of the self. But such perception is threatening to the
structure of the self and consequently tends to be denied or distorted,
to be inadequately symbolized.

But let us suppose that our individual, now vaguely or keenly disturbed
and experiencing some internal tension, enters a relationship with a
therapist who is client-centered in his orientation. Gradually he
experiences a freedom from threat which is decidedly new to him. It is
not merely that he is free from attack. This has been true of a number
of his relationships. It is that every aspect of self which he exposes
is equally accepted, equally []{#013_c4.html_lpn_193}valued. His almost
belligerent statement of his virtues is accepted as much as, but no more
than, his discouraged picture of his negative qualities. His certainty
about some aspects of himself is accepted and valued, but so are his
uncertainties, his doubts, his vague perception of contradictions within
himself. In this atmosphere of safety, protection, and acceptance, the
firm boundaries of self-organization relax. There is no longer the firm,
tight gestalt which is characteristic of every organization under
threat, but a looser, more uncertain configuration. He begins to explore
his perceptual field more and more fully. He discovers faulty
generalizations, but his self-structure is now sufficiently relaxed so
that he can consider the complex and contradictory experiences upon
which they are based. He discovers experiences of which he has never
been aware, which are deeply contradictory to the perception he has had
of himself, and this is threatening indeed. He retreats temporarily to
the former comfortable gestalt, but then slowly and cautiously moves out
to assimilate this contradictory experience into a new and revised
pattern.

Essentially this is a process of disorganization and reorganization, and
while it is going on it may be decidedly painful. It is deeply confusing
not to have a firm concept of self by which to determine behavior
appropriate to the situation. It is frightening or disgusting to find
self and behavior fluctuating almost from day to day, at times being
largely in accord with the earlier self-pattern, at times being in
confused accord with some new, vaguely structured gestalt. As the
process continues, a new or revised configuration of self is being
constructed. It contains perceptions which were previously denied. It
involves more accurate symbolization of a much wider range of sensory
and visceral experience. It involves a reorganization of values, with
the organism's own experience clearly recognized as providing the
evidence for the valuations. There slowly begins to emerge a new self,
which to the client seems to be much more his "real" self, because it is
based to a much greater extent upon all of his experience, perceived
without distortion.

This painful dis- and re-organization is made possible by two elements
in the therapeutic relationship. The first is the one
[]{#013_c4.html_lpn_194}already mentioned, that the new, the tentative,
the contradictory, or the previously denied perceptions of self are as
much valued by the therapist as the rigidly structured aspects. Thus the
shift from the latter to the former becomes possible without too
disastrous a loss of self worth, nor with too frightening a leap from
the old to the new. The other element in the relationship is the
attitude of the therapist toward the newly discovered aspects of
experience. To the client they seem threatening, bad, impossible,
disorganizing. Yet he experiences the therapist's attitude of calm
acceptance toward them. He finds that to a degree he can introject this
attitude and can look upon his experience as something he can own,
identify, symbolize, and accept as a part of himself.

If the relationship is not adequate to provide this sense of safety, or
if the denied experiences are too threatening, then the client may
revise his concept of self in a defensive fashion. He may further
distort the symbolization of experience, may make more rigid the
structure of self, and thus achieve again positive self-feelings and a
somewhat reduced internal tension --- but at a price of increased
vulnerability. Undoubtedly this is a temporary phenomenon in many
clients who are undergoing considerable reorganization, but the evidence
suggests the possibility that an occasional client may conclude his
contacts at such a juncture, having achieved only an increasingly
defensive self.

Where the client does face more of the totality of his experience, and
where he adequately differentiates and symbolizes this experience, then
as the new self-structure is organized, it becomes firmer, more clearly
defined, a steadier, more stable guide to behavior. As in the state in
which the person felt no need of therapy, or in the defensive
reorganization of self, positive self-feelings return, and positive
attitudes predominate over negative. Many of the outward manifestations
are the same. From an external point of view the important difference is
that the new self is much more nearly congruent with the totality of
experience --- that it is a pattern drawn from or perceived in
experience, rather than a pattern imposed upon experience. From the
client's internal point of view, the new self is a more comfortable one.
Fewer []{#013_c4.html_lpn_195}experiences are perceived as vaguely
threatening. There is consequently much less anxiety. There is more
assurance in living by the new self, because it involves fewer shaky
high-level generalizations, and more of direct experience. Because the
values are perceived as originating in self, the value system becomes
more realistic and comfortable and more nearly in harmony with the
perceived self. Valued goals appear more achievable.

The changes in behavior keep pace with the changes in organization of
self, and this behavior change is, surprisingly enough, neither as
painful nor as difficult as the changes in self-structure. Behavior
continues to be consistent with the concept of self, and alters as it
alters. Any behavior which formerly seemed out of control is now
experienced as part of self, and within the boundaries of conscious
control. In general, the behavior is more adjustive and socially more
sound, because the hypotheses upon which it is based are more realistic.

Thus therapy produces a change in personality organization and
structure, and a change in behavior, both of which are relatively
permanent. It is not necessarily a reorganization which will serve for a
lifetime. It may still deny to awareness certain aspects of experience,
may still exhibit certain patterns of defensive behavior. There is
little likelihood that any therapy is in this sense complete. Under new
stresses of a certain sort, the client may find it necessary to seek
further therapy, to achieve further reorganization of self. But whether
there be one or more series of therapeutic interviews, the essential
outcome is a more broadly based structure of self, an inclusion of a
greater proportion of experience as a part of self, and a more
comfortable and realistic adjustment to life.

Underlying this entire process of functioning and of change are the
forward-moving forces of life itself. It is this basic tendency toward
the maintenance and enhancement of the organism and of the self which
provides the motive force for all that we have been describing. In the
service of this basic tendency the pre-therapy self operates to meet
needs. And because of this deeper force the individual in therapy tends
to move toward reorganization, rather than toward disintegration. It is
a characteristic of []{#013_c4.html_lpn_196}the reformulated self which
is achieved in therapy that it permits a fuller realization of the
organism's potentialities, and that it is a more effective basis for
further growth. Thus the therapeutic process is, in its totality, the
achievement by the individual, in a favorable psychological climate, of
further steps in a direction which has already been set by his growth
and maturational development from the time of conception onward.

SUGGESTED READINGS

::: sl
Readings related to this chapter may be divided into two groups ---
those concerned with giving a clinical account of the process of
therapy, and those which exemplify the objective investigation of this
process.

In the former group Snygg and Combs (200, Chapters 13 and 14) give a
fresh statement of the processes involved in inductive or "directive"
therapy, and also a theory of the process of client-centered or
"self-directive" therapy. Their theory is strictly phenomenological. If
the reader wishes to dip into the past, he may compare the present
chapter with Chapters 6, 7, and 8 of *Counseling and Psychotherapy*
(166). For comparative purposes, the reader may wish to view the process
of psychoanalysis. A brief account of the process is contained in a
chapter by Ivimey (89, pp. 211--234). A longer account, which stresses
the activity of the analyst rather more than the process, is contained
in Alexander and French (4, Chapters 1--8).

Nearly all the objective research regarding the process of therapy has
been related to the client-centered point of view, and much of it has
been cited in this chapter. If one wishes to gain a historical
perspective on it, the rather crude but pioneering study by Lewis (114)
or the somewhat better designed study by Snyder (197) would exemplify
the early period. Curran's research (49), though it has faults, focuses
more than any other on the process itself. The best published account of
measured personality outcomes is that by Muench (140). For a cross
section of recent research, see the June, 1949, issue of the *Journal of
Consulting Psychology;* the entire issue is devoted to a coordinated
research in therapy, and contains brief accounts of the investigations
by Seeman (180), Sheerer (189), Stock (203), Haigh (76), Hoffman (86),
Carr (40), and Raskin (156).
:::

[]{#014_c5.html}

<div>

[]{#014_c5.html_c5}

</div>

# []{#014_c5.html_lpn_197}*Chapter* [5]{.chapnum} • Three Questions Raised by Other Viewpoints: [Transference, Diagnosis, Applicability]{style="font-size: 80%"} {.chaptitle}

![](html/docimages/line.jpg){height="10" width="100%"}

This chapter is written in the hope of improving communication between
various therapies. It has been our experience that sincere therapists of
other therapeutic orientations have often been interested in learning
something of the client-centered approach. As a means of learning about
it, they inquire about the viewpoint of the client-centered therapist on
certain concepts and issues which are of central importance in their own
thinking. And since the answers they receive sometimes seem to make no
sense in these other frames of reference, they quite naturally conclude
that the client-centered viewpoint must be stupid, shallow, or
irresponsible to have given such answers, and hence not even worth
investigating.

It is to try to bridge this communication gap that the present chapter
is written. It may be said that the issues discussed in this chapter are
in no way *special* issues from the point of view of client-centered
therapy, and would need no special treatment from the point of view of
the person learning this approach. They are special issues for
therapists whose training has been in other orientations.

Three of the questions most frequently asked, to which the answers must
seem absurd, are: "How do you handle the problem of transference?" "In
what way does your therapy build upon diagnosis?" and "In what types of
situations is client-centered []{#014_c5.html_lpn_198}therapy
applicable?" When the answers are: "Transference, as a problem, doesn't
arise," "Diagnosis is regarded as unnecessary," "Perhaps client-centered
therapy applies to all cases," then there is likely to be a rise in
blood pressure in the questioner but little further communication of
meanings. Perhaps if each one of these questions is taken up in some
detail a better understanding may ensue.

::: top
T[HE]{.sc} P[ROBLEM OF]{.sc} T[RANSFERENCE]{.sc}
:::

*The Meaning of Transference*

To the therapist with a psychoanalytic orientation the concepts of
transference, of the transference relationship, and of the transference
neurosis have acquired a host of significant meanings. They are close to
the core of his therapeutic thinking.

It is not easy for me to put myself into the frame of reference of the
analyst, and to understand fully the meaning these concepts have for
him. But in so far as I can understand, I would gather that transference
is a term which is applied to attitudes transferred to the therapist
which were originally directed, with more justification, toward a parent
or other person. These attitudes of love, hate, dependence, and so on,
are utilized by the analyst as an immediate expression of the client's
basic attitudes and conflicts, and it is through the analysis of these
attitudes that the most significant part of the psychoanalysis takes
place. For this reason, the method of dealing with the transference
attitudes is the most important part of the analyst's work. Fenichel
states, "Understanding the contents of the patient's unconscious from
his utterances is, relatively, the simplest part of the analyst's task.
Handling the transference is the most difficult." (56, p. 29)

To check on the accuracy of our understanding of the concept of
transference and of its handling, several brief quotations from
authoritative psychoanalytic references may be examined. Freud gives a
very clear summary in his article in the *Britannica:*

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
By "transference" is meant a striking peculiarity of neurotics. They
develop toward their physician emotional relations, both of an
affectionate and hostile character, which are not based upon the
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_199}actual situation but are derived from their
relations toward their parents (the Oedipus complex). Transference is a
proof of the fact that adults have not overcome their former childish
dependence; it coincides with the force which has been named
"suggestion"; and it is only by learning to make use of it that the
physician is enabled to induce the patient to overcome his internal
resistances and do away with his repressions. Thus psychoanalytic
treatment acts as a second education of the adult, as a correction to
his education as a child. (66, p. 674)
:::
::::
:::::

Here is a succinct account of the meaning of transference and of the
analyst's purpose in using it.

Fenichel describes the analyst's methods in dealing with transference
attitudes:

::::: block
:::: sl
::: top
The analyst's reaction to transference is the same as to any other
attitude of the patient: he interprets. He sees in the patient's
attitude a derivative of unconscious impulses and tries to show this to
the patient. (56, p. 30)
:::
::::
:::::

::::: block
:::: top
::: sl
Systematic and consistent interpretative work, both within and without
the framework of transference, can be described as educating the patient
to produce continually less distorted derivatives until his fundamental
instinctual conflicts are recognizable. (56, p. 31)
:::
::::
:::::

*Transference Attitudes in Client-Centered Therapy*

As we examine our clinical experience in client-centered therapy and our
recorded cases, it would appear to be correct to say that *strong*
attitudes of a transference nature occur in a relatively small minority
of cases, but that such attitudes occur in *some* degree in the majority
of cases.

With many clients the attitudes toward the counselor are mild, and of a
reality, rather than a transference, nature. Thus such a client may feel
somewhat apprehensive about first meeting the counselor; may feel
annoyed in early interviews that he does not receive the guidance he
expected; may feel a warm rapport with the counselor as he works through
his own attitudes; leaves therapy with a gratitude to the counselor for
having provided him the opportunity to work things out for himself, but
not with a dependent or strong gratitude; and can meet the counselor
socially []{#014_c5.html_lpn_200}or professionally during or after
therapy with little affect beyond what is normally involved in the
immediate reality of their relationship. This would seem to describe for
many, perhaps for a majority of our clients, the affect which is
directed toward the counselor. If one's definition of transference
includes all affect toward others, then this is transference; if the
definition being used is the transfer of infantile attitudes to a
present relationship in which they are inappropriate, then very little
if any transference is present.

There are many cases, however, in which clients have much stronger
emotionalized attitudes directed toward the counselor. There may be a
desire for dependence upon the counselor, accompanied by deep affect;
there may be fear of the counselor, which is similar to fears felt
toward any authority, and which is no doubt genetically related to fear
of parents; there are attitudes of hostility which go beyond the
attitudes which an observer would judge to be realistically related to
the experience; there are, in some instances, expressions of affection,
and desire for a love relationship between client and counselor.

In general, then, we may say that transference *attitudes* exist in
varying degrees in a considerable portion of cases handled by
client-centered therapists. In this respect all therapists would be
alike, for all would meet such attitudes. It is in what happens to them
that the difference arises. In psychoanalysis these attitudes appear
characteristically to develop into a *relationship* which is central to
the therapy. Freud describes it in these terms:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
In every analytic treatment there arises . . . an intense emotional
relationship between the patient and the analyst. . . . It can be of a
positive or of a negative character and can vary between the extremes of
a passionate, completely sensual love and the unbridled expression of an
embittered defiance and hatred. This transference . . . soon replaces in
the patient's mind the desire to be cured, and, so long as it is
affectionate and moderate, becomes the agent of the physician's
influence and neither more nor less than the mainspring of the joint
work of analysis. . . . \[If\] converted into hostility . . . it may
then happen that it will paralyze the patient's power of associating and
endanger the success of the treatment. Yet it would be senseless to
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_201}try to evade it; for an analysis without
transference is an impossibility. (64, p. 75)
:::
::::
:::::

In client-centered therapy, however, this involved and persistent
dependent transference relationship does not tend to develop. Thousands
of clients have been dealt with by counselors with whom the writer has
had personal contact. In only a small minority of cases handled in a
client-centered fashion has the client developed a relationship which
could in any way be matched to Freud's terms. In most instances the
description of the relationship would be quite different.

*The Handling of Transference Attitudes in Client-Centered Therapy*

It is this possibility of therapy without a deep transference
relationship which deserves close attention. The possibility of
effective brief psychotherapy seems to hinge on the possibility of
therapy without the transference relationship, since the resolution of
the transference situation appears to be uniformly slow and
time-consuming. Can therapy then be carried on without having such a
relationship develop?

Perhaps some elements of the answer to this problem may be clearer if we
examine some of the verbatim interview material. The basic question is
this: Though transference attitudes exist in many clients in
nondirective therapy, how is it that these do not develop into a
transference relationship or transference neurosis, and that therapy
does not appear to require that such a relationship should develop?

If we take one of the minority of cases in which definite transference
attitudes are experienced and discussed by the client, we may see
something of what occurs. The following is transcribed from the
electrically recorded beginning of a fifth interview with a young
married woman, Mrs. Dar. In the previous interviews she had brought out
material about which she felt quite guilty.

:::: sl
::: topbot
*S:* Well, I have had a very curious dream. I almost hated to think
about coming back again, after the dream. Uh. . . .

*C:* You say you almost thought about not coming back again after the
dream?

[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_202}*S:* M-hm. (*Laughs.*)

*C:* It was almost too much for you.

*S:* Yeah. Well, uh, last Friday night I dreamt that, uh, I went to New
York to see you, and you were *terribly* busy, and were running in and
out of offices, and you had so much to do, and finally I looked at you
pleadingly and you said to me, "I'm sorry. I haven't got any more time
for you. Your story is much too sordid. I --- I just can't be bothered."
And you kept running in and out of rooms, and I kept sort of following
you around. I didn't, uh, know what to do, and I felt very helpless, and
at the same time I felt very much ashamed, and shocked by the fact that
you said what you did.

*C:* M-hm.

*S:* And it's --- it's stayed with me ever since then.

*C:* That had a good deal of reality.

*S:* Yes.

*C:* You sort of felt that somehow I was judging your situation to be
pretty, pretty bad.

*S:* That's right. That you were --- I was up for trial, and you were
the judge, and --- (*Pause.*)

*C:* The verdict was guilty.

*S:* (*Laughs.*) I think that's it. (*Laughs.*) That's it all right. I
didn't see how I could come back into the situation. I mean the
circumstances, you already judged me, and therefore I didn't really see
how I could possibly talk any more.

*C:* M-hm.

*S:* Except about other things. And uh, it hasn't left me. I've been
thinking about it a great deal.

*C:* You almost felt that you *were* being judged.

*S:* Well, why should I feel that? Uh --- well, of course I probably
transferred my own thoughts into your mind, and therefore I, uh, there
was no doubt about it. It just couldn't be changed. It was *the*
verdict. I suppose in my own way I was judging myself.

*C:* M-hm. You feel that perhaps *you* were the judge, really.
:::
::::

Here is a clear instance of a transference attitude. The counselor had
neither stated any evaluation of the client's behavior in previous
interviews, nor had he felt evaluative toward the client's behavior. Yet
the client projects onto the therapist attitudes of negative judgment,
and reacts with fear and shame to those projected accusations of guilt.

[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_203}The therapist handles these just as he would
handle similar attitudes directed toward others. To paraphrase and
modify Fenichel's sentence to make it true of this approach, one might
say: "The client-centered therapist's reaction to transference is the
same as to any other attitude of the client: he endeavors to understand
and accept." As is evident in this fragment, acceptance leads to
recognition by the client that these feelings are within her, they are
not in the therapist.

Why is this accomplished so quickly and so readily? It would appear that
one reason is that the therapist has so completely put aside the self of
ordinary interaction that there is no shred of evidence upon which to
base the projection. For four interviews this woman has experienced
understanding and acceptance --- and nothing else. There has been no
evidence that the therapist is trying to "size her up," diagnose her,
evaluate her scientifically, judge her morally. There is no evidence
that he approves or disapproves of anything she does --- of her
behavior, present or past, of the topics she chooses to discuss, of the
way she presents them, of her inability to express herself, of her
silences, of the interpretations she gives to her own behavior.
Consequently when she feels that the therapist is passing a moral
judgment upon her, and when this feeling too is accepted, there is
nothing upon which this projection can hang. It *must* be recognized as
coming from herself, since every evidence of her senses makes it plain
that it does not come from the therapist, and the complete lack of
immediate threat in the situation makes it unnecessary to insist upon
the feeling in defiance of the evidence of her senses. Thus, in a few
moments she goes from the clear transference attitude, "I feel badly
because you think I am sordid," to the feeling, "I am passing judgment
on myself, and attempting to transfer those thoughts to your mind."

*A Further Example*

Perhaps two excerpts from another case will lend some weight to this
type of explanation. This is another young married woman, Mrs. Ett, who
is experiencing conflict in many areas of her life, and the material
which follows is transcribed from the []{#014_c5.html_lpn_204}recording
of the tenth interview. The first several moments of the interview are
given.

:::: topbot
::: sl
*C417* (*in friendly tone*): Well, what today?

*S417:* Ah, am I supposed to tell you everything (*laugh*) or is that up
to the person?

*C418:* That certainly is up to you, anything you feel you want to talk
about you are certainly free to talk ---

*S418:* Well, when I say that ---

*C419:* We don't probe into anything unless you want to talk about it.

*S419:* Well, I do want to talk it over, or else perhaps I wouldn't have
asked the question. In regard to this, I had a big fight before I came
here, I really got very angry and I was just beating you down, you know.
Ah, and then of course by the time I got here I rationalized it to the
extent where I think I can understand why I was so angry at you. First
of all, would you like to know why I was so angry? Ah, I was angry in
that I thought this whole thing is a fraud. I mean, now I'm being very
frank. I think that --- at least I thought then, that this idea of
coming here and talking and talking is not so terrific when you consider
that you can always do that almost anywhere if you really take the time
or trouble to get somebody who will listen to you.

*C420:* It seemed like it was kind of a cheat, and something that you
could get anywhere.

*S420:* Yes. My idea in telling this is not a personal unfriendliness,
but rather because I'm trying to work these things out myself. (*C:
M-hm.*) I have no grievances against you.

*C421:* It was a very real feeling in yourself and that's why you wanted
to bring it out.

*S421:* Yes, yes. I mean it will clear up for me, why I'm coming, or,
you know. I have a feeling that this sort of thing is not too much
different from the sort of thing that is very common in many places.
They advertise, you've heard about it haven't you, people advertise and
say that for a dollar per hour, or two dollars, they will sit and listen
to you.

*C422:* Just listen to your troubles.

*S422:* You come there, of course I've never had that experience, but I
imagine this is what happens, you come there and sit down and you talk
and you talk to the person, and the person sits with you and makes the
necessary noises of listening and approval, and, ah, never comments, of
course, so that when your time is up you walk out and you pay them the
two dollars. Well, certainly the person who is sitting and doing the
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_205}listening doesn't have the extensive background
and education that you have or those connected with this field. They
haven't made the constant research, and yet they do the very same thing
with success, it would seem to me, because it's exactly the very same
thing. In other words, I feel you are wasting your time, because you
have spent so much time and effort, I know you have, in reaching to the
stage where you are, and you see, I'm telling you about it with the
feeling that it isn't doing me any good. But after I talked it out with
myself and called you all sorts of names (*C:* M-hm.) when I walked up
the steps here, it occurred to me that the reason for not wanting this
and not accepting this is tied up with the same feeling of nervousness
and fluttering everytime I come here. I don't know why, but I always get
very jittery. (*Pause.*) I know why, it's because I'm facing something
that I don't like to face. Talking things out myself.

*C423:* M-hm. So that the feelings that you had about the fact that,
after all, why a person with any professional training just listens and
so on, and the feelings you had about this being sort of a fraud, you
recognize them as being in part perhaps connected with your own
irritation and fear at having to face things within yourself.

*S423:* That's right. And that is the logical feeling. Certainly if I
thought this were a fraud --- I mean, the --- to use that type of word,
I wouldn't come here because I'm very suspicious, I'm a very suspicious
person and I don't usually go into things unless I look at it from all
sorts of angles, so the very fact that I'm coming here probably means
that it isn't a fraud (*laugh*) as far as I'm concerned, you see.

*C424:* At least it means that your feelings are definitely mixed. I
mean, if you were pretty sure this was a fraud, you wouldn't be coming.

*S424:* Yes. That's right.
:::
::::

Note how clearly the dynamics follows the pattern of the previous
excerpt. The client is angry at the counselor because he does nothing
but "sit and listen." But here, too, there appears to be no adequate
reality basis for the anger, and so she must of necessity look for the
reason in herself. She finds the reason for it, and the reason for her
jitteriness in entering the interviews --- "I know why, it's because I'm
facing something that I don't like to face."

The adequacy of this type of explanation is further verified in an
excerpt from the twelfth interview with the same client, where she tries
to put into words the meaning the relationship has had
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_206}for her. She seems to state in articulate terms
what many clients have described less clearly.

:::: topbot
::: sl
*S540:* By the way, there's something I meant to ask you all the time.
You sit here and listen to me and listen to my troubles which after all
aren't so important, what are your reactions to everybody that comes in
and sits and tells their whole story to you? Do you live it through with
them, or are you just a good listening post? Or is that something I
shouldn't ask?

*C540:*^[21](#025_endnotes.html_e21){#014_c5.html_f21}^ It's a question
that is awfully hard to answer. We've discussed that a lot among
ourselves. It's more than just listening like a post, that's very
certain (*S:* Well, certainly.) and it's also something short of, uh,
suffering right with the person, I mean ------

*S541:* Well, my problems, for instance, and they are given to somebody
to type, and of course assuming that you pull out all identification, uh
--- well, I don't know, when it comes to the question it really doesn't
matter, actually. It really doesn't matter, I don't know why I even
posed a question like that. You can take it off the record. Uh, my
feelings toward you are very, not peculiar, but interesting. After all,
I've told you more than I've told anybody, and generally when you tell
somebody something very personal --- you begin to sort of dislike the
person afterwards because you think perhaps they know too much about you
and you are fearful of them. I know that to be the case. Well, I haven't
that feeling of you at all. I mean, you are --- it's almost impersonal.
I like you, of course I don't know why I should like you or why I
shouldn't like you. It's a peculiar thing. I've never had that
relationship with anybody before and I've often thought about it.

*C541:* It's really something quite different than most relationships.

*S542:* Oh, yes, and yet my --- I couldn't say our --- because certainly
you haven't given me anything, so that it would be ours --- but *my*
relationship with you is fascinating. I enjoy it because it's so purely,
uh, well, impersonal, asexual, everything that's on an even keel. You're
like a life buoy.

*C542:* There's more constancy, somehow.

*S543:* Oh, yes, and I enjoy being with you this three quarters of an
hour and I walk out and I also think of you, I have no curiosity. Oh,
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_207}yes, I do have some curiosity about you, about
your background, naturally, but not as vital as I would about somebody
else, and in that respect, I mean this feeling I have about you seems to
validate, or however you pronounce it, uh, this feeling that
nondirective therapy is right and is good, or else why would I have this
constant, uh, feeling of security. I guess that is what it is, with you.
(*C:* M-hm.) Whereas if it weren't right, why then the vacillations of
my mind would make you a terrible figure, so evidently there is
something. (*C:* M-hm.) I had one dream about you, I don't remember what
it was. It wasn't important, I don't think --- you stood as a symbol of
authority, I think. I guess at that time I was trying to think of your
approval or disapproval. When I walk out of here, everything --- which
is the only way I can feel, the only way I can think, many times I walk
out and I think, well what did I tell Mr. L. now, because he laughed,
and then a lot of times I walk out with a feeling of elation that you
think highly of me, and of course at the same time, I have the feeling
that, gee, he must think I'm an awful jerk or something like that. But
it doesn't really, those feelings aren't so deep that I can form an
opinion (*C:* M-hm.) one way or the other about you.

*C543:* Would it be that, and here let me ask a question, would it be
that, uh, you have no real basis for knowing my opinion about it and
therefore possibly it helps you to realize that those attitudes are
within yourself and that you fluctuate in regard to
them?^[22](#025_endnotes.html_e22){#014_c5.html_f22}^

*S544:* That's right. Also, you've managed to establish one thing in my
mind. That I cannot come to you for advice because I don't get it, which
is good, because then I have a feeling that I'm on my own, and boy, I'm
really battling it out. (*C:* M-hm.) Of course with that feeling I have
this terrible feeling of knocking my head against the wall without ---
there were times when I'd get ------

*C544:* A little satisfying and a little bit dissatisfying, the feeling
------

*S545:* Well, yes. 'Cause I need approval so desperately all the time.
In everything I do, so that sometimes I get very discouraged to think
that I can't get approval from you when I really need it when I'm baring
my psyche. But in a way it's disciplinary. I mean it's --- it acts as a
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_208}discipline so far as I'm concerned, so that I
don't confront everybody with approval or disapproval. I feel very
secure, very, well as if I was the real me (*laugh*), no pretenses,
nothing.

*C545:* That somehow here you can be the real you.
:::
::::

Note how clearly the client puts into words, in *S543*, the fact that
though she is eager to find some evidence of evaluation, or behavior
upon which she may project evaluative attitudes, she is unable to "form
an opinion one way or the other about you."

*The Counselor-Client Relationship*

The terms this client uses in describing the relationship are in two
respects very similar to the description given by many clients. Two of
her terms which would typify these aspects are "impersonal" and
"secure."

It is surprising how frequently the client uses the word "impersonal" in
describing the therapeutic relationship, after the conclusion of
therapy. This is obviously not intended to mean that the relationship
was cold or disinterested. It appears to be the client's attempt to
describe this unique experience in which the *person* of the counselor
--- the counselor as an evaluating, reacting person with needs of his
own --- is so clearly absent. In this sense it is "im"-personal. Mrs.
Ett's words, "My --- I couldn't say our --- . . . but *my* relationship
with you is fascinating," illustrates again, and very deeply, the fact
that the relationship is experienced as a one-way affair in a very
unique sense. The whole relationship is composed of the self of the
client, the counselor being depersonalized for purposes of therapy into
being "the client's other self." It is this warm willingness on the part
of the counselor to lay his own self temporarily aside, in order to
enter into the experience of the client, which makes the relationship a
completely unique one, unlike anything in the client's previous
experience.

The second aspect of the relationship is the security which the client
feels. This, very obviously, does not come from approval by the
counselor, but from something far deeper --- a thoroughly consistent
acceptance. It is this absolute assurance that there
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_209}will be no evaluation, no interpretation, no
probing, no *personal* reaction by the counselor, that gradually permits
the client to experience the relationship as one in which all defenses
can be dispensed with --- a relationship in which the client feels, "I
can be the real me, no pretenses."

Perhaps the basis of this security may be made more clearly distinct by
pointing out some characteristics which it does not possess to contrast
with those which it does possess. It is experienced as basically
supporting, but it is in no way supportive. The client does not feel
that someone is behind him, that someone approves of him. He does
experience the fact that here is someone who respects him *as he is*,
and who is willing for him to take any direction which he chooses. The
security is not a type of "love-relationship" in any of the senses in
which this term is ordinarily understood. The client does not feel that
the therapist "likes" him, in the usual sense of a biased and favorable
judgment, and he is often not sure, as in the excerpt above, whether he
likes the therapist: "I don't know why I should like you or why I
shouldn't like you." There is simply no evidence upon which such a
judgment could be based. But that this is a secure experience, in which
the self is deeply respected, that this is an experience in which there
need be no fear of threat or attack --- not even of the subtlest sort
--- of this the client gradually becomes sure. And this basic security
is not something the client believes because he is told, not something
about which he convinces himself logically, it is something he
*experiences*, with his own sensory and visceral equipment.

*The Disappearance of Transference Attitudes*

In this strangely unique experience of security in a relationship with
another who understands and respects, what, specifically, happens to the
transference attitude? It would seem that what occurs is exactly
parallel to all the other unrealistically hostile, fearful, loving
attitudes which the client brings out. In this relationship the
experience of the client seems to be, "This is the way I have perceived
and interpreted reality; but in this relationship, where I have no need
of defending this interpretation, I can
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_210}recognize that there are other sensory evidences
which I have not admitted into consciousness, or have admitted but
interpreted inaccurately." The client becomes aware of experiences which
have not been previously accepted. He also becomes aware of the fact
that he is the perceiver and evaluator of experience, a fact which seems
to be very close to the heart of therapy. Mrs. Dar recognizes that she
has the feeling of judging herself. Mrs. Ett realizes that she is
fearful of looking at what she is finding in herself. When these
experiences are organized into a meaningful relation to the self, the
"transference attitudes" disappear. They are not displaced. They are not
sublimated. They are not "re-educated." They simply disappear because
experience has been reperceived in a way which makes them meaningless.
It is analogous to the way in which one attitude drops out and another
entirely different one takes its place when I turn to watch the large
plane I have dimly glimpsed out of the corner of my eye, and find it to
be a gnat flying by a few inches from my face.

*An Extreme Example*

Some may still feel that the examples given represent no very marked
instances of strong transference attitudes, but only mild ones. Yet
there is evidence that even when transference attitudes are most extreme
the same principles apply. The excerpts which follow are from interviews
with a single woman in her thirties, Miss Tir, a person so deeply
disturbed that she would probably have been diagnosed as psychotic in
terms of an external evaluation. It should be stressed that attitudes
like this would be found very infrequently in a community counseling
center. On the other hand, in a psychiatric ward or state hospital they
might be more frequent. In the course of the interviews, this woman has
wrestled with deep guilt feelings, many of which center around possible
incest with her father. She cannot be entirely sure whether the events
really occurred or whether they exist only in her own mind. Some brief
excerpts may give an inkling of the depth of the transference attitudes,
and of the counselor's method of handling. This account is from the
counselor's notes, which are unusually complete because the client spoke
very slowly. They fall short, however, of the complete accuracy of a
recording.

::::::: topbot
:::::: sl
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_211}*From ninth interview:*

*S:* This morning I hung my coat out there instead of here in your
office. I've told you I like you, and I was afraid if you helped me on
with the coat, I might turn around and kiss you.

*C:* You thought those feelings of affection might *make* you kiss me
unless you protected yourself from them.

*S:* Well, another reason I left the coat out there is that I want to be
dependent --- but I want to show you I don't have to be dependent.

*C:* You both want to be, and to prove you don't have to be.

::: top
(*Toward end of interview*)
:::

*S:* I've never told anyone they were the most wonderful person I've
ever known, but I've told you that. It's not just sex. It's more than
that.

*C:* You really feel very deeply attached to me.

*From tenth interview --- toward close of interview:*

*S:* I think emotionally I'm dying for sexual intercourse but I don't do
anything about it. . . .^[23](#025_endnotes.html_e23){#014_c5.html_f23}^
The thing I want is to have sexual intercourse with you. I don't dare
ask you, 'cause I'm afraid you'd be nondirective.

*C:* You have this awful tension, and want so much to have relations
with me.

*S:* (*Goes on in this vein. Finally*) Can't we do something about it?
This tension is awful! Will you relieve the tension. . . . Can you give
me a direct answer? I think it might help both of us.

*C* (*gently*): The answer would be no. I can understand how
*desperately* you feel, but I would not be willing to do
that.^[24](#025_endnotes.html_e24){#014_c5.html_f24}^

*S:* (*Pause. Sigh of relief.*) I think that helps me. It's only when
I'm upset that I'm like this. You have strength, and it gives me
strength.

::: top
*Twelfth interview:*
:::

*S:* (*Silent for two minutes. Then begins to talk in hard flat voice*,
*quite unlike her usual tone. Does not look at counselor. There was much
repetition*, *but the following excerpts give the major thoughts.*) You
feel I want to []{#014_c5.html_lpn_212}come, but I *don't!* I'm not
coming any more. It doesn't do any good. I don't like you. I hate you! I
wish you never were born.

*C:* You just hate me very
bitterly.^[25](#025_endnotes.html_e25){#014_c5.html_f25}^

*S:* I think I'll throw you in the lake. I'll cut you up! You think
people like you, but they don't. . . . You think you can attract women,
but you *can't*. . . . I wish you were *dead*.

*C:* You *detest* me and you'd really like to get rid of me.

*S:* You think my father did bad things with me, but he didn't! You
think he wasn't a good man, but he *was*. You think I want intercourse,
but I *don't*.

*C:* You feel I *absolutely misrepresent* all your thoughts.

*S:* . . . You think you can get people to come in and tell you
everything, and they'll think they're being helped, but they're *not!*
You just like to make 'em suffer. You think you can hypnotize them, but
you *can't!* You think you're good, but you ain't. I hate you, I hate
you, I *hate* you!

*C:* You feel I really like to make 'em suffer, but that I *don't* help
them.

*S:* You think I haven't been straight, but I have. I *hate* you. All
I've had is pain, pain, pain. You think I can't direct my own life, but
I can. You think I can't get well, but I can. You think I had
hallucinations, but I didn't. I hate you. (*Long pause. Leans on desk in
strained*, *exhausted pose.*) You think I'm crazy, but I'm not.

*C:* You're sure I think you're crazy.

*S:* (*Pause.*) I'm tied, and I just can't get loose! (*Despairing tone
of voice*, *and tears. Pause.*) I had a hallucination and I've *got* to
get it out! . . . \[Goes on about her own deep conflicts, and tells of
the hallucination she has experienced, with terrific tension in her
voice, but with an attitude very different from that at beginning of
interview.\]

::: top
(*Later in interview*)
:::

*S:* I knew at the office I had to get rid of this somewhere. I felt I
could come down and tell you. I knew you'd understand. I couldn't say I
hated myself. That's true but I couldn't say it. So I just thought of
all the ugly things I could say to you instead.

[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_213}*C:* The things you felt about yourself you
couldn't say, but you could say them about me.

*S:* I know we're getting to rock bottom. . . .
::::::
:::::::

Here again, in very deep material, the client again comes to realize
that the attitudes she holds toward others, and the qualities she
attributes to them, reside in her own perceptions, not in the object of
her attitudes. This would seem to be the essence of the resolution of
transference attitudes.^[26](#025_endnotes.html_e26){#014_c5.html_f26}^

*Clinical Problems Regarding Transference*

On the basis of our clinical experience it could be said that the
experienced client-centered therapist rarely has difficulty in handling
attitudes of hostility or attitudes of affection which are directed
toward him. (The beginning counselor may have more difficulty with such
attitudes than with attitudes directed toward others, but this
disappears as his assurance in his hypothesis grows.) The attitudes
which most frequently seem to be ineffectively handled are those which
might be called "aggressive dependence." The client who is certain that
he is incapable of making his own decisions or managing himself, and who
insists that the counselor must take over, is a type of client with whom
we are sometimes successful, but not infrequently unsuccessful. In such
instances the problem is likely to arise very early in the series of
interviews. The client is annoyed or antagonistic because he is not
finding what he expected, and feels this annoyance without having as yet
experienced much of the satisfaction of being understood. Consequently,
very minute deviations by the therapist from an attitude of complete
respect, understanding, and acceptance may be responsible for the
client's terminating therapy []{#014_c5.html_lpn_214}after one or a few
interviews. In such cases, however, if this crucial early point is
passed without termination by the client, then therapy appears to have
the same essential process as in any other case. It is very clear,
however, that we have much to learn, probably in attitudes rather than
in techniques, before we can with entire success provide this type of
client with a helping situation which he can use for himself.

*How Does a Dependent Transference Develop?*

Thus far we have discussed the reasons why a dependent transference does
not tend to develop in client-centered therapy. We could discuss the
matter with more assurance if there were a clear understanding of the
opposite problem: How is a dependent transference created or initiated?
Here any reliable answer must come from those orientations in which such
a relationship frequently develops. Undoubtedly as we have more
recordings of various therapies we can study such materials in order to
discover the crucial points at which dependency begins or is fostered.
At the present state of our knowledge, we can only raise questions and
formulate tentative hypotheses on this point.

One such question is this, "Does evaluation of the client by the
counselor create dependence?" "Evaluation" is here being used in a broad
sense to include everything which is experienced by the client as "a
judgment has been made about me." Thus it would include not only moral
evaluation ("I wonder if you made the right move in doing that?" or "It
is quite natural to have such sexual thoughts"), and evaluation of
characteristics ("Your ability is at about the 25th percentile" or "You
probably have somewhat compulsive tendencies"), but also evaluation of
causes or patterns ("I wonder if underlying that is an attitude of
hostility toward your mother," or "Perhaps you really feel some
attraction toward him as well as hatred of him"). In these broad terms
it seems that many interview techniques --- interpretation, questions
which probe in a certain direction, reassurance, criticism, praise,
objective description --- are all experienced as to some extent
evaluations. Is it these experiences of being evaluated which bring
about dependence? This would seem to be a reasonable a priori
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_215}hypothesis since one of the most obvious
differences between client-centered and other therapies lies in the
amount of counselor evaluation which is involved. The evidence when we
examine it seems to be both pro and con. Against this hypothesis is the
fact that traditional counseling makes much use of evaluation, yet
dependency develops only occasionally. Adlerian therapy could be
similarly described. In the field of psychoanalysis, I have had
opportunity to examine sample recorded interviews conducted by seven
analysts. In all but one of these there was a heavy proportion of
evaluation as here defined. There was a definitely dependent
transference relationship in all these cases, even in the case in which
evaluation by the therapist was quite minimal. Thus this hypothesis
seems hardly satisfactory, since evaluation exists in those instances in
which a transference relationship develops as well as in instances where
it does not develop.

Another possibility is that dependency arises when it is expected.
Certainly the expectation differs sharply in different orientations, and
the therapist's expectations are undoubtedly conveyed in subtle ways.
Thus the analyst's stress upon the use of free association would
probably convey an expectation of client dependency. The fact that the
patient is advised to avoid all feeling of responsibility for what he
says, and as Fenichel says, "not to be active at all," would tend to
imply that another will be responsible for him in this situation. In
sharpest contrast, the client-centered therapist, in his respect for
every client utterance as being, at that moment, a responsible
expression of the self as it exists at the time, would undoubtedly
convey an expectation of independence rather than dependence.

Over against this is the fact that sometimes a dependent transference
does not develop in analysis even though the therapist has expected it,
and a nondirective therapist who does not expect dependence may find it
developing very rapidly if he becomes interpretive or evaluative.

It has seemed to me that a clue to the dilemma may lie in the following
type of hypothesis. When the client is evaluated and comes to realize
clearly in his own experience that this evaluation is more accurate than
any he has made himself, then self-confidence
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_216}crumbles, and a dependent relationship is built
up. When the therapist is experienced as "knowing more about me than I
know myself," then there appears to the client to be nothing to do but
to hand over the reins of his life into these more competent hands. This
is likely to be accompanied by comfortable feelings of relief and
liking, but also at times by hatred for the person who has thus become
so all-important. Whether this dependent relationship is regarded by the
therapist as desirable depends of course upon the theory of therapy
which he holds. All appear to be agreed, however, that once this has
happened it is a slow process to get the patient to the point where he
again feels confident in the control of his own life.

A very simple example may point up some of the reasons why this very
tentative hypothesis appears to be a possible explanation. During the
war a counselor with relatively little training or experience tried to
help a soldier who was in the guardhouse for having gone AWOL. A little
conversation revealed the fact that the AWOL episode had come about
because of complex marital difficulties involving both the man's wife
and mother-in-law. Toward the latter he was extremely hostile and
abusive. The counselor questioned him about the whole situation, and on
the basis of several interviews came to the conclusion that the
mother-in-law was actually a constructive factor in the situation, that
the soldier's attitude toward her was both unfortunate and
inappropriate, and that if he would improve this relationship the whole
marital picture would be improved. He tried to show this to the man,
suggested that the man write a friendly letter to his mother-in-law, and
so on. The man flatly rejected this interpretation of the situation and
refused to write the letter.

Here is the way in which some directive counseling concludes. The client
has been given an evaluation which may be far more adequate than his
own. It is not experienced as adequate, and hence there is no effect
upon the feeling of competence which the individual holds. In ordinary
life the above case would probably have ended at this point, with the
client leaving because he did not accept the evaluation nor the
suggestion.

The story continues, however, because he was in the guardhouse
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_217}and could not leave. After further discussion
and persuasion, the soldier finally wrote to his mother-in-law a letter
of the sort advised. He had no confidence that it would help. To his
great surprise he received a friendly and constructive letter from her,
and a letter from his wife also, both letters easing the strain of the
marital situation, and opening up the possibility of rebuilding his
marriage. The client was greatly pleased and so was the counselor.
Within a few weeks the counselor's pleasure turned to perplexity. He
found the soldier wanting to see him about many problems and many
issues. He was asked to make decisions for him on very minute and
inconsequential points. When the counselor tried to put the client off,
he was resentful and hurt. A real dependency relationship had been
developed.

Here in the blundering efforts of this naïve counselor we have possibly
the basic pattern which exists in any transference relationship of a
strongly dependent sort. The client discovers that the therapist knows
him and his relationships better than he knows himself in his
relationships. This is not merely an intellectual observation on the
client's part, but something which is directly experienced. Once this is
experienced, then the obvious conclusion is that the person who is
sensed as having better understanding, better ability to predict
behavior, and the like, should be the person in control. Consequently a
basically positive dependent transference results, a relationship with
strong affective components because it is so vitally important for the
client. It has equally strong potentialities for negative feeling, since
the client resents the loss of independent selfhood which is at least
temporarily involved.

There is still another hypothesis to account for the development of a
transference relationship. Perhaps as the client explores more and more
deeply into himself, the degree of threat to self tends to make it more
necessary to project these threats onto another, the therapist, as in
the case of Miss Tir. The degree of internal threat may also make
necessary the experiencing of more dependence. In favor of this
hypothesis is the fact that in our longer cases (many of which appear to
involve deeper reorganization) transference attitudes are more frequent
and more noticeable. []{#014_c5.html_lpn_218}This explanation would,
however, deal only with the client's side of the picture and the
likelihood of developing transference *attitudes* since even in these
cases there is a difference between our experience and that of the full
development of a transference *relationship*.

*Summary*

If transference attitudes are defined as emotionalized attitudes which
existed in some other relationship, and which are inappropriately
directed to the therapist, then transference attitudes are evident in a
considerable proportion of cases handled by client-centered therapists.
Both the analyst and the nondirective therapist deal with such attitudes
in the same fashion in which they deal with any other affect. For the
analyst this means that he interprets such attitudes, and perhaps
through these evaluations establishes the characteristic transference
*relationship*. For the client-centered therapist this means that he
attempts to understand and accept such attitudes, which then tend to
become accepted by the client as being his own perception of the
situation, inappropriately held. Thus the emotionalized, dependent
relationship between client and therapist almost always becomes the
heart and focus of successful analytic therapy, whereas this does not
seem to be true of client-centered therapy. In the latter therapy the
client's awareness of his attitudes and perceptions as residing in him,
rather than in the object of his attitudes and perceptions, may be said
to be the focus of therapy. Put in another way, the awareness of self as
perceiver and evaluator appears to be central to the process of
reorganization of self which takes place.

In endeavoring to explore further the phenomena of transference
attitudes and transference relationships, several tentative hypotheses
were formulated. Transference attitudes are perhaps most likely to occur
when the client is experiencing considerable threat to the organization
of self in the material which he is bringing into awareness. A true
transference relationship is perhaps most likely to occur when the
client experiences another as having a more effective understanding of
his own self than he himself possesses.

[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_219}T[HE]{.sc} P[ROBLEM OF]{.sc} D[IAGNOSIS]{.sc}

Shall psychotherapy be preceded by, and built upon, a thoroughgoing
psychological diagnosis of the client? This is a complex and perplexing
question, a question which has not been entirely resolved by any
therapeutic orientation. We shall endeavor in this section to look at
some of the elements in the situation, and to formulate a tentative
answer from the point of view of client-centered therapy.

*Differing Views*

Looming large in the background of any such discussion is the fact that
in dealing with organic disease, physical diagnosis is the *sine qua
non* of treatment. The tremendous strides of medicine in dealing with
disease processes in the organism have been very largely based upon the
discovery, elaboration, and refinement of more adequate means of
accurate diagnosis. It has been natural to suppose that progress in
dealing with psychological difficulties would follow the same path.

It seems already obvious that this will not be true. Some therapists
have indeed maintained that "rational treatment cannot be planned and
executed until an accurate diagnosis has been made" (216, p. 319) but it
is doubtful if this dictum represents the thinking of most. In various
psychotherapeutic orientations, the diagnostic process has come to have
a decreasing amount of emphasis. Many analysts and psychiatrists ---
particularly those influenced by Rankian thinking --- prefer to start
therapy without a diagnostic
study.^[27](#025_endnotes.html_e27){#014_c5.html_f27}^ The trend is most
sharply shown by the fact that nearly all therapists, even in making a
diagnostic study, would subscribe to the statement so popular in all
orientations, that "therapy begins with the first contact, and proceeds
hand in hand with diagnosis." It has not been sufficiently pointed out
that approval of this statement means that in the mind of the
psychotherapist, therapy is *not* built upon diagnosis. Some aspects of
it, at least, can begin before there is any knowledge of the difficulty
or its causation.

[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_220}In this general trend, client-centered therapy
has been at the end of the continuum in stating, as its point of view,
that psychological diagnosis as usually understood is unnecessary for
psychotherapy, and may actually be a detriment to the therapeutic
process. (143, 170)

In order to understand how such a divergence of opinion could exist, let
us consider more deeply some of the principles which underlie the proved
effectiveness of diagnostic procedures in the field of organic illness.
There would doubtless be agreement that the following are statements
which present the assumptions and the rationale of physical diagnosis, a
rationale for which there is now a heavy weight of evidence.

::::: block
:::: block1
::: topbot
  ----- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1.    Every organic condition has a preceding cause.
  2.    The control of the condition is much more feasible if the cause is known.
  3.    The discovery and accurate description of the cause is a rational problem of scientific search.
  4.    This search is best conducted by an individual with a knowledge of scientific method, and a knowledge of various organic conditions.
  5.    The cause, when it is differentiated and discovered, is usually remediable or alterable by materials and/or forces used and manipulated by the diagnostician or his professional associates.
  6.    To the extent that the alteration of the causative factors must be left in the control of the patient (keeping a diet, restriction of behavior in heart conditions, and so on) a program of education must be undertaken so that the patient perceives the total situation in much the same way as the diagnostician.
  ----- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::
::::
:::::

Obviously psychological diagnosis is necessary to psychotherapy to the
degree, and only to the degree, that these assumptions and this
rationale hold true of the situation in the psychological field. Here we
find that therapists differ.

On the one hand are those who hold the view that psychological diagnosis
is also a problem of rational search best conducted by
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_221}the more objective expert. It is probable that
they would agree that relatively little has been done to relate specific
diagnoses with specific therapies, but this is the direction in which
they believe sound progress will be made.

The writer has much sympathy with this point of view, and regards it as
important to clinical advancement that this hypothesis be utilized and
developed by those who believe it to be most fruitful. In an earlier
volume (164) the writer in general espoused this point of view, and
endeavored to set up the criteria and conditions by which manipulative
treatment of elements in the physical and attitudinal situation of the
child might be guided. In some areas, such as the prescription of foster
home care, such treatment was beginning to acquire a definite scientific
basis. For "x" type of problem syndrome in the child, a foster home of
describable "y" type could be predicted to be successful in a known
percentage of cases.

For the author, experience has gradually brought about the conclusions
(1) that such prescriptive treatment of psychological maladjustment
tends to be palliative and superficial, rather than basic, and (2) that
it places the clinician in a god-like role which seems basically
untenable from a philosophical point of view, for reasons which are
discussed later.

*The Client-Centered Rationale of Diagnosis*

In our evolving experience with therapy, another point of view about
diagnosis has developed in the client-centered orientation. The
rationale behind it may perhaps be summarized rather briefly in a number
of propositional statements.

::::: block
:::: block1
::: topbot
Behavior is caused, and the psychological cause of behavior is a certain
perception or a way of perceiving.

The client is the only one who has the potentiality of knowing fully the
dynamics of his perceptions and his behavior.
:::
::::
:::::

Many therapists would be in agreement here. Fenichel points out (56, p.
32) that the final criterion of the correctness of an analytic
interpretation is the patient's reaction over a period of time. If in
the long run an interpretation is not experienced by
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_222}the patient as meaningful and true, then it is
not correct. The final diagnostician, then, in psychoanalysis as well as
in client-centered therapy, is the client or patient.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
In order for behavior to change, a change in perception must be
*experienced*. Intellectual knowledge cannot substitute for this.
:::
::::
:::::

It is this proposition which has perhaps cast the most doubt upon the
usefulness of psychological diagnosis. If the therapist knew, with an
assurance surpassing any he could have on the basis of present
diagnostic tools, exactly what had brought about the present
psychological maladjustment, it is doubtful that he could make effective
use of this knowledge. Telling the client would most assuredly not help.
Directing the client's attention to certain areas is perhaps as likely
to arouse resistance as to bring nondefensive consideration of these
areas. It seems reasonable to hypothesize that the client will explore
the areas of conflict as rapidly as he is able to bear the pain, and
that he will experience a change in perception as rapidly as that
experience can be tolerated by the self.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
The constructive forces which bring about altered perception,
reorganization of self, and relearning, reside primarily in the client,
and probably cannot come from outside.
:::
::::
:::::

The forces which physical medicine can bring to bear, through drugs and
other means, appear to have no real counterpart in the psychological
field. The use of penicillin to combat a specific bacteria and the
creation of an artificial fever to cure a disease have no real analogy
in psychotherapy. The native curative forces which make for growth and
learning appear to be the primary ones upon which the therapist must
rely. When hypnosis or other means have been used to bring in positive
forces whose source is external to the client, the results seem
disappointing or temporary.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
Therapy is basically the experiencing of the inadequacies in old ways of
perceiving, the experiencing of new and []{#014_c5.html_lpn_223}more
accurate and adequate perceptions, and the recognition of significant
relationships between perceptions.

In a very meaningful and accurate sense, therapy *is* diagnosis, and
this diagnosis is a process which goes on in the experience of the
client, rather than in the intellect of the clinician.
:::
::::
:::::

It is in this way that the client-centered therapist has confidence in
the efficacy of diagnosis. One might say that psychotherapy, of whatever
orientation, is complete or almost complete when the diagnosis of the
dynamics is experienced and accepted by the client. In client-centered
therapy one could say that the purpose of the therapist is to provide
the conditions in which the client is able to make, to experience, and
to accept the diagnosis of the psychogenic aspects of his maladjustment.

Perhaps this presentation is sufficient to indicate that there is a
rational basis for an approach to therapy which does not build upon an
externally based diagnosis. The fact that it is feasible to conduct
therapy on this basis is evident from the thousands of clients handled
with this approach. As the two viewpoints regarding diagnosis continue
to operate, clinical and research evidence will accumulate to indicate
the effectiveness of each.

*Certain Objections to Psychological Diagnosis*

Our experience has led to the tentative conclusion that a diagnosis of
the psychological dynamics is not only unnecessary but in some ways is
detrimental or unwise. The reasons for this conclusion are primarily
two. In the first place, the very process of psychological diagnosis
places the locus of evaluation so definitely in the expert that it may
increase any dependent tendencies in the client, and cause him to feel
that the responsibility for understanding and improving his situation
lies in the hands of another. When the client perceives the locus of
judgment and responsibility as clearly resting in the hands of the
clinician, he is, in our judgment, further from therapeutic progress
than when he came in.^[28](#025_endnotes.html_e28){#014_c5.html_f28}^
Also if the results of the evaluation are made known
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_224}to him it appears to lead to a basic loss of
confidence by the person himself, a discouraging realization that "I
cannot know myself." There is a degree of loss of personhood as the
individual acquires the belief that only the expert can accurately
evaluate him, and that therefore the measure of his personal worth lies
in the hands of another. The more he acquires this attitude, the further
he would appear to be from any sound therapeutic outcome, any real
achievement of psychological growth.

The second basic objection to psychological diagnosis, and its
accompanying evaluation of the client by the therapist, is that it has
certain social and philosophical implications which need to be carefully
considered and which, to the writer, are undesirable. When the locus of
evaluation is seen as residing in the expert, it would appear that the
long-range social implications are in the direction of the social
control of the many by the few. To many this conclusion may seem
far-fetched. Certainly it does not hold true in the realm of organic
difficulties. If a physician diagnoses his patient as having a kidney
infection and prescribes remedial measures, neither the diagnosis nor
the prescription, whether correct or incorrect, has any general
implications in the realm of social philosophy. But when the clinician
diagnoses a client's vocational aims or marital relationships or
religious views as, let us say, immature and works toward changing these
conditions in the direction of what he regards as maturity, then this
situation has many social implications. In a paper given at Harvard the
writer has endeavored to point out some of these implications.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
One cannot take responsibility for evaluating a person's abilities,
motives, conflicts, needs; for evaluating the adjustment he is capable
of achieving, the degree of reorganization he should undergo, the
conflicts which he should resolve, the degree of dependence which he
should develop upon the therapist, and the goals of therapy, without a
significant degree of control over the individual being an inevitable
accompaniment. As this process is extended to more and more persons, as
it is for example to thousands of veterans, it means a subtle
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_225}control of persons and their values and goals by
a group which has selected itself to do the controlling. The fact that
it is a subtle and well-intentioned control makes it only less likely
that people will realize what they are accepting. . . . If the
hypothesis of the first trend proves to be most adequately supported by
the evidence, if it proves to be true that the individual has relatively
little capacity for self-evaluation and self-direction, and that the
primary evaluation function must lie with the expert, then it would
appear that the long range direction in which we are moving will find
expression in some type of complete social control. The management of
the lives of the many by the self-selected few would appear to be the
natural consequence. If, on the other hand, the second hypothesis should
be more adequately supported by the facts, if, as we think, the locus of
responsible evaluation may be left with the individual, then we would
have a psychology of personality and of therapy which leads in the
direction of democracy, a psychology which would gradually redefine
democracy in deeper and more basic terms. We would have a place for the
professional worker in human relations, not as an evaluator of the self,
behavior, needs and goals, but as the expert in providing the conditions
under which the self-direction of both the individual and group can take
place. The expert would have skill in facilitating the independent
growth of the person. (168, pp. 212, 218--219)
:::
::::
:::::

Considerations of this sort have led client-centered therapists to
minimize the diagnostic process as a basis for therapy. To us, the
objections have seemed basic. At least they warrant consideration, and a
suitable approach to therapy in our culture will need to provide a
satisfactory answer to the questions which have been
raised.^[29](#025_endnotes.html_e29){#014_c5.html_f29}^

[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_226}*What About Psychosomatic Problems?*

If organic problems are best handled by beginning with a diagnostic
evaluation made by the expert, and if psychogenic problems are best
handled by keeping the evaluative function with the client and avoiding
external evaluation, what procedure is most advisable with psychosomatic
problems in which the organic and psychological factors are inextricably
woven together? The answer to this question is most puzzling, and no
attempt will be made to give *the* answer, but some highly tentative
suggestions may be made.

One point of view that, so far as is known, has never been
systematically tried, would be to keep the locus of evaluation with the
patient in the diagnostic procedures used. Suppose the physician, or the
physician-psychologist team, took an attitude toward the patient which
could be summarized thus: "You, and we, are perplexed as to the basis of
your symptoms. We could give you metabolism tests, which would indicate
whether your body is functioning satisfactorily in turning your food
into fuel for energy; we could give other tests (describing the function
of each in simple, nonmedical terms), or you could talk with Dr. X,
talking about your symptoms and your feelings and any of the things that
trouble you, since sometimes difficulties such as yours get their start
from emotional conflicts or problems within the person. Now, of all
these possibilities, which do you wish to use? You may wish to go ahead
on all of them, or you may feel that some of these lines of
investigation would be much more likely than others to get at the source
of your symptoms." Many physicians would, of course, find it quite
impossible to take the point of view described. Yet where they could
sincerely test out the hypothesis of putting confidence in the patient,
the results might prove stimulating to our thinking. We know, as the
Bixlers (31, 32) and Seeman (179) have shown, that this type of approach
works very well indeed in the vocational guidance field, where the
client selects the tests which he regards as
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_227}appropriate for himself. Their experience would
at least suggest that it might be profitable in the psychosomatic realm.
Clearly, the patient who was highly defensive would exhaust first the
tests and procedures which would point toward an organic diagnosis; but
when these had been utilized, assuming the findings were negative or
minimal, he would tend to choose for himself the pathway which would
lead to possible discovery of the psychogenic aspects. The importance of
having this choice his own can hardly be overestimated.

The advantage of this whole procedure would be that the primary locus of
responsibility would be kept with the patient throughout, which, as the
Peckham experiment has shown, is important even in dealing with organic
ills. (See pages 59--63 of Chapter 2.) Even more important, he would be
making the choice to investigate the psychological elements in the
picture, and once this choice was made would be soundly embarked on
therapy. Furthermore, such a mode of approach keeps the physician
thinking *with* the patient at all times rather than primarily *about*
or *for* the patient. This has many advantages in the area of
psychogenic problems.

Another highly tentative suggestion reverses the usual order of
procedure in dealing with patients. If a patient presents symptoms which
appear to have a considerable probability of being psychosomatic or
psychological, the usual procedure is to "rule out" the possibility of
organic illness first, leaving to the last the psychological
possibilities. This procedure is very understandable from an historical
point of view. Yet if we consider it from a logical point of view, and
keep in mind the great preponderance of psychogenic ills in many of the
medical specialties, it would make equally good sense to reverse the
approach. Psychotherapy might be started at once, provided the patient
was willing; and if the symptoms did not improve after a reasonable
length of time, the chance that they might be organic in origin could
then be investigated.

These two possibilities are suggested for consideration only. The
experience of the author in the psychosomatic field is by no means
extensive, and the only justification for putting forth these rather
radical proposals is to indicate that client-centered therapy
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_228}does have at least a theoretical rationale for
approaching problems of psychosomatic illness. It is also clearly
recognized that many physicians would consider the procedures suggested
so antagonistic to all the conventions of medical training as to be
wholly repugnant. It is to the few who might find the procedures
congenial that the suggestions are addressed.

T[HE]{.sc} L[IMITS OF]{.sc} A[PPLICABILITY OF]{.sc}
C[LIENT]{.sc}-C[ENTERED]{.sc} T[HERAPY]{.sc}

The third question which this chapter will explore is a question very
frequently raised by those interested in therapy: "What are the types of
situations in which client-centered therapy is applicable?" The answer
can be relatively brief, though it will not satisfy all the questioners.

In *Counseling and Psychotherapy* the author gave certain tentative
criteria which, if met, indicated that counseling was
advisable.^[30](#025_endnotes.html_e30){#014_c5.html_f30}^ This list of
criteria has proved less than helpful. It is []{#014_c5.html_lpn_229}not
so much that it is entirely incorrect (though points 5 and 8 are
disproved continually) as that it engenders in the counselor-in-training
an evaluative, diagnostic frame of mind which has not been profitable.

Present opinion on applicability must take into account our experience.
A client-centered approach has been used with two-year-old children and
adults of sixty-five; with mild adjustment problems, such as student
study habits, and the most severe disorders of diagnosed psychotics;
with "normal" individuals and those who are deeply neurotic; with highly
dependent individuals and those of strong ego-development; with
lower-class, middle-class, and upper-class individuals; with the less
intelligent as well as the highly intelligent; with healthy individuals
and those with psychosomatic ailments, particularly allergies (48, 133,
134). Only two of the many types of customary classifications have not
been appreciably sampled --- the mental defective and the delinquent. It
is unfortunate that thus far circumstances have not led to much work
with this therapeutic approach in these fields.

On the basis of the foregoing experience it would be correct to say
that, in each of the groupings in which we have worked, client-centered
therapy has achieved noteworthy success with some individuals; with
some, partial success; with others, temporary success which later
suffered a relapse; while with still others failure to help has been the
result. Certain trends appear to be evident, such as the lesser
likelihood of deep personal reorganization in the older individual. The
Haimowitz study (78), already cited, indicates tentatively that
intra-punitive males may make better use of the experience of
client-centered therapy than others. But on the whole, our experience
does not lead us to say that client-centered therapy is applicable to
certain groups and not to others. It is felt that there is no advantage
to be gained by trying to set dogmatic limits to the use of such
therapy. If there are certain types of individuals who do not respond,
or for whom client-centered therapy is contra-indicated, then
accumulating experience and additional research will indicate what these
groups are.

In the meantime, the lack of definite knowledge about the
[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_230}groups for whom client-centered therapy is more
or less successful is not a matter for serious concern, since our
clinical experience would indicate that such therapy does not seem to do
harm to the individual. Where a client-centered approach is consistently
utilized, it is our judgment that very rarely would the client leave the
experience more disturbed than when he came in. In the overwhelming
majority of instances, even where the counseling experience is felt by
the client to be unsuccessful, he is not more upset by his problems
because of the failure. This is so primarily because of the lack of any
pressure in the relationship; that is, only those elements of experience
come to awareness which are not too threatening to face or tolerate. The
client tends to draw back from those topics which are too dangerous or
upsetting to face.

A consideration of these elements leads to the conclusion that
client-centered therapy is very widely applicable --- that indeed in one
sense it is applicable to all people. An atmosphere of acceptance and
respect, of deep understanding, is a good climate for personal growth,
and as such applies to our children, our colleagues, our students, as
well as to our clients, whether these be "normal," neurotic, or
psychotic. This does *not* mean that it will *cure* every psychological
condition, and indeed the concept of cure is quite foreign to the
approach we have been considering. With some types of individuals
hospital care may be necessary, or with others some type of drug therapy
may be necessary, and a variety of medical aids may be utilized in
psychosomatic conditions. Yet a psychological climate which the
individual can use for deeper self-understanding, for a reorganization
of self in the direction of more realistic integration, for the
development of more comfortable and mature ways of behaving --- this is
not an opportunity which is of use for some groups and not for others.
It would appear rather to be a point of view which might in basic ways
be applicable to all individuals, even though it might not resolve all
the problems or provide all the help which a particular individual
needs.

[]{#014_c5.html_lpn_231}SUGGESTED READINGS

::: sl
In considering further the question of transference, the reader will
doubtless wish to investigate other viewpoints. A modern psychoanalytic
concept of transference may be found either in the chapter by French on
"The Transference Phenomenon" (4, Chapter 5), or in the chapter by
Horney on "The Concept of Transference" (89, Chapter 9). For another
therapeutic point of view which, like client-centered therapy, regards
the relationship as important but sees no special significance in
transference attitudes, see Allen (5, especially Chapter 3) and Taft
(209).

On the issue of diagnosis, two very different points of view are
expressed in Thorne (215) and Patterson (143).

There is little that is definitive on the applicability of
client-centered or any other form of therapy.

Since this chapter concludes the presentation of the major features of
client-centered therapy as used with individual adults, it may be
appropriate at this point to refer to the criticisms of this
orientation. Of the published criticisms the most extensive is a
symposium edited by Thorne and Carter (217) in which a number of writers
give their critical evaluations of this point of view.
:::

[]{#015_p2.html}

<div>

[]{#015_p2.html_p2}

</div>

# [PART]{.sc} [II]{.partnum} *The Application of Client-Centered Therapy* {.parttitle}

[]{#016_c6.html}

<div>

[]{#016_c6.html_c6}

</div>

# *Chapter* [6]{.chapnum} • Play Therapy {.chaptitle}

::: top
By [E[LAINE]{.sc} D[ORFMAN]{.sc},
[M]{.sc}.[A]{.sc}]{style="font-size: 150%"}
:::

![](html/docimages/line.jpg){height="10" width="100%"}

[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_235}Client-centered play therapy did not spring into
being fully formed. Many of the assumptions and procedures of the
client-centered play therapist are derivatives of those of other
orientations. It is to the brief consideration of some of these that we
now turn.

O[RIGINS OF]{.sc} P[LAY]{.sc} T[HERAPY]{.sc}

Play therapy appears to have arisen from attempts to apply
psychoanalytic therapy to children. As in adult analyses, an important
aim of the Freudian therapy was the bringing to consciousness of
repressed experiences, together with the reliving of the accompanying
affects in the more "antiseptic" relationship with the therapist. A
basic method for effecting this outcome in adults was that of free
association. Thus, a serious problem arose when it was discovered that
young children refused to free-associate. In her early report, Anna
Freud (63) stated that a small child might occasionally be induced to
free-associate briefly, in order to please an analyst of whom he was
fond. The material thus produced was, however, insufficient as a basic
source for interpretation. For this reason, and because of a belief that
children did not form a transference neurosis, Anna Freud modified the
classical analytic technique. As part of a campaign to win over a child,
she sometimes played with him. For example, she reports a case (63, pp.
8--9) in which, when a child brought []{#016_c6.html_lpn_236}some string
to the treatment room, she proceeded to tie fancier knots than the child
could. Her stated aim was to show him that she was an interesting and
powerful person, whom he might well desire as an ally. In this way, she
hoped to gain access to the child's secrets. Thus, it appears that her
early use of play was not central in the therapy, but was considered
rather as a preliminary to the real work of analysis. It was a technique
to produce a positive emotional attachment to the analyst, and thus to
make possible the actual therapy.

The differing approach of Melanie Klein (103) was independently
developed at about the same period, and it, too, derived from the
fundamental theories of Sigmund Freud. Klein assumed that the child's
play activities, including his accompanying verbalizations, were quite
as motivationally determined as the free associations of adults. Hence,
they could be interpreted to the child, in lieu of interpretations based
upon adult-style free associations. Klein called her approach "Play
Analysis." Unlike adult psychoanalyses, Play Analysis was characterized
by a very early launching into deep interpretations of the child's
behavior. By this means, it was hoped to reduce the child's more acute
anxiety, and thus to give him an inkling into the value of the analysis
for him. This was to supply a personal motive for continuing the
therapy, in place of an entire reliance upon parental compulsion.
Despite some differences, Play Analysis was essentially true to
psychoanalytic tradition, as is seen, for example, in the way symbols
were interpreted. The fact that it was in the tradition is also evident
in its stated aims to uncover the past and to strengthen the ego so that
it might be better able to cope with the demands of the superego and id.

The application of Rank's theories (155) to play therapy by Taft (209)
led to certain significant changes in the aims and methods of
psychotherapeutic work with children. These were further elaborated and
exemplified by Allen (5). An essential feature of Rankian or
relationship therapy is its conception of a certain kind of therapeutic
relationship as being curative in its own right. This is in contrast to
the view that it is necessary for the patient to retrace his
developmental steps and to relive earlier emotional
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_237}relationships in the analytic hours. Classical
analysis aimed thus to assist the patient in growing up again, in a
better way. That is, a permissive parent surrogate, the analyst, did not
inflict the previous traumata. Relationship therapy, on the other hand,
was concerned with emotional problems as they existed in the immediate
present, regardless of their history. In the Rankian view, the analytic
effort to recover the past was not particularly helpful, because the
neurotic patient was already too much bound to the past and too little
able to live in the here and now. Thus, the Rankian therapist did not
seek to help the patient to repeat a particular series of developmental
steps, but began where the patient was. In play therapy, this meant the
abandonment of interpretation in terms of the Oedipus complex, for
example. Emphasis on present feelings led to considerable reduction in
the time span of therapy. Taft and Allen stressed the need for helping
the child to define himself in relation to the therapist. The therapy
hour was conceived of as a concentrated growth experience. In it, the
child might gradually come to the realization of being a separate person
who was in himself a source of strivings, and who could, nevertheless,
exist in a relationship where the other person was to be permitted to
have qualities of his own. Of the various therapeutic orientations,
relationship therapy seems to be closest to the client-centered
approach.

If one considers the principles of client-centered therapy as outlined
in preceding chapters of this book, it is apparent that much is owed to
older therapies. From the Freudians have been retained the concepts of
the meaningfulness of apparently unmotivated behavior, of permissiveness
and catharsis, of repression, and of play as being the natural language
of the child. From the Rankians have come the relatively a-historical
approach, the lessening of the authoritative position of the therapist,
the emphasis on response to expressed feelings rather than to a
particular content, and the permitting of the child to use the hour as
he chooses. From these concepts, client-centered play therapy has gone
on to develop, in terms of its own experiences.

[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_238} A C[URRENT]{.sc} D[ESCRIPTION]{.sc}

What, then, constitutes client-centered play therapy as currently
understood? Like client-centered counseling, play therapy is based upon
the central hypothesis of the individual's capacity for growth and
self-direction. The work of the client-centered play therapist is an
attempt to test the validity of this hypothesis under varying
conditions. Thus, therapy has been offered to children presenting the
most widely disparate problems, symptoms, and personality patterns.
Children have been seen at their schools, in orphanages, youth clubs,
university clinics, and community guidance centers. Sometimes both
parent and child have received therapy and sometimes the child alone has
been seen. Under each of these circumstances, all degrees of success and
failure have occurred. It is as experimentation is carried into wider
areas that the client-centered hypothesis, like any other, may be
upheld, modified, or disproved. For instance, relatively little has been
done with delinquents, mental defectives, and children in psychiatric
wards. Until further experience has been obtained in these areas, the
extent of applicability of this kind of therapy remains unknown.

*The Increasing Belief in the Child*

The belief in the child's capacity for self-help is not an all-or-none
affair, an article of faith accepted *in toto* by client-centered
therapy from the very start, and retained unaltered ever since. Rather,
it has grown with experience in working with children who seemed to have
many strikes against them. For instance, a few short years ago, a
nondirective therapist was apt to feel somewhat pessimistic about
accepting a child for play therapy unless one or both parents also
received therapy. Since the child's difficulties were seen to spring at
least partially from the emotionalized attitudes of his parents, it
appeared necessary to help the parent to examine and perhaps modify some
of these. Thus, the therapist's attitude might have been paraphrased
somewhat as follows: "The child's behavior and symptoms do not come from
thin air. They are his way of solving his problems,
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_239}however inadequate they prove to be. If the
problems themselves remain unaltered, therapy might help temporarily,
but when it is over, the child may again be overwhelmed. It is too much
to ask of a young child that he cope by himself with these unyielding
and traumatizing parental relationships." Experiences with play therapy
in orphanages and schools led to serious questioning of this early
formulation. In these situations, as a matter of practical necessity,
only the child received therapy. With parents unavailable for or
unwilling to undertake personal therapy, treatment of the child alone
was the only alternative to abandoning him completely. Much of the
experimental work in schools and in children's homes was done by Axline
and by students working under her direction. Reports of these
applications, including verbatim case excerpts, are to be found in her
book (14).

How is it that children have been able to cope not only with their own
inner conflicts, but with the same environmental situation which was
originally traumatizing? An answer which seems plausible is that, once
the child has undergone some personal change, however slight, his
environmental situation is no longer the same. That is, his
"stimulus-value" to other persons has been altered. Once he is
differently perceived, he is differently reacted to, and this different
treatment may lead him to change further. Thus, the child may initiate a
cycle of change. This is by no means a new idea, nor one which is unique
to client-centered therapy, but it is one which has strongly affected
our approach to play therapy. It is still possible to conceive, however,
of a case, albeit rare, in which an attitude of deep rejection may be so
central in a parent as to remain unaffected by a child's behavior
changes. This being the case, perhaps therapy can help a child
emotionally to accept this painful fact, and hence to seek satisfactions
elsewhere. Whatever the explanation may be, the fact remains that many
children have benefited from play therapy without concurrent parent
therapy. It is through accrued experiences of this kind that
client-centered therapists have come to trust more and more in the child
himself.

[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_240}*The Therapist's Role*

Belief in the child as the chief agent in his own therapy, however
justified in experience, cannot in itself produce therapy. It is
necessary for the therapist to communicate this attitude of respect, so
that the child senses that here is a situation in which he can be his
real self. The therapist does this partly by what is said to the child,
although this is probably a minor aspect. Thus, in the following excerpt
from a contact with a nine-year-old boy, a few words communicate a good
deal of the therapist's attitude to the child. The excerpt is from the
last half of the contact.

:::: topbot
::: sl
*Jack:* I think I'll paint something. What should I paint?

*Therapist:* You want me to tell you what to paint? (*The therapist
fails to respond to the first half of Jack's statement*, *and thus
inadvertently focuses attention on the second half.*)

*Jack:* Yes. What do you want me to paint? You tell me.

*Therapist:* Jack, I know you want me to decide for you, but I really
can't, because I don't want you to paint any particular thing.

*Jack:* Why not, don't you care about what I do?

*Therapist:* Yes, Jack, I care, but I think that what you feel like
painting is really up to you. (*Pause.*) Sometimes it's hard to decide.

*Jack:* An airplane.

*Therapist:* You'll paint an airplane?

*Jack:* (*Nods*, *and paints in silence for several minutes. Then*,
*suddenly*, *he looks up.*) How many do you have?

*Therapist:* How many? (*Therapist is quite in the dark.*)

*Jack:* Yes, how many of us?

*Therapist:* Oh, about twenty.

*Jack:* My God! How do you stand twenty? (*Said in a tone of great
shock.*)

*Therapist:* (*Laughs*, *before recovering.*) Think that's an awful lot?

*Jack:* And how! (*He returns to his painting.*)
:::
::::

In this excerpt, the therapist has tried to let Jack know that both his
need to be dependent and his right to use the hour in his own way are
respected.

There are more subtle and perhaps more important behaviors by means of
which the therapist's attitude of respect can be conveyed to the child.
The therapist is ready for the child when he
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_241}arrives. Regardless of the mess made in previous
contacts, the room is in order at the beginning of each new hour. If
delayed, the therapist apologizes, just as he would with an adult.
Appointments are faithfully kept. If it is necessary to break one, the
child is told in advance. If the therapist is unable to let the child
know ahead of time, the child receives an apology as soon as possible,
in the form of a personal letter of explanation if he can read. The
receipt of such a letter can be a very meaningful experience, for
children are not used to such consideration. It is not unusual for a
child in therapy to bring such a letter with him to the next therapy
contact, and to read it aloud to the therapist with much relish. In a
school situation, the child is allowed to decide whether he will be
called for, be reminded by his teacher, or receive a note from the
therapist notifying him of his appointment. The child's confidences are
kept, in exactly the same way as are those of the adult client. In these
and other ways, the child is told that he is a person deemed worthy of
respectful treatment. It is perhaps unnecessary to add that the
therapist's attitude must be genuine.

The therapist goes further. He attempts to provide a relationship of
warmth and understanding, in which the child may feel safe enough to
relax his defenses long enough to see how it feels to operate without
them. The safety of the therapy hour seems to lie in the absence of
pressure. The therapist accepts the child exactly as he is at the
moment, and does not try to mold him into some socially-approved form.
The therapist makes no attempt to respond to the child of the last
contact, but confines himself to feelings currently expressed. By this
means, it is hoped to heighten the child's awareness of what he is at
the moment. The thrill that sometimes comes with this is vividly
illustrated in an excerpt from a case reported by Axline.

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
Three boys, aged eight, were experiencing group-therapy sessions. During
the eighth interview, Herby suddenly asked the therapist, "Do you *have*
to do this? Or do you *like* to do this?" Then he added, "I wouldn't
*know* how to do this." Ronny asked, "What do you mean? You play. That's
all. You just play." And Owen agreed with Ronny. "Why, sure you do," he
said. But Herby continued []{#016_c6.html_lpn_242}the discussion. "I
mean I wouldn't know how to do what she does. She doesn't seem to do
anything. Only all of a sudden, I'm free. Inside me, I'm free." (He
flings his arms around.) "I'm Herb and Frankenstein and Tojo and a
devil." (He laughs and pounds his chest.) "I'm a great giant and a hero.
I'm wonderful and I'm terrible. I'm a dope and I'm so smart. I'm two,
four, six, eight, ten people, and I fight and I kill!" The therapist
said to Herby, "You're all kinds of people rolled up in one." Ronny
added, "And you stink, too." Herby glared at Ronny, and replied, "I
stink and you stink. Why, I'll mess you up." The therapist continued to
speak to Herby --- "You're all kinds of people in here. You're wonderful
and you're terrible and you're dopey and you're smart." Herby
interrupted exultantly, "I'm good and I'm bad and still I'm Herby. I
tell you I'm wonderful. I can be anything I want to be!" Apparently
Herby felt that during the therapy hour he could express fully all of
the attitudes and feelings that were an expression of his personality.
He felt the acceptance and permissiveness to be himself. He seemed to
recognize the power of self-direction within himself. (14, pp. 19--20)
:::
::::
:::::

Here, it seems as though the therapist's responsiveness to the child's
currently expressed feelings brought about a sense of strength and
personhood which was new and exhilarating.

*The Child's Hour*

Unlike other occasions in the child's life, the therapy hour belongs to
him alone. The therapist is there to provide warmth, understanding, and
company, but not leadership. The therapist is willing to accept the pace
selected by the child. He does not try to hasten or delay any particular
aspect of the therapy process. Client-centered therapy postulates that
in a nonthreatening relationship, the rate at which the child brings
forth significant material is determined by his psychological readiness
to do so. Like good teaching, therapy must respect this factor of
readiness. It is in order to avoid becoming a threat, and hence impeding
the unfolding process, that the therapist's responses are limited to
what the child is willing to communicate. For example, in a given case
the therapist may know that there is bitter sibling hostility. If such a
child puts a baby doll into a toy toilet, and announces
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_243}with glee that "a guy" is now going to flush the
toilet, the therapist's response does not go further than, "He is
getting rid of the baby?" The assumption here is that if the child were
ready to identify the "guy," he would do so, and that therapy is not
facilitated when the therapist takes over this responsibility for him.
So, too, if the child deals with symbols, the therapist also accepts
this level of communication, even when the meaning of the symbol is
quite obvious. Here is an example from a contact with a
thirteen-year-old boy who had been in therapy for over a year. The
excerpt is from the first session following an operation for hernia,
which had been anticipated with dread.

:::: topbot
::: sl
*Henry:* (*Plays rather aimlessly with small bits of clay for ten
minutes in silence. Then he takes a larger lump and rolls it out into a
cylinder. As he does so*, *he begins to speak.*) It's a frankfurter.

*Therapist:* A frankfurter?

*Henry:* Yes. (*He continues to roll it until it has the proper
dimensions. Then he takes one of the modeling sticks and cuts a long
vertical gash.*) It's getting operated on. (*He cuts several parallel
gashes*).

*Therapist:* The frankfurter's getting cut up?

*Henry:* Uh-huh. (*He makes a series of cuts at right angles to the
lengthwise cuts*). Stitches.

*Therapist:* It's getting sewed up now?

*Henry:* Yes. Soon they're gonna take out the stitches. And after that,
it'll be all right."

*Therapist:* Things will turn out O.K.?

*Henry:* (*Nods affirmatively. From here on*, *the topic of conversation
changes to his family*).
:::
::::

It was obvious that Henry was speaking of his own experiences. His
previous therapy contacts had been characterized by remarkable
frankness, and rapport was excellent. Hence it does not appear likely
that his failure to identify the "frankfurter" or its owner was a
purposeless avoidance reaction. Perhaps the use of the "frankfurter"
served as an anxiety-reducer, for it was possible physically to
manipulate, cut, and "sew" it, and hence to objectify his feelings. It
may be that this is also why children often appear relieved after making
a gruesome painting. Perhaps it is this neutralization of fears through
their concrete physical []{#016_c6.html_lpn_244}representation that is a
basic aspect of play therapy. It may help to understand the apparent
successes when there is little evidence of insight or verbalized
attitude change.

*The Silent Case*

Perhaps the child will sit in silence. If the therapist is truly
convinced that the hour belongs to the child, he will not feel the
necessity of urging the child to play or to talk. As a matter of fact,
one of the most perplexing problems is that of the "silent case." The
child comes and sits down and continues to do just that. The therapist
remarks that he may play with any of the toys if he wishes, or he may
talk about anything at all, or he may just sit through the hour. The
total silence may continue for one hour or for twenty hours. There is no
apparent catharsis, no reflection of feelings, there are no verbalized
insights, no self-searchings --- in short, none of the phenomena
generally believed characteristic of a psychotherapeutic process. Not
infrequently, however, these cases must be adjudged successful, on the
basis of reports of altered behavior from adults who deal with the
child. A fourteen-year-old boy is referred because he waylays and robs
smaller children, hits strange adults without apparent provocation,
uproots fences, does unsatisfactory schoolwork, and executes cats by
hanging. He flatly refuses to discuss anything with the therapist, and
spends most of his fifteen weekly sessions reading comic books,
methodically searching the closets and desk, raising and lowering the
window shades, and looking out the windows, in silence. In the midst of
these seemingly unprofitable contacts, his teacher reports that he has
performed an act of unsolicited generosity, the first ever noted in his
eight years at the school. His teacher tells the therapist that he has
used his printing press to print programs for a class skating party, and
has distributed these to his classmates, although no one has suggested
it to him. As she puts it, "This is his first social act." For the first
time, an interest in his schoolwork is noted. His teacher says, "Why
he's actually one of us now. We never even notice him now."

Another twelve-year-old is referred for attempted rape, and for
schoolwork so poor that he has been taken out of his classroom
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_245}in order to be tutored individually by the
adjustment teacher. During the therapy sessions, he does his spelling
homework, or describes the latest movie he has seen. Once, he brings a
deck of cards, and he and the therapist play "war." This is the overt
extent of their relationship. When the semester is over, he is returned
to his grade, where he is reported "doing very well." Months later, he
is walking along the street with a friend, when he accidentally meets
the therapist. He introduces them, and says to the friend, "You oughta
go see her on accounta you can't learn to read. She helps kids who are
in trouble."

Again, a thirteen-year-old boy is referred for his explosive outbursts
of aggression, and for his long-standing "torturing" (unspecified) of a
girl in his class. He inquires about the therapist's first name, which
just happens to be the same as that of the tortured girl classmate. From
then on, he calls the therapist by this name alone. When he is at the
height of his sociability, he plays tic-tac-toe with the therapist. By
dint of always going first, he wins nearly every game, and scornfully
keeps a record of his victories. Most of the time, however, is spent
seated at the window, his back to the therapist, counting the numbers of
the various brands of automobiles which pass. When the hour ends, he
throws his tally-sheet on the therapist's table and stalks out. After
ten such sessions, the therapist tells him that she saves the hour for
him, but that he need not come any more if he does not wish to. His
reply is, "Whaddya mean, not come any more? I'll come till the cows come
home!" Then, he misses two weeks in a row, and upon his return,
announces, "I didn't feel like coming, so I didn't." At the end of the
semester, he too is "doing very well." His teacher has become fond of
him because he is so helpful and cooperative. He has stayed after school
to help with the school newspaper. His teacher adds, "He's improved so
much. Why, I don't know what I'd do without him!"

Cases like these three are far from rare, although they seem to be more
common in children over eleven years of age. The therapist has not been
able to grasp the internal frame of reference of the child, because it
was not in evidence. What was therapeutic about the experience? It seems
to be stretching the concept []{#016_c6.html_lpn_246}of chance too much
to say that in each case the period of therapy "chanced" to coincide
with a period of spontaneous improvement. These cases have occurred too
frequently for this explanation to suffice. Perhaps the following
hypothesis might be offered. If the child will not admit another person
into his private world, perhaps it can be therapeutic if the therapist
only accepts this, and does not try to intrude. Perhaps it is enough to
experience that the therapist is willing to respect his privacy, in a
genuine sense. For a child, this may be sufficiently different from his
usual dealings with adults as to constitute an outstanding experience.
"Here is somebody who lets me ignore him and he still thinks I'm O.K. He
doesn't get mad."

Most of the time, there is no way of knowing just how the child is
reacting to the therapist's acceptance of his silence, but an occasional
case is revealing. Here is an example from a play contact with a
nine-year-old boy who has spent the entire hour painting in silence.
Near the end, he asks the therapist about the time.

:::: sl
::: topbot
*Dick:* How much time do I have left?

*Therapist:* Seven minutes, Dick.

*Dick:* I might as well go rock awhile. (*He goes and sits in the
rocking-chair. He closes his eyes and quietly rocks.*) How much time do
I have left now?

*Therapist:* Five more minutes, Dick.

*Dick* (*sighs very deeply*): Ah, five more minutes *all to myself.*

*Therapist* (*very softly*): Five more minutes *all your own*, Dick?

*Dick:* Yes! (*Said with much feeling. He rocks silently for the rest of
the hour. His eyes are shut*, *in apparent enjoyment of peace.*)

*Therapist:* It feels good just to sit and rock?

*Dick:* (*Nods.*)

*Therapist:* That's all the time we have for today, Dick.

*Dick:* O.K. (*He gets up immediately and goes to the door with the
therapist. They say good-bye*, *and he goes out. A minute later*, *he
knocks at the door.*) I thought I'd get you some clean water.

*Therapist:* You want to help me, Dick?

*Dick:* Yes, I do. (*He gets the water. The therapist thanks him and he
leaves*, *skipping down the hall. This is the first time that he has
ever made any effort to clean up after his painting.*)
:::
::::

[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_247}In this excerpt, Dick has overtly stated that in
therapy he has some time which can be truly called his own. It seems as
if the therapist's willingness to let Dick be silent was experienced by
him as an opportunity for psychological privacy, yet without loneliness.
Whether this is true in other silent contacts remains unknown.
Experiences of this kind prompt one to ask, "What is the essence of a
therapeutic relationship?" It is apparent, too, that one of the more
important personal qualities of a client-centered play therapist must be
an ability to tolerate silence without embarrassment. A therapist who
feels rejected when the child fails to pour out his troubles will only
add to the child's anxiety by his display of his own. If the therapist
cannot feel comfortable, it might be better for him to avoid offering
therapy to children over ten or eleven years of age.

*A Contrasting Case*

Although the therapy process need not involve a great deal of
verbalization on the child's part, an occasional case presents a
striking contrast to "the silent case." An example is that of
eleven-year-old Henry, already briefly cited above (page 243). Its
further presentation may indicate a child's capacity for sophisticated
insights.

Henry was referred for therapy because of his "nervousness." He had an
assortment of tics, including rapid and continuous blinking of the
eyelids, twitching of the lips, mouth and jaw grimaces,
shoulder-tossing, feet-kicking, and gasping for breath. He suffered from
constipation, wept easily, stuttered, was a social isolate, and was
failing in his schoolwork. In short, there seemed to be no area of his
life which afforded him satisfaction. During his first therapy hour, he
told of often running all the way home from school in order to escape
the men waiting in alleys to kill him. He reported his life at home to
be an endless round of quarrels, reprimands, hypodermic injections of
sedatives, suppositories, and nightmares. His father, a physician,
threatened him with shock therapy if his "shaking" did not cease. It
seems that a psychiatrist had told Henry's parents that he shook in
order to gain attention, and they were determined to end his
"nastiness." []{#016_c6.html_lpn_248}In the face of his many problems,
Henry felt quite overwhelmed. His own words provide a vivid account of
his psychological state during this first therapy hour. The excerpt is
from the last half of the hour, and is reproduced from his therapist's
notes.

::::: sl
<div>

::: topbot
*Henry:* One time, my mother said she'd take me to Baltimore. So I got
up early, 7 o'clock, and I went into the living-room. It was empty. I
should have gotten up at 6 o'clock. She took Michael \[older brother\]
instead.

*Therapist:* They left you when you'd hoped to go?

*Henry:* (*Nods. He weeps again.*) Up until I was 6 years old, I had a
nurse, Miss Palmer. She protected me from everybody, but now, now she's
gone, and --- (*interrupts his story with tears*)

*Therapist:* You're all alone without anybody to protect you now?

*Henry:* Yes. They say Miss Palmer spoiled me, but I don't think so.

*Therapist:* You miss her?

*Henry:* Yes, I do. I have a cousin, Jean. Well, I happened to fall in
love with her. Michael says, "Jean doesn't care for you a bit." He says
Jean likes him better.

*Therapist:* He doesn't want you to be happy?

*Henry:* No. He doesn't. He does everything he can to make me miserable.
My father always says Michael is right. If I try to stand up for my
rights, my father gives me a hypo.

*Therapist:* Things seem to be going pretty badly at home.

*Henry:* Yes, oh yes! (*He weeps again. He goes on to relate other
incidents. Then*, *he becomes very insistent upon knowing how therapy
can help. Earlier in the hour*, *the therapist had said that she was
there to talk things over with him.*)

*Henry:* What good will it do to tell you about it; I don't understand.

*Therapist:* You mean, talking won't help?

*Henry:* Yes. What good will it do?

*Therapist:* Sometimes people feel better about things after talking
them over. (*The therapist falls into the trap of answering an emotional
question as if it were a mere request for information. It leads to
difficulties.*)

*Henry:* Yes, but what good does it do to feel better about things if
they still go on?

*Therapist:* Sometimes boys and girls can understand the way they really
feel about things, and it helps them to know what they really want to do
about their situations. (*The therapist is still trying to "sell" the
therapy session to the child.*)

[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_249}*Henry:* Yes, but after I tell you about it,
what if it's still going on?

*Therapist:* I know you feel pretty hopeless, Henry. I can't change your
parents. All I can do is to help you think through your own problems.
(*Pause.*) It's hard for you to see it now, I know, but sometimes it
helps.

*Henry:* Well. . . . (*Goes on to relate several more incidents.*) I
still don't understand. What good will it do to talk about it if they
still keep on the same way?

*Therapist:* You mean, what can you do if they don't change?

*Henry:* Yes.

*Therapist:* I don't really know. But I hope that's something we can
work out together, here, when you come to see me.

*Henry:* Suppose it lasts 10 or 15 years and they keep on?

*Therapist:* You just wonder how long you can bear it? (*This should
have been the response earlier in the session.*)

*Henry:* Yes, oh yes. (*He weeps several minutes.*)

*Therapist:* It all looks pretty black.

*Henry:* (*Nods.*) Sometimes I dream that my mother dies and that then
somebody will understand me. I don't understand why I should dream that.

*Therapist:* You just wonder, "Will anybody ever understand me?"

*Henry:* Uh-hm. Sometimes I think that something terrible will have to
happen before they realize their mistakes.

*Therapist:* As if only something awful would work?

*Henry:* Uh-hm. (*Pause.*) I often wonder whether it's true, what they
say on the radio.

*Therapist:* Yes?

*Henry:* Dr. Preston Bradley says God counts every tear.

*Therapist:* And you wonder whether God is counting your tears?

*Henry:* Yes, oh yes! (*With a great sigh*, *he lowers his head to his
folded arms*, *and weeps.*)
:::

</div>
:::::

This first contact has been presented in some detail in order to
indicate Henry's feeling of hopelessness about altering his situation.
It is interesting to note that although he stated his inability to see
any use in it, he made eager use of the therapist's presence. Despite
his stuttering and gasping for breath, he spoke very rapidly, and was
astonished when the hour was up. He did not even see the paints and
other materials until the third therapy hour. Then he painted a boy in
jail, behind heavy black bars --- []{#016_c6.html_lpn_250}a perfect
projection of his feelings. Like many adult clients, Henry began therapy
with a view of his problems as existing outside himself, in the actions
of other people. Hence, he avidly desired the punishment of his
"villains." The tenth therapy hour brought some interesting changes, as
may be seen in this excerpt.

:::: topbot
::: sl
*Henry:* Michael and 1 had a fight. I wanted the window shut, I felt
cold. He yelled, "Who shut the window?" I said, "I did!" So he said I
was a brat, and he opened it. So then I shut it again. He got up out of
bed and opened it and then he hit me. So I threw a shoe at him, and it
broke the lamp. He started to cry. He's such a baby, honestly! So then
my father came in and he hit me. He always takes Michael's side. I told
him, "Dad, Michael's your favorite." He says he has no favorites, and
that I'm just a little snot. He was lying, though.

*Therapist:* You feel he's pretty unfair to you, is that it?

*Henry:* And sometimes I get so mad!

*Therapist:* You really get sore at him.

*Henry:* I *hate* him!

*Therapist:* You *despise* him.

*Henry:* Yes. I'd love to pay him back, too.

*Therapist:* You'd like some revenge?

*Henry:* Yes. If only he weren't here.

*Therapist:* You'd like to be rid of him?

*Henry:* I'd like to kill him.

*Therapist:* You want him dead?

*Henry:* Uh-hm. That would be the end of my problems.

*Therapist:* With him dead, things would be O.K. with you?

*Henry:* That's right. (*Pause.*) But would that end my problems?
Supposing he were dead. I'd still be the same, I mean my shaking and
all. Now if he'd have got killed earlier, that might have done me some
good, but now it's too late for that. I am what I am already, and that's
my problem. He's just a fool.

*Therapist:* So that, all in all, you've decided to let him live?

*Henry:* Yes. It wouldn't do any good to kill him, I'd still have my
same problems, and I'd still have to figure them out. He's supposed to
be a grown man, but honestly, he acts just like a baby.

*Therapist:* Sometimes you think he's rather silly?

*Henry:* Yes. I wonder what could have happened to him when he was a
child. You know, he's not at all understanding. Could it be because his
father didn't understand him when he was a child?

[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_251}*Therapist:* You are wondering just what really
makes him tick?

*Henry:* Yes, I really am. I really am. (*Very thoughtfully.*)
:::
::::

This interview marked the beginning of his attempts to understand the
motivations behind behavior, and was therefore a turning-point in his
therapy. Later sessions contained complex insights usually found only in
adult cases. For example, near the end of Henry's second year of
therapy, the following took place.

:::: topbot
::: sl
*Henry:* (*As had become his custom*, *he spent the first twenty minutes
working with the clay. Then*, *he glanced at the therapist's watch*,
*put aside the clay*, *and began to speak.*) Friday night, Gerald and
Ann \[his eldest brother and his wife\] went downtown. Michael went with
them. I would have liked to go too, but they didn't invite me.

*Therapist:* You were left behind, hm?

*Henry:* Yes. I put it out of my mind but I couldn't get rid of it. So,
I decided to think about it. I asked myself, "Why did I want to go with
them? Was it because Michael was going? Did I want Ann just because he
had her?" I told you she said I was a brat, so you know that, don't you?

*Therapist:* Yes.

*Henry:* So I was thinking. Did I want to own Ann? So what if I did?
Many a man owns his wife. Ownership doesn't have to mean you want to
destroy a thing. Well, anyway, I asked myself, "Why did I want to be
with someone who didn't want me?" It wasn't just that I wanted to be a
part of the group, although I do like to be in the group. I think I told
you that about my feeling bad about not being invited to parties, didn't
I?

*Therapist:* Yes.

*Henry:* That's what I thought. Well, I decided it wasn't just that. So,
I tried to think back about how I felt at the time. Do you know what I
was craving?

*Therapist:* No. Do you want to tell me?

*Henry:* Well, it's very hard to put into words, but it's sort of a
feeling of importance. I wanted to feel important, that's all. That's
what I've been craving all along.

*Therapist:* You have really found out something about yourself.

*Henry:* Yes. It was that feeling of importance. You know, when I first
started coming to you I had so many worries. Now I have just one
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_252}big worry: how to keep myself from worrying. I
have a fear that the Devil will sort of seep into my mind. I don't
really believe in the Devil, but in a way I do. I'm just afraid he might
seep into my mind. It's sort of a vague feeling. I can't express it.

*Therapist:* It's uncomfortable to think of his taking control of you,
is that it?

*Henry:* Yes. How can I prevent it? That's something I haven't quite
figured out. Do you know how?

*Therapist:* No, but I guess it is pretty puzzling for you.

*Henry:* Yes, it is. I was afraid to tell you, but I feel better now.

(*The hour ended. One week later*, *Henry again brought up the matter of
the Devil.*)

*Henry:* Last week I was telling you about my worry over the Devil
seeping into my mind. I was afraid he might punish me for telling you.
So I decided to think about it. I tried to recapture my feeling about
the Devil. I asked myself, "Who is he?" And guess who he is. *Me! I* am
the Devil! *I* make myself worry. All this time, the Devil has been me.

*Therapist:* So that you are your *own* Devil?

*Henry:* Exactly. I am my own Devil. All this time, I've been fighting a
part of myself, using up so much of my energy to fight a part of myself,
and keeping myself so tired. Using energy I could have had for other
things. Say, what happened to the room?

*Therapist:* Is there something?

*Henry:* It suddenly got lighter, like if there was a fog or a mist and
an opening, and it got bigger, and the fog lifted and the mist
disappeared. You mean, you don't see it? (*Incredulously.*)

*Therapist:* No. But things look much brighter to you now?

*Henry:* Yes. It happened when I was telling it to you. It's amazing ---
hm. Well, that's something. I realize now that I can think through my
problems. That's something I've discovered. Now Michael, he thinks about
things too, but he just wants to convince himself.

*Therapist:* You mean, you think to get at the truth, but he tries to
fool himself?

*Henry:* Yes. And now I know I can think things out for myself. Michael
just tries to keep himself from worrying, so he says I'm jealous, but
I'm not.

*Therapist:* He thinks you're jealous, but you don't agree.

*Henry:* Yes. He's jealous of me because Miss Palmer liked me better.
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_253}He says she spoiled me. If that was so, they had
years in which to make up for it after she left, but they didn't. So
that angle doesn't convince me.

(*One week later*, *Henry brings up the same issue.*)

*Henry:* Last time, I was telling you about Michael figuring things out
just to keep himself from worrying, just to convince himself. So, when
he said I was jealous, why was *I* worried? It wasn't exactly worry, but
a sort of a vague feeling. What does "anxiety" mean?

*Therapist:* Sort of being afraid when you don't know exactly what of.

*Henry:* Well, then that's not what I mean. I felt sort of anxious,
though, when he said it. He kept himself from worrying by convincing
himself that he was right. But why should that worry me?

*Therapist:* Why should it affect you so?

*Henry:* Yes. I think it's because I *want* him to be worried. Hm. Yes.
I think I do want him to worry. God knows he caused me plenty of worry
in the past. Well, I never realized that.

*Therapist:* It's a new thing to see yourself as wanting him to worry,
hm?

*Henry:* Yes. But why? Of course, I did feel bad when Gerald said he'd
rather have Michael than me. Michael said I was jealous of their
closeness. Well, the reason they're so close is first of all because
they're closer in age. But the real reason is that Gerald needs to have
someone boss him around and Michael is only too glad to have someone to
direct, so they get on. But that's beside the point. Am I jealous? I
don't think so. If it was jealousy, there'd be some feeling of anger or
hate, but there isn't. It can't be envy either, because I don't want to
be in Michael's shoes. So what is it? I tried to think back to how I
felt at the time. That's a way I've discovered. It's so hard to explain.
Do you understand?

*Therapist:* It's really hard to put into words, isn't it? It's not
jealousy or envy, yet there is a kind of an uncomfortable feeling there,
is that it?

*Henry:* Uncomfortable in a way, but that's still not it exactly. Why
should it be so hard to put it into words? It's a sort of a sorrow, when
I think of Gerald saying he preferred Michael.

*Therapist:* A sadness?

*Henry:* Yes. A sort of sadness, a sorrow. I guess I felt sorry for
myself. I probably always have.

*Therapist:* Pitying yourself has been --- (*interrupted*)

*Henry:* An important part, yes. Sorrow for myself. That's it, not
jealousy, but sorrow. I see it now. Sorrow.
:::
::::

[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_254}Here, we have a case of astonishing
self-scrutiny resulting in sophisticated understandings, in a
thirteen-year-old boy, after two years of therapy. Was this process
actually play therapy, or was it an interview series? It seems to have
been both. There were many hours in which Henry said not a single word,
but played with the clay, water, and dolls. Other hours were pure
interviews. Apparently, Henry was able to do what was helpful for him,
for during his therapy many changes in him were obvious. All of his many
tics disappeared entirely. His stuttering ceased. He sought to
participate in group games. His schoolwork improved. His tested
intelligence rose forty I.Q. points. Most important, he became able to
consider himself and his problems calmly, and to feel able to work
things out for himself. Was the unusual length of his therapy a function
of the severity of his disturbance or might it have been shortened by
more skill on the part of his student-therapist? We can raise the
question, but the answer cannot now be determined.

*The Meaning of the Hour to the Child*

In an hour which belongs to him, the child finds an adult who is not
shocked by anything he does, who allows the expression of his every
feeling, and who treats his utterances with a respect which no other
adult offers to the same extent. The therapist's acceptance of the
child's right to feel as he does in no way implies approval of any
particular attitude. Reflection and clarification of feelings serve to
help the child to bring them out into the open, where they can be looked
at. If the child feels understood, he tends to bring out deeper
material. Since the therapist reflects feelings which are positive,
negative, or ambivalent, and regardless of their object or the number of
times they occur, no specific attitude or content is valued above the
rest. The child has no way of knowing the therapist's opinion. As
neither praise nor blame is forthcoming, the child's expressions are
determined by his needs, rather than by the therapist's persuasion. The
uniqueness of this kind of experience may be perceived to a greater
extent than the therapist sometimes realizes. Thus Fred, a
seven-year-old boy, brought a friend to his fifth therapy hour.
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_255}Fred's explanations to Jimmy sounded as though
he had himself received them from the therapist, although this was not
the case. Here is a part of the discussion between them.

:::: topbot
::: sl
*Jimmy:* What kind of paint should I use? (*The remark is addressed to
the therapist.*)

*Fred:* Why, use the one you want to use!

*Jimmy:* That isn't very polite, Fred.

*Fred:* You don't have to be polite in here.

*Jimmy:* I think that isn't very nice, not to be polite.

*Fred:* You don't understand. You can do what you want in here.

*Jimmy:* I can?

*Fred:* Sure!

*Jimmy:* This is very strange.

*Therapist:* Fred feels at home in here, but Jimmy is surprised when
nobody tells him what to do.

*Jimmy:* Yes. This is very strange, very strange. (*He begins to paint
with the water colors.*)

*Therapist:* It seems very different to you, Jimmy?

*Jimmy:* Yes. It's in the school, isn't it?

*Fred:* Yes, it's in the school, but this is a different kind of a room.
You'll find out, Jimmy.

*Jimmy:* I will? Hmm.

*Therapist:* Jimmy still thinks this is kind of peculiar.

*Jimmy:* Yes, I do. It's strange, and *you* are a strange woman.

*Therapist:* Everything seems so different, and me too?

*Jimmy:* Uh-huh.

*Fred:* Yes, she *is* a strange woman, Jimmy. (*They whisper together a
moment.*) Yes, you can tell her!

*Jimmy:* You're a nice teacher. (*Blushing.*)

*Fred:* She *is* a nice teacher.

*Therapist:* You both like me.

*Jimmy:* Where should I put this paint brush?

*Therapist:* Anywhere you like, it's up to you.

*Jimmy:* My God, this is strange!

*Therapist:* It's queer not to be told what to do?

*Jimmy:* It sure is.

*Fred:* You'll find that there are very few rules in here. You can even
throw those rubber knives around. Not where they might knock over the
paints, though. (*And then*, *thoughtfully*, *he adds:*) It makes sense.

*Therapist:* Some rules seem O.K.? (*There is no reply.*)
:::
::::

[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_256}It is evident from this excerpt that in his
previous contacts, Fred must have grasped many of the essential features
of the therapy hour. Its permissiveness, its difference from other
experiences, the existence of limits, were understood. Although they had
not been specifically verbalized to him, he had sensed them clearly
enough to be able to explain them to a newcomer. A child may sense that
"something is going on" in the therapy hour even when he gives no overt
indication to the therapist. A further example may be seen in the case
of Martha, an eleven-year-old referred for quarrelsomeness, crying
spells, and chronic thumbsucking. Her first four therapy contacts were
filled mainly with disparaging remarks about the therapy situation, the
play materials, the therapist's clothing, her mother, her teacher, the
school, and her classmates. It was the therapist's judgment that there
was no acceptance whatever of the therapeutic relationship. Yet when her
father asked her what play therapy was like, she replied, "Well, it's
kind of relaxing. It's like going to the toilet." Apparently the term
"catharsis" is no mere flight of fancy.

*Are There Risks?*

One of the questions frequently asked concerning the permissiveness in
client-centered play therapy is, "Isn't there danger of the child's
doing these socially taboo things outside of therapy, where he may run
into serious trouble? Perhaps all this freedom of expression is no
service to the child, and even less so to his parents." There are
several possible explanations of why dangerous "acting out" is unlikely
to be a problem in this kind of therapy. First of all, the therapist has
carefully refrained from praising any form of behavior or from "egging
on" the child to say or do any particular thing. Hence, the child is
more apt to feel responsible for his expressions; he cannot put this
responsibility upon the therapist. Second, the child is usually quite
aware that the therapy sessions are different from daily life. The case
of Fred, cited above, is an illustration of this. In the third place,
prohibitions experienced by the child in his life situation have not
removed his need for a particular behavior, however disruptive.
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_257}If the therapist were to become another agent of
society, the child would merely again be faced with his old problem. To
be accepted as a person despite one's glaring deficiencies seems to be
an important part of therapy. It is therefore necessary for the child to
bring his real feelings, no matter how anti-social, out into the open,
when he feels safe enough to do so. He cannot be sure that the therapist
really accepts him until he has tested him out by demonstrating rejected
aspects of his personality. A fourth reason why play therapy is unlikely
to promote socially unacceptable conduct outside the sessions is the
fact that the therapist's acceptance seems to reduce hostility rather
than to increase it. The therapist's careful following along with the
child as he works through his feelings appears to affect their deeper
determinants. And finally, the therapy hour is not unlimited in its
freedom. It is to a consideration of this aspect of play therapy that we
now turn.

*The Problem of Limits*

The therapist establishes no limits upon the child's verbal expression
of his feelings. Some feelings, however, are not permitted to be
directly expressed in action. Anger, for example, may not be released by
breaking windows or otherwise destroying the playroom. Certain activity
channels are available for it. The child may bang away on the floor, hit
the clay, shout, throw unbreakable toys, and so on. One of the things
that a child learns in therapy is that it is not necessary to deny one's
feelings, because there are acceptable outlets for them. In this sense,
therapy can be a socializing experience. The differences between limits
in the playroom and those outside it are twofold. First, the playroom
limits are far fewer. Second, there is acceptance of the child's need to
break them, and he is not rejected for having this need. If there is to
be any "transfer of training" from the therapy hour to the subsequent
life situations, there ought to be some resemblance between them. Limits
seem to serve this function.

Among the desires not permitted to be acted out directly are destructive
impulses toward the therapist. The child may say anything he wishes to
the therapist, and these feelings are []{#016_c6.html_lpn_258}accepted
and reflected like any others. He is, however, not allowed a physical
attack upon the therapist. The most obvious reason for this limitation
is that it saves wear and tear on fragile therapists. But there are
equally important reasons from the child's point of view. First of all,
let us consider that the therapist's acceptance of the child is an
instrument by means of which the child may come to self-acceptance. What
therapist can feel accepting of a child who is in the process of
flattening his cranium with a mallet? In the second place, hurting the
therapist may arouse the child's deep guilt and anxiety in relation to
the only person who can help him. Fear of retaliation, especially of
withdrawal of this unique kind of permission to be oneself, may destroy
the possibility of therapy. An article by Bixler (29) points out the
usefulness of making the limit against hitting the therapist a total
one. That is, it gives both child and therapist a greater security. If
the limit were, "You may hit me a little, but you can't really hurt me,"
it might irresistibly challenge the child to test out the prohibition
and see what constitutes "hurting." The therapist's calm acceptance of
the child is unlikely to be facilitated by the anticipation of mayhem.
On the other hand, the child is permitted to murder the therapist in
effigy. If the therapist accepts the child's feeling of anger, this act
of symbolic destruction can be a beneficial part of therapy, and need
not arouse deep guilt feelings. Here is an example in a contact with a
ten-year-old boy, referred for his poor schoolwork and attention-getting
rumpuses in class. The interview is reproduced from the therapist's
notes.

:::: sl
::: topbot
(*The door opened and Bob literally leaped into the room.*)

*Bob* (*making noise like machine-gun*): Rrrattatataaaa! I'm Mr.
District Attorney! (*Ferocious expression.*)

*Therapist:* You're a very tough character?

*Bob:* You bet I am! I'll mow you down!

*Therapist:* You're so tough you'll even shoot me down.

*Bob:* Yes! And you! And you! And you! And you! (*He shoots at various
unnamed parties with his imaginary gun.*)

*Therapist:* Everybody's getting shot.

*Bob:* I'll say they are! Rrrattattattaaa. All dead now!

[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_259}*Therapist:* You got them all?

*Bob:* Yeah. (*He gets some clay from the table*, *rolls it into a
ball*, *and tosses it into the air several times. As he does so*, *he
talks to the therapist.*) Did you know I was a swop?

*Therapist:* A swop, Bob? (*Uncomprehending.*)

*Bob:* Yeah, my father says I'm a swop. He's one too. He likes
spaghetti, he eats it every day. I like it too, oh boy!

*Therapist:* You both like spaghetti and you're both swops?

*Bob:* Yeah. I bet I can hit the ceiling.

*Therapist:* I bet you can too, and it'd be fun, but no clay on the
ceiling, Bob.

*Bob:* Why not?

*Therapist:* It's too hard to get it off.

*Bob:* (*He tosses the ball several times. When it gets within an inch
or two of the ceiling*, *he looks at the therapist.*)

*Therapist:* You want to see how I'm taking it?

*Bob:* I do! (*He tosses the clay ball again. It gets nearer and nearer
to the ceiling.*) Heh heh heh!

*Therapist:* Bob, I know you'd like to throw clay at the ceiling. That's
one of the things we can't do in here. You can throw it at the target or
at the floor if you want to.

*Bob:* (*He says nothing*, *but goes to the table and begins to pound
the clay ball flat.*)

*Therapist:* (*Comes and sits down opposite him*, *but says nothing.*)

*Bob:* Wait till you see what I'm making.

*Therapist:* You mean, it'll surprise me?

*Bob:* You'll see in a minute.

*Therapist:* I'll soon find out?

*Bob:* (*He makes a clay figure.*) It's a man.

*Therapist:* A man?

*Bob:* (*He puts a skirt on the figure*, *with great glee. He looks
mischievously at the therapist.*) Guess who it is now.

*Therapist:* I don't know, Bob. Do you want to tell me?

*Bob:* My dear teacher, how do you do? (*He hits the clay figure with
his fist.*)

*Therapist:* Teacher got socked.

*Bob:* Heh, heh. No, *you* did.

*Therapist:* Oh, *I* got that one.

*Bob:* (*He hits the clay figure another blow.*) There!

*Therapist:* I got another sock.

[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_260}*Bob:* I'll say you did! And here's another one
for you! (*Hits clay figure again.*)

*Therapist:* You hit me again.

*Bob:* And that's not all. Take that! And that! And that! (*He hits
harder and harder as he pounds the figure quite flat.*)

*Therapist:* You're giving me an awful beating.

*Bob:* You bet I am! Take that one too! I'll mash ya! (*Hits.*) I'll
smash ya! (*Hits several times.*)

*Therapist:* You are very mad at me and I am getting all pounded up.

*Bob:* Off goes your head!

*Therapist:* My head's off now.

*Bob:* There goes your arms!

*Therapist:* I have no arms now.

*Bob:* There goes your legs!

*Therapist:* No more legs left.

*Bob:* And there goes you! (*He throws the remnant of the clay figure
into the basin.*)

*Therapist:* I am all gone now?

*Bob:* You're dead. I killed you.

*Therapist:* I am killed.

*Bob:* You're all washed up.

*Therapist:* I am very, very dead?

*Bob:* You sure are. (*Suddenly*, *he smiles.*) I'll have you a game of
catch now.

*Therapist:* You want to play with me now? O.K. (*The rest of the hour
is spent in a quiet game of "catch" with a ball of clay.*)
:::
::::

This was the first session in which Bob had frankly aimed his aggression
against the therapist. The hostility is probably a reaction to being
thwarted in his desire to throw clay at the ceiling. Since Bob did not
state this connection, the therapist, too, left it unsaid. Apparently,
it was not necessary to state it, for following this contact, Bob's
attitude in the therapy hours was different. He showed a new interest in
compromising his desires with the therapist's own. For example, one of
his favorite pastimes continued to be playing catch with the therapist,
especially when they tried to keep three balls of clay in the air. His
boundless energy was apt to outlast that of the therapist. In previous
contacts, the therapist had occasionally said after a
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_261}while that she was too tired to continue the
game. Bob had displayed irritation, and had nagged during the rest of
the hour, "Gee whiz, aren't you rested up yet?" After this session,
however, he would ask at intervals during a game of catch, "Are you sure
you're not too tired to play? Am I throwing them too fast for you? If
you want to rest, it's all right with me." He also stopped cheating at
target practice, although no mention had ever been made of this. Thus it
seems that the symbolic murder of the therapist was helpful, partly
because of the victim's ability to accept her fate and her executioner.

Some restrictions exist in every therapy, the most obvious of these
being those of time and place. Limits have a positive value, for they
lend some structure to the therapeutic situation, and hence reduce its
anxiety-inducing potentiality. If consistently enforced, together with
an acceptance of the child's desire to break them, they help to increase
the predictability of the situation, and thus add to the security of
client and therapist. The child knows that the therapist will see him at
the regular time, in the familiar room. He is protected against the
guilt feelings which may follow acts of extreme destruction. However, it
is important that a limit not be made the core of the problem. For
example, a child is ordinarily not permitted to defecate in the
playroom. If this happens, he is told that there is a toilet for his
use, and that no one is allowed to defecate in the playroom. The
therapist would state that if he felt he *had* to break this rule, he
would have to leave the playroom for the rest of that day, although he
could return for the next contact. The child would thus be allowed to
make the decision as to whether he would choose to end his play contact
by his action. However, if the child's problem were a lack of bowel
control, the therapist would not invoke this limit. If the therapist
could not honestly accept such behavior, it would probably be better to
transfer the case. Otherwise, the therapist's open loathing or
ill-concealed guilt at his own rejection of the child might add to the
child's difficulties.

Some limits will depend upon the physical circumstances of the playroom.
If it is a schoolroom which is also used for classes,
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_262}there will probably be a rule against pouring
paint on the floor. If the therapy room is not used for other purposes,
there would be less need to protect the floor. However, if a child asks
the reason for a particular limit, it seems wisest to be honest if the
rule is a personal one. Thus, "You can't play with my eyeglasses because
I don't want to risk their being broken" is preferable to "The school
(or the clinic) says you can't play with my eyeglasses." The child will
usually spot an attempted deceit, and this will be of no help in
therapy.

*Some Questions Regarding Limits*

The current thinking about the problem of therapeutic limits illustrates
further the developing nature of the client-centered approach to play
therapy. There is now far more concern with the problem of determining
just what activity restrictions are required in order to permit the
therapist to remain emotionally accepting of the child. Indeed, some
therapists believe that this is the only reason for having limits. There
is, however, no unanimity of opinion on this issue. As those therapists
who feel more tolerant report the results of their experiments with
letting the child take home toys, paint the therapist's face, urinate in
the playroom, and the like, the best therapeutic course will become more
evident. Another change in our thinking on the matter of limits concerns
the question of whether to allow a child to bring another to his therapy
contact. In earlier days, it was felt that this was the child's way of
evading therapy and making it just another play situation. For this
reason, it was not usually permitted. Subsequent experiences with group
therapy have led to reconsideration of this problem. In group play
therapy, the child's adjustment difficulties are often brought out quite
strikingly, and very early in the process. Many children have been
helped by group therapy, although the relationship with the therapist is
apt to be less close than in individual therapy. Thus far, there are no
clear criteria for deciding whether to offer group or individual therapy
in a given case. One procedure which has been tried with some apparent
success is to accept a child for one weekly individual play contact, and
to allow him to join []{#016_c6.html_lpn_263}a group for a second
contact if he wishes. If therapy can be effected when it is not solely a
relationship between two people, as in group therapy, then perhaps
allowing a child to bring a friend to an individual therapy session need
not hinder the process. Indeed, such an arrangement may be considered
group therapy in which the child selects the rest of the group. It may
well be that the child, in asking to bring another person, is seeking to
evade therapy. However, if the therapist feels sufficiently sure in his
own skills to be accepting of this attitude, therapy is still possible.
The rationale here is that the child can be trusted to work through his
difficulties, including the need to bring another person to his therapy
hour. Surely, it cannot always be a mere accident that a child brings
one person rather than another to his play contact. Sometimes a child
may bring in, one by one, those people who represent his areas of
difficulty, and then dismiss each one as his need disappears. Not all
client-centered therapists would be willing to permit this, but some are
experimenting with allowing the child more control over the therapy
situation.

*Special Issues in Play Therapy*

Although client-centered therapy is basically similar for both children
and adults, the play therapist faces some problems more likely to occur
in work with children. Some of these need to be specifically discussed,
in a consideration of the methods of play therapy.

Unlike the adult, the child rarely refers himself for therapy. Some
preliminary work with self-referrals by children has been conducted in a
school, by Axline, but no specific report has been published.
Ordinarily, the child is in the playroom because he has displeased or
worried some adult. Thus, he seldom comes with the conscious desire for
self-exploration which characterizes many adult clients who seek help.
In many cases, the child accepts the play situation and benefits from it
without any indication from the therapist that he is in difficulty. In
these instances, there is no problem of initial structuring; therapy
proceeds without it. At other times, the child arrives and demands to
know, "Why am I here?" Ordinarily, the client-centered
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_264}therapist has little or no diagnostic
information in advance of the first therapy hour. However, he does know
that some adult was sufficiently concerned to arrange for play therapy.
Thus it seems dishonest as well as pointless to profess total ignorance
when the child asks. A frank explanation seems to be in order, as a
gesture of respect for the child's feelings, when he asks for it. It
need not be a great threat if properly handled. Thus, "Your mother
brought you to me because of your temper tantrums" would be a most
inappropriate response. It would be apt to lead the child to think that
the therapist was the mother's agent, who would try to make him over in
accordance with the maternal desires. Resistance would be a likely
consequence of the child's determination to protect his power field from
the therapist's encroachments. On the other hand, a more satisfactory
explanation might be, "Your mother was concerned because things didn't
seem to be going so well at home. She thought it might help if you had
someone outside the family to whom you could come and talk things over."
It is often necessary to add that the referring adult will never know
the contents of the therapy hour. Beyond this, the therapist says
nothing, but waits for the child's next move.

When an adult wishes to discontinue psychotherapy, he can usually just
stop coming. The child seldom has this option. Who shall be responsible
for the continuance or discontinuance of the child in psychotherapy? A
strictly client-centered reply would hold that it should be up to the
child to decide whether he will come. Very often, however, the reality
situation is such that he does not have this choice. A parent or a
school or some other institutional authority insists that the child
remain in therapy until his behavior is more satisfactory to them, or
for some prescribed length of time. Thus, to ask the child whether he
cares to come back would be a mockery, unless the referring agent is
actually willing for the child to discontinue therapy. Within this
framework of compulsion, a nondirective approach is still possible. When
the child asks, the therapist can state that he himself cannot require
the child to come, and that such authority does not belong to him. In a
school situation, the therapist who []{#016_c6.html_lpn_265}is an
outsider and comes only for play therapy contacts is apt to have an
easier time of it than a regular staff member, for he can truthfully
assure the child that playroom events will not be a part of school
records, nor reported to parents or teachers. Suspicion of betrayal is
less apt to fall upon the head of one who is not seen hobnobbing with
teachers. Although the child may be compelled to come to the therapy
hour, he is not obliged to spend it in any particular way. Once the
playroom door closes behind him, he is boss, subject to the broad limits
outlined above. If he declines to participate in any way, he is
permitted this refusal. Like his action, his silence is a secret between
him and the therapist. The question arises of how long an apparently
deadlocked case should be permitted to continue. The therapist's time
may be required for cases on a waiting list. One approach which has
seemed feasible is for the child to be told that he must come a certain
number of times, and that afterwards, he may discontinue if he wishes.
On the basis of limited experience in a school situation, it appears
that at least half the children given such an option will decide to
continue therapy. No doubt the therapist's skill is a very important
variable here. It is, of course, necessary that the therapist have the
consent of the institution concerned before he makes such an arrangement
with the child.

When an adult arrives at the psychologist's office, he finds a physical
arrangement which is suitable for him whether he is twenty or sixty
years old. The playroom does not have this characteristic. A young
adolescent may be quite humiliated at finding himself compelled to
occupy a room where everything seems to be in miniature. Perhaps it
would be better to allow those of approximately eleven years and over to
choose between the playroom and an office, after inspection of each. In
the absence of this possibility, the following kind of arrangement has
been tried with reasonable success. The play materials are at one end of
a large adult-size table. At the other end, two adult-size chairs face
each other across it. In this way, the child has the choice of an
across-the-table relationship if he wishes it. Some children will
utilize this set-up as an almost straight
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_266}interview situation; others of the same age will
choose to play. Whatever the decision, it has the advantage of being the
child's own.

R[ESEARCH IN]{.sc} P[LAY]{.sc} T[HERAPY]{.sc}

Thus far, the principles and methods of play therapy from a
client-centered point of view have been roughly outlined. The reader in
search of a more detailed and profusely illustrated report is referred
to the book by Axline (14). It now seems appropriate to turn to a
consideration of the existing research studies, in order to evaluate
their accomplishments and to clarify what needs to be done.

Thus far, relatively little research has been done in this area, largely
because of the difficulty of collecting the required raw data.
Phonographic recordings alone cannot give an adequate picture of the
process of play therapy, for the sounds are often meaningless by
themselves. It is necessary to have detailed descriptions of the
activities in the course of which the recorded sounds were made. The
therapist's own notes can never be complete, because some children
require the therapist's active participation in play. For example, it is
impossible to write notes while finger-painting. The cost of employing
an observer to write behavior descriptions, and later to integrate them
with the sound recording, is prohibitive. There are also other
difficulties involved. If a desk microphone is used, severe pounding on
the table on which it stands may break it. The use of a hanging
microphone entails prohibiting any throwing of objects in its vicinity.
If the recording machine is itself in the playroom, it has to be
protected from the child's tender ministrations. Thus there may be
danger of making the therapist into a policeman. However, where the
child is not too aggressively active, recording can actually aid the
therapy process. If the child is permitted to play back some of his
recorded material, embarrassment is the usual first reaction. After this
phase, surprising insights may occur. These are usually of the variety,
"I didn't realize I was being so bossy," or "So that's how I've been
acting!" A study of this particular problem has never been conducted,
and might well be worth the attempt.

[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_267}*Attempts to Analyze Play Therapy Protocols*

The process of play therapy, as distinct from its outcomes, has thus far
been subjected to only two research studies. Landisberg and Snyder (108)
studied the protocols of four children between the ages of five and six
years. The work of three therapists was involved. Three of the cases
were judged successful on the basis of reports of behavior outside the
therapy hours; one was a failure. Presumably, these cases were not
phonographically recorded. The aim of the study was the analysis of
client and therapist responses in order to determine their trends
throughout the course of therapy. The method of analysis used was that
developed by Snyder for adult cases, and already referred to in Chapter
4, above. Briefly, the procedure was to divide the protocols into idea
units which were then categorized. Therapist statements were classified
as to content. Client statements were classified as to content and
feeling. Re-categorization of three interviews after a three-month
interval resulted in duplication of the original classifications from 72
to 85 per cent of the times. Inter-scorer reliability ranged from 45 per
cent to 76 per cent. This is considerably lower than that reported by
Seeman (180), whose work has already been outlined in Chapter 4. The
discrepancy may be a function of the use of a relatively untrained judge
by Landisberg and Snyder.

It was found that 75 per cent of therapist responses fell into the
nondirective category (simple acceptance, recognition of feeling,
re-statement of content). This is in fair agreement with the 85 per cent
and 63 per cent reported by Seeman and by Snyder, respectively, for
adult cases. Interpretations comprised 5 per cent of all therapist
responses. This may be compared with the 8 per cent reported by Snyder
and the 1 per cent by Seeman. Whether an analysis of more recent play
therapy cases would show closer agreement with Seeman's results is
problematical. It is quite possible that in a study based upon only four
cases, observed discrepancies reflect sampling errors.

With respect to the client categories, the most marked trend was an
increased physical activity during the last three fifths of the therapy
process. Also, during the latter period, about 70 per
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_268}cent of client responses were expressions of
feeling (verbally or in action). This percentage is significantly
greater than the approximately 50 per cent observed in the first two
quintiles. A Chi Square analysis indicated that the increased feeling
was significantly related to the actions, rather than to the verbal
responses. This is in agreement with common formulations of the
rationale of play therapy. Unlike results reported for adult cases,
Landisberg and Snyder found that it was the negative feelings which
increased during play therapy. Positive feelings remained about 30 per
cent of client responses throughout therapy. This is contrary to
Seeman's data for adults. Although negative feelings comprised about 15
per cent of the child's responses during the first quintile, in the
final fifth of therapy negative and positive feelings were of the same
frequency. The latter finding is in agreement with that part of Seeman's
report in which no distinction was drawn between tenses of expressed
attitudes. Furthermore, in contrast to results with adult cases,
children's expressions of feelings tended to be more and more directed
toward other persons as therapy progressed. Here again, one cannot know
whether this is a true difference between the psychotherapy of adults
and children. Because the small sample was also homogeneous with regard
to age, it is not even possible to state that the observed trends are
likely to be true of the process of play therapy at other age levels.
Further investigation is therefore indicated. It might be more fruitful
if future research in play therapy did not depend too heavily upon
categories derived from the study of adult cases. Categories are ways of
summarizing information. In order to be true to their basic data, they
ought probably to spring from it. Otherwise, their forced character may
mask significant findings.

A study by Finke (59) attempted to overcome the disadvantages of
adult-derived categories. Nineteen categories of feelings expressed by
children in therapy were employed. These came from an examination of
play therapy protocols. Inter-scorer reliabilities for categorizations
ranged from 66 per cent to 77 per cent agreement with the original
judge.

The aim of the study was to determine whether any trends existed in the
differential frequencies among feeling categories
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_269}during the course of therapy. For this purpose,
the therapists' notes on six cases of children between the ages of five
and eleven years were analyzed. Four were boys and two were girls. The
number of contacts per case ranged from eight to fourteen. Six different
therapists were involved. The group included children seen at school and
at a children's home. These variations were introduced in order to
ensure that results could not be attributed to the effects of any one
therapist, playroom, or type of problem. Rather, the one factor common
to all the cases was nondirective play therapy.

Only five categories showed significant trends. A trend was defined as a
deviation from theoretical frequencies in a consistent direction for at
least one-third of the total number of contacts. The category, Story
Units (stories made up by the child) showed a peak in the fifth contact
and then declined. The category, Attempting to Establish a Relationship
with the Counselor, showed a peak in the third contact. Then it remained
low until the eighth session, when it rose steadily until the end of
therapy. Testing Limits maintained a constant level until the ninth
contact, when it began a steady decline. Aggressive Statements reached a
peak in the fourth contact, a slump in the fifth, and a second, though
lower, peak in contact seven. After this, it declined steadily. Total
Number of Statements reached a constant level after the third contact.
It should be pointed out that these results were obtained by averaging
data from all six cases. Inspection of the individual case graphs showed
considerable variation, which may cast doubt upon the averaged results
in some instances.

Among the categories which showed no trends during therapy were:
Positive Statements About the Self; Negative Statements About the Self;
Positive Statements About the Family, Home, Situation, etc.; and
Negative Statements About the Family, Home, Situation, etc. These
results are of course contrary to those obtained with adult clients.
Perhaps the contradiction is partly due to an inherent weakness in this
study: its restriction to the child's verbalizations. As Landisberg and
Snyder (108) found that increased expression of feeling was
significantly related to the action rather than to the verbal responses,
it appears necessary for future research to consider this factor.

[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_270}*Studies of the Outcomes of Play Therapy*

Other studies of play therapy have been concerned with its outcomes,
rather than with the process itself. Among these is one conducted by
Cruickshank and Cowen (47, 46) --- an exploratory study of group play
therapy with physically handicapped children in a special public day
school. Five children between the ages of seven and nine years were seen
twice weekly for seven weeks. The group included two cardiac cases, and
one each of hemophilia, post-poliomyelitis, and post-encephalitis.
Before and after the therapy series, teachers and parents wrote
essay-type reports stating the chief problems and noting any changes. By
this criterion, three of the five children showed improvement. The
absence of a control group makes it impossible to say how many of these
might have improved without therapy. Thus no definite conclusions may
properly be drawn without further investigation.

Axline (13) has reported upon the effect of nondirective
psychotherapeutic methods in cases of reading retardation in an
elementary school. Thirty-seven second grade children diagnosed as
retarded in reading (by means of teacher judgments and standardized
reading tests) were selected for the study. Their I.Q. range on the
Stanford-Binet was from 80 to 148. They were placed in a special class,
where the teacher attempted to create a therapeutic milieu in which
adjustment and learning might occur together. No emphasis was placed
upon learning to read. Children were encouraged to express their
attitudes in the presence of an understanding and permissive teacher. In
a strict sense, this was not play therapy, but an adaptation of it for
classroom use. Spontaneous statements by the children indicated to the
teacher that many had serious personal problems. At the end of the
school term, children were re-tested with the Gates Primary Reading
Tests for Grades One and Two. During this three-and-one-half month
period, there were several remarkable gains in reading age, including
some of sixteen and seventeen months. Unfortunately, however, no
statistical test was made by Axline. Thus, for the group as a whole, we
do not know whether the results differed significantly from chance
expectations. In addition, the absence of a control group makes it
impossible to evaluate the effects of []{#016_c6.html_lpn_271}repetition
of the tests without intervening therapeutic experience.

A further study of the effects of nondirective play therapy in cases of
reading retardation has been conducted by Bills (24). Eight retarded
readers were selected for therapy from a class of twenty-two third grade
children. Although this was a class for "slow learners," four of the
children were of superior intelligence and four of average intelligence,
as measured by Form L of the Stanford-Binet. Their I.Q. range was from
99 to 159, with a mean of 123. These children were chosen on the basis
of discrepancies between their mental age scores and reading age as
measured by the Gates Primary Reading Tests of Paragraph Meaning. Five
of the eight children received six individual and three group play
therapy contacts; two had six individual and two group sessions; one had
four individual and one group contact. All sessions were
phonographically recorded.

The study covered three periods of six weeks each. The first of these
was a control period; children were tested at its outset and conclusion,
but received no therapy. The second period was the experimental one,
during which therapy was offered; reading tests were administered at its
close. The third period was a follow-up period, during which no therapy
sessions occurred; children were tested upon its conclusion. Thus,
instead of comparing an experimental group with a control group, a
single group was compared with itself during three intervals. Each child
therefore served as his own control, in an experiment in perfectly
matched pairs. The assumption here is that the control and therapy
periods were comparable with respect to reading experiences. Bills
therefore had three judges with teaching experience visit the classroom
in order to determine whether reading instruction was alike for the
three periods of the study. They concluded that the three intervals were
equivalent with regard to reading instruction.

Comparison of reading gains during control and experimental periods by
means of the "t" test of significance indicated the superiority of the
latter. The results were significant at the .001 level. Comparison of
the control period gains with those of the combined experimental and
follow-up periods also favored the latter. This difference was
significant at the .01 level. Thus, marked reading
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_272}gain was made by the experimental group during
the period of therapy, and this gain was maintained during the
post-therapy period.

Bills asked also whether improved reading was due to improved personal
adjustment. To answer this question, he conducted a study (25) of play
therapy with well-adjusted retarded readers. The design was similar to
that of the project just discussed, except that cases were selected for
good adjustment on the basis of projective and objective personality
tests. In this study, gains were not significantly greater during the
therapy period. Therefore, it appears that play therapy may improve
reading where retardation exists together with emotional maladjustment.
Therapy is not necessarily the method of choice for remediation of
reading difficulties per se.

Fleming and Snyder (60) have conducted a study of the effects of
nondirective group play therapy upon personality test performance. They
used three measures before and after psychotherapy. The first of these,
Rogers' Test of Personality Adjustment, is an objective paper and pencil
test. The second, a Guess Who test, invites children to name others
described by its items, such as, "Who brags and boasts about things that
you know aren't so?" This allows a rating of children by their peers.
The third test, Fleming's Sociometric Test, asks the child to name two
persons in his group with whom he would and would not like to do things.
The therapy subjects were four boys and three girls between the ages of
eight and one-half and eleven and one-half years. All were residents of
a children's home, and were selected because they, of forty-six children
tested, made the worst rank scores on a combination of the three
measures. Sixteen children left the institution before the end of the
study and were therefore not retested. The remaining twenty-three
children received no therapy but were tested twice and hence served as
controls. The experimental group of boys did not improve significantly
more than the control group. This was in agreement with the therapist's
judgment of poor rapport in therapy. The girls' group improved
significantly more than the control group on all three indices. This,
too, was in agreement with the therapist's impressions of the
[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_273}therapy contacts. However, these results cannot
be taken entirely at face value. First, experimental design utilizing a
control group requires that control and experimental groups be equated
for initial status, in this case, maladjustment scores. This may be
accomplished by matching pairs, matching total groups by means and
standard deviations, or random assignment of cases to each group. None
of these methods was employed by Fleming and Snyder. They used as
controls those children left after the most maladjusted had been
selected out for therapy. Hence, the controls were, by definition, less
maladjusted. In the second place, sound procedure requires that the
experimental and control groups be treated as nearly alike as possible,
except for the experimental variable --- in this case, play therapy. The
clinic at which these children were treated was ten miles from their
institutional home. Thus, twice a week, for six weeks, the experimental
group was treated to a long ride and a chance to visit away from the
confines of the institution. The control group had no such experience.
Hence, improved adjustment scores, when found, might be due to play
therapy itself or to the outings which were incidental to it. Thus there
appears to be no unequivocal interpretation of the results of this
study.

*Needed Research*

It is apparent from this summary of existing research that much remains
to be done. One of the more pressing needs is for follow-up study of a
large number of cases, at regular intervals. Instead of repeated
follow-up studies of a relatively small number of cases, it might be
more fruitful to re-study some cases after six months, others after one
year, still others after two years, and so on. In this way, a larger
sample of cases might be tapped without adding enormously to the
research burden.

A second area of needed investigation is that of the assessment of
personal adjustment before and after therapy. The only existing research
in this area, that of Fleming and Snyder (60), is concerned with group
therapy. A beginning study of personality outcomes of individual play
therapy by means of objective and projective tests is now under way at
the University of Chicago, []{#016_c6.html_lpn_274}but the results are
not yet in. As in adult therapy, the problem of experimental controls
looms large. Matching methods are notoriously weak, for they fail to
cover motivational variables. The use of a control period, as Bills (24,
25) has done, is an improvement in this regard. However, its assumption
of control and experimental periods as equivalent except for the
variable, play therapy, may not always be tenable. By far the most
satisfactory method of experimental control is the random assignment of
cases to experimental and control groups. This method requires a pool of
candidate cases twice as large as the number actually to be seen in
therapy. For this reason, it is not always practical. Studies of
outcomes are also hindered by the questionable validity of existing
children's personality tests. One approach to the problem of evaluation
which has not yet been tried is the Vineland Social Maturity Scale (50).
This might be employed in an interview with mothers before and after
their children's therapy. It would have the advantage of being a
quantitative assessment by one who was familiar with the child's
behavior.

Investigation of the actual process of therapy is also necessary. High
costs may limit the number of future completely recorded and transcribed
cases. For this reason, it is important to be able to evaluate the
adequacy of the therapist's notes. In a small number of cases, also
phonographically recorded, the therapist and an observer might take
notes. Then each of these independent accounts could be compared with
the phonographic case record. In this way, the kinds of defects apt to
occur in written notes might be learned, in order to ascertain whether
it is worth while to base research analyses upon such notes.

Thus far, there has been no attempt to test rather specific hypotheses
in a study which would include playroom actions. For example, as therapy
progresses, is there a trend from "accidental" to "purposeful" actions?
That is, does a child who begins therapy with, "The Daddy fell over,"
increasingly come to state, "I knocked over the Daddy"? In this
connection it might be advisable first to separate the relatively
successful from the relatively unsuccessful cases. This would make
possible an answer to the question of the nature of changes where these
are found to occur.

[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_275}Another useful addition to our knowledge would
be a comparative study of group and individual therapy. Three conditions
might be contrasted: individual therapy, group therapy, and a
combination of these. Data might be used to furnish information on both
process and outcomes of therapy. It is likely that an investigation of
this kind would require a cooperative group project.

The therapy protocol might also be used as a validating criterion for
personality tests. Client-centered protocols have the particular
advantage of being freer from interviewer bias than those of other
approaches. A beginning in this direction has been made by Bills and
others (26). The possible applications of the "Q" technique to play
therapy (201, 202) need to be explored. Still another untried approach
is the time-sample method of behavior observation, applied to the
therapy session. It is clear, then, that many possibilities lie open for
future research workers in the field of client-centered play therapy.

S[UMMARY]{.sc}

In summary of this chapter, it may be said that a therapeutic approach
which relies primarily upon the client's capacity for constructive use
of himself seems to be applicable to children. Its challenge is
particularly felt in this area, for children are generally considered to
be more at the mercy of their environments than are adults. Despite
this, it appears that children have far more ability to deal with
themselves and with their interpersonal relationships than is usually
credited to them. A relationship in which the child can feel genuinely
accepted and respected, despite his faults, seems to help this latent
capacity to become manifest.

In this method of play therapy, a child is offered the opportunity to
use a particular time period in his own way, subject to a few broad
limitations. The child is provided with the play materials which lend
themselves as media for expression of his needs, but he may decline to
use them if he wishes. The therapist's belief is that the child's
decision to do or not to do a particular thing is more beneficial than
is the actual performance of it. The child's opportunities for
responsible self-direction are maximized, on the theory that the therapy
session is a good place to begin to practice it.

[]{#016_c6.html_lpn_276}As in adult therapy, a basic hypothesis is that
a relationship of acceptance, as contrasted with positive or negative
evaluation, reduces the need for defensiveness, and thus allows the
child to dare to explore new ways of feeling and behaving. Because of
this hypothesis, the therapist does not try to affect the pace or the
direction of therapy; he follows rather than leads the child. The
therapist's aim is to see things through the child's eyes, in order
verbally to clarify the child's expressed feelings. However, when the
child refuses to allow any access to his private feelings, the therapist
accepts this refusal and does not seek to intrude. There is no attempt
to alter the child, but only to make possible his self-alteration, when
and if he wishes it. In these and other ways the therapist tries to
communicate his underlying respect for the child as he is at the moment.
The child's perception of this attitude of the therapist seems to aid
his use of the relationship with reduced anxiety. It seems to help him
to bring out into the open rejected as well as accepted aspects of his
personality, and to form some kind of integration among them.

Among the outcomes of successful therapy have been altered peer-group
and parent-child relationships, improved schoolwork, change in previous
diagnosis of mental defect, reduction of reading disability,
disappearance of tics, and cessation of stealing and other socially
unacceptable behavior. The areas of application of client-centered play
therapy have been wide. Whether they may be extended as far as childhood
psychoses is a question for future investigation. Thus far, research
studies have been meager and inadequate, but the challenge of the field
is clear. As clinical experiences and research studies in play therapy
increase in number, scope, and quality, perhaps the perplexing problem
of what constitutes psychotherapeutic change may come nearer to
solution.

SUGGESTED READINGS

::: sl
An historical perspective upon client-centered play therapy may be
gained from the books by Taft (209), Allen (5), and Axline (14),
especially when read in the order given.

Special applications of nondirective play therapy have been described in
several articles. Among these are Axline's articles on race conflict
(15), []{#016_c6.html_lpn_277}mental defect (12), and reading
retardation (13). Bills' studies of reading retardation (24, 25) will be
of particular interest to the research-minded, for they are the most
carefully designed investigations to date. Work with physically
handicapped children has been described by Cruickshank and Cowen (47,
46). Special problems arising in a case transferred from one therapist
to another are reported by Bixler (30). In another article, Bixler (29)
discusses the handling of aggression against the therapist.

For a presentation of a somewhat similar approach applied in a preschool
setting, see the report by Baruch (19). Its application to allergy
patients, seven of whom were children, is reported in a later article
(133).
:::

[]{#017_c7.html}

<div>

[]{#017_c7.html_c7}

</div>

# []{#017_c7.html_lpn_278}*Chapter* [7]{.chapnum} • Group-Centered Psychotherapy {.chaptitle}

::: top
By [N[ICHOLAS]{.sc} H[OBBS]{.sc},
[PH]{.sc}.[D.]{.sc}]{style="font-size: 150%"}
:::

![](html/docimages/line.jpg){height="10" width="100%"}

In significant respects, group therapy is like individual therapy. It is
also distinctly different. The similarities arise from a common purpose
and from a shared conception of the nature of human personality and how
it changes. The differences arise from the important fact that in
individual therapy only two people are immediately involved, whereas in
group therapy five or six or seven persons interact in the process of
therapy. This multiplication of the number of the participants means
more than the extension of individual therapy to several persons at
once; it provides a qualitatively different experience with unique
therapeutic potentialities.

Although the essential kinship between client-centered therapy and
group-centered therapy will be evident in the discussion that follows,
an effort will be made to communicate the peculiar genius of group
therapy, not just in broad outline, but with details that will bring the
reader into intimate understanding of the process, and with quotations
from therapy sessions and from diaries about therapy that will let him
taste the flavor of the experience. In the tradition established in the
development of client-centered therapy, research findings will be
brought in to give foundation for generalizations. No argument will be
made for the greater economy of group therapy, though this is an
impressive consideration []{#017_c7.html_lpn_279}when the need for
psychological help is so urgent, and clinic waiting lists so long. The
possibility that group therapy may actually be more effective than
individual therapy, for some people, will only be mentioned here in
passing, for research evidence on this point is lacking, although in the
neglected field of therapy for the normal person with debilitating
situational conflicts group therapy appears to offer advantages over
individual therapy. On some issues it will be necessary to write in a
most tentative fashion. On other issues there have been enough
observation and research to permit writing with some assurance. That the
views presented will need to be modified with additional exploration,
there is little doubt. There are many gaps and many unanswered
questions. But even at this stage of development of group-centered
therapy, those who have explored its possibilities and weighed its
outcomes have gained a feeling of substance, and a desire to know more
of the process.

Groups of diverse composition and purpose have been worked with. Most of
our experience has been with a selected population --- university
students who found themselves disturbed and unable to gain from life the
satisfactions they desired. Some of these people suffered from a
temporary inability to cope with a situation (as the woman whose husband
had been killed in the war and who had not been able to re-pattern her
life after his death); others were more severely incapacitated (as the
man who was unable to go ahead with his plans to be a teacher because of
intense anxiety when with people). All shared this favorable
characteristic: they felt keenly the discrepancy between themselves and
their aspirations for themselves, and they actively sought help. In
addition to a considerable amount of work with these normal but troubled
individuals, there have been groups made up of people with some specific
kind of problem or purpose: combat veterans with a psychiatric diagnosis
of "anxiety reaction"; college students who desired to change their
feelings of racial or religious prejudice; mothers whose children were
receiving individual play therapy; unhappy children who were brought for
therapy by their parents, and children who could not learn to read; boys
from a Harlem gang, who came to therapy on the invitation of a worker
who had []{#017_c7.html_lpn_280}become friendly with them; veterans with
multiple sclerosis, who sought more comfortable ways of living with
their organically changing selves; severely disturbed individuals with
chronic headaches and other continuing neurotic symptoms; and clinic
outpatients with a psychiatric diagnosis of schizophrenia. In the main,
however, our efforts have been to help the "average" man, of whom there
is certainly more than an "average" number. A major objective has been
to discover more efficient ways of working with the great numbers of
essentially normal people who find that life has lost its savor, who
quietly struggle along with their problems, who pay great costs in extra
energy for their achievements, and who have tremendous potential for
responding to assistance. Concern for this large group of people stamps
the account that follows.

A[N]{.sc} I[LLUSTRATION OF]{.sc} G[ROUP]{.sc}-C[ENTERED]{.sc}
T[HERAPY]{.sc}

It will be helpful first to see what happens when people come together
in a group to work on their personal problems. Here is a verbatim
transcript of part of a first hour of group-centered therapy with six
university students, all preparing for jobs in schools or
colleges.^[31](#025_endnotes.html_e31){#017_c7.html_f31}^ The names have
been changed and all identifying information removed. Jane Harrison, age
23, is a nursery school teacher. Kay Madison, age 35, is a guidance
worker in a Southern high school. Anne Jensen, age 21, and the youngest
member of this group, does not talk during this session. Mary Conway,
age 33, has had several years' experience teaching English. Laura
Preston, age 27, is a teacher and part-time school psychologist. Betty
Arnold, age 28, has taught in secondary schools, is now working for an
M.A. in guidance.

:::: sl
::: top
*Jane:* One thing I might say is my particular feeling that I want to
work on a problem of the concept of dependence and independence in
marriage. I've been married about a year and married to --- he's a law
student --- who is primarily an unemotional person, and I would say
there's a good deal of lack of understanding between us. The conflict
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_281}was mainly one of my desire to be independent
and not being independent, in the marriage relationship, and the
marriage not being a fifty-fifty relationship.

*Leader:* It's not wholly satisfactory to you now.

*Jane:* No, it is not a satisfactory relationship, but I do think
there's a good deal of possibility of its being a satisfactory
relationship.

*Betty:* (*Pause.*) I think most of my trouble is not having enough
confidence in myself to assert myself when I am with others. I feel
confidence in being able to *do* things, but when I'm in a social group
or in a classroom, I more or less withdraw and let everybody else do the
talking and thinking. I think a lot of that is probably a result of the
fact that in our family my father is a very dominant person, and is
*the* person in the family so that everyone else is being subdued to his
wishes. Now, I suppose that feeling carries over into other
relationships too, a feeling of not being --- of not having a great deal
of personal worth or value.

*Leader:* You feel rather confident of your ability, privately or as an
individual, yet when you work with people you tend to devaluate
yourself.

*Betty:* That's right. I tend to evade issues or withdraw --- instead of
meeting them face on.

*Leader:* Yes.

*Jane:* Does that happen in small groups as well as larger ones ---
amongst --- uh, intimate family and social relationships?

*Betty:* With a small group of *good* friends that I've known for some
time, I don't have that feeling, but in a classroom or with my family
groups, when we have relatives in, or just a gathering of family
friends, I stick in the background.

*Leader:* You have to feel pretty strongly supported by a small group of
people before you feel free to be yourself. (*Pause as another member
arrives.*) Miss Preston, we got everyone's first name down here, what is
your first name?

*Laura:* Laura.

*Leader:* Laura, that's right.

*Kay:* I think the thing I've got to work out is an acceptance of my
personal situation. I've accepted it mentally and I see that I have
several choices in what to do, but I want to accept them emotionally as
well. This is probably due to the fact that I --- my husband was killed
about two years ago in a very tragic sort of way. His plane went down in
the Pacific. No one was saved. It was after the war was over and he was
about ready to come home. And while I can see how it happened, I still
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_282}don't accept it, and I want just the emotional
acceptance of my life from here on.

*Leader:* You've been able to work out something of an intellectual or
rational understanding of the situation and what you should do, but you
haven't yet been able to bring your feelings around to where they are,
say, under control.

*Kay:* If I'm walking down the street and I look into a shop window,
perhaps see an article of clothing he would have liked, it throws me
completely and I ---.

*Leader:* Find all these emotions welling back up.

*Kay:* That's right. Maybe the odor of tobacco that he used, something
of that sort; and it's been two years, I should begin to control the
emotions.

*Mary:* I have difficulty controlling my emotions, too --- feelings.

*Leader:* Some similarity there. (*Long pause.*)

*Jane* (*to Kay*): Did you have a happy relationship with him?

*Kay:* Yes, I had a perfect relationship with him, one of the kind where
each went 90 per cent of the way and it adds up to 50 per cent. And one
of the things I think helped to do that: We had to depend on each other,
because we lived a long time in a foreign country. We had *no* outside
forces and we depended entirely upon each other.

*Leader:* You had a very warm relationship. He was almost your whole
life.

*Kay:* I had known him all my life, and I had not --- we didn't marry
when we were very young; it was my own fault; and all the time he had
been very fond of me and, as I grew older, I appreciated more and more
how he felt about me. And I think it wasn't so much that 1 loved him, as
that I was so secure in his love for me. Well, that was the greatest
thing about it, you see. And I did love him, and I learned to appreciate
him more and more.

*Jane:* Did you --- were you ever insecure about people loving you
before?

*Kay:* Yes, I've never been very secure with anybody, my parents were
divorced, I never had anybody who was *all* mine.

*Leader:* You really found it in him, didn't you?

*Kay:* Yes. And not only --- I recognized it and then I worked at it.
For instance, I tried to make myself essential to him every way I could,
you see. (*Pause.*)

*Jane:* Well, 1 guess essentially what you had is what I want.

*Laura:* Well, actually, I have been sitting here --- uh, in a sense
envying []{#017_c7.html_lpn_283}Kay for the happiness you have had.
Sometimes we don't recognize the importance of something like that when
we have it.

*Leader:* The really deep love of someone?

*Laura:* That's right, and how fortunate she was in being able to
recognize those things she had been denying for so long. She actually
lived with him for awhile.

*Kay:* I try to tell myself that. And I knew that. As I look around at
people, I feel very fortunate to have had that (*pause*) and I realize
that, but I still just can't accept it.

*Leader:* It kind of overwhelms you.

*Laura:* Well, the thing that struck a note was the fact --- that you
didn't know for so *very long*, which is pretty similar to where I find
my problems starting, in that I didn't know either. And I went on not
knowing and never did have a chance, you see. And, right now, I'm faced
with a problem that my mother in particular accuses herself. That's the
pity of the situation.

*Leader:* Makes you feel pretty bad.

*Laura:* Well, I want to apologize to her in the way that I can and
assure her that it isn't her fault. Because whether it is or it isn't is
beside the point. But you can't go on feeling this was the only thing in
life for me. There is a whole lot more. And with pressures all around
you, you begin to take an easy way and say, well, maybe it was her
fault, and maybe it is a pitiable situation, and maybe this, and maybe
that.

*Leader:* Makes you feel that you'd have to fight against her.

*Laura:* That's right, and it doesn't leave room for making a happy
adjustment all around. It's not right. In school, at work, with friends,
any place --- you're constantly impressed with this horrible situation
that you're in. And that's no good.

*Leader:* It stays with you pretty much of the time.

*Laura:* That's right, mostly because it's easy to adopt someone else's
attitude without thinking for yourself. And I'm sure that if my mother
realized just how very destructive the thing she's doing is, she would
try in every way to change. But if I told her, she would be all the more
hurt, and I can't tell her.

*Kay:* Yes, I know what you mean. That's partly the reason I came here,
to get out of that situation. Because when I walk into a room, everyone
stops talking, and you *feel* the sympathy they have for you, and you
don't want that. Pretty soon you get to feeling sorry for yourself.
Because, if I had --- I haven't any worries. There isn't anything I
should be upset about.

[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_284}*Betty:* You find, too, that it is very
difficult to get away from the things that people think about you. If
they always thought of you as being a very sensible or practical person,
you get so that you just can't do anything that isn't sensible or
practical, because other people will frown at you or express horror that
you do something that they didn't expect you to do.

*Leader:* So you tend to shape your behavior according to the
expectations of other people.

*Betty:* Very frequently, if I want to do something, I'll say, well, how
will my parents feel about it, and I probably won't do it if I feel they
won't approve.

*Mary:* This subject of people feeling sorry for you --- does things to
you, when the situation may actually not be half as bad.

*Leader:* You get to believe it yourself.

*Mary:* Definitely, and soon you capitalize on it.

*Leader:* Yes.

*Jane:* It begins to be a very easy way out of your situation by feeling
sorry for yourself. I know that I've done it many times. And I've spent
a lot of time alone, and I begin to think, home was never like this, and
feel very sorry for myself. And I find it is a very easy way out of
facing myself.

*Kay:* Why do you have to go to school?

*Jane:* He's got three years of school, and if he wants to practice,
he's got several years of routine work. So he is in a position where he
will earn nothing for about five years.

*Kay:* And now you plan to work this fall, to begin work?

*Jane:* Yeah, I plan to be the financial boost to him, so that he can go
on. And I feel very strongly about not taking money from the folks,
because my relationship with my parents is not a very good one. And my
relationship with my in-laws --- I feel that if I take money from them,
and they're in a position to give it, I feel I would have to answer to
my mother-in-law for the rest of my life. That is a thing I would find
very hard to do, because she would like to show you how to blow your
nose, if you give her a chance. (*Laughter.*)

*Kay:* But actually, they're very human.

*Jane:* They are, they're very human. And if you sit down and think
about it, they're mothers, and they've spent all of their lives bringing
up these boys and then we take them away from home. And their interests
are elsewhere. And it's hard for them; it's a very hard
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_285}adjustment to make, I imagine. I suppose when
there comes a time that I'll be a mother-in-law, I won't be much better.

*Kay:* Why do you feel, I mean, well, you must feel that he loves you,
that he did love you.

*Jane:* Well, he's not very emotional and I'm a very emotional person. I
feel that he's quite reserved. It was a great deal of time before he
showed any overt affection towards me in everyday relationships. You
begin to feel that, to put it callously, you were married for financial
reasons and other reasons. You begin to wonder, especially when I need a
good deal of emotional support and I find that I don't get it, due to
circumstances.

*Leader:* It's really very disturbing to have those feelings.

*Jane:* It is, there's a great deal of guilt attached to it, too,
because I was always brought up with the feeling that you should never
think those things about your husband.

*Leader:* So, you tend to blame yourself when you do have thoughts like
that.

*Jane:* Yes, and I take the attitude that everything that's wrong with
our marriage is my fault. I tend to take that attitude, so that he's got
the feeling that well, he's just --- he's perfect.

*Kay:* Have you discussed it with him? Does he realize how insecure you
feel?

*Jane:* Yeah, he's beginning to realize now. And as I said, not until
recently has he begun --- I will say that essentially there's a great
deal of possibility that we can develop a relationship that will be
satisfactory to both of us.

*Leader:* There are many positive factors.

*Jane:* Yes, there are; he comes around. But it's at a terrific expense
to me emotionally, but he does come around. A great many scenes have to
occur before he realizes some things. And then he'll come around to it.

*Kay:* Is that because, uh, do you express this feeling that you have.
Or do you just let him blindly have to guess at them?

*Jane:* I don't express it too much, no.

*Kay:* Well, you see, he doesn't really know.

*Jane:* Well, he doesn't know, that's true.

*Leader:* It's very hard for you to express your feelings to him.

*Jane:* Yes, because I --- if I break down and do it and then I'm put in
a position where I am not as high as what I would like to be. I feel
that I'm not as mature as I would like to be. (84, pp. 118--121)
:::
::::

::: top
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_286}I[NDIVIDUAL AND]{.sc} G[ROUP]{.sc}
T[HERAPY]{.sc} --- S[IMILARITIES AND]{.sc} D[IFFERENCES]{.sc}
:::

*There Are Similarities*

With the above excerpt providing concrete material for consideration, we
may gain in understanding of the subtle and complex process of group
therapy by making comparisons with the more familiar process of
individual client-centered therapy. The most elusive of all the
qualities evident in the session reproduced should probably be
considered first because it is fundamental --- the kind of climate or
atmosphere or feeling that was gradually built up --- that has to be
built up if there is to be gain from the group experience. As in
individual client-centered therapy, the members of a group must perceive
the situation they are in as being dependably sustaining of their
selves. They bring to the situation a freight of anxiety, a product of
their unsuccessful efforts to relate themselves effectively to other
people, and this anxiety is usually heightened by the indeterminate
nature of the impending experience in therapy. It is believed that each
member of a group, if he is to profit from therapy, must find in the
therapist and in other members of the group a genuine feeling of
acceptance. He must find in the group situation increasingly less need
for the defenses against anxiety which render him so ineffectual in
living with others and so unhappy in living with himself. As in
individual therapy, he must feel increasingly free to examine himself,
with assurance that there will be an understanding of his life as he
sees it, and that there will be respect for him as a person every step
of the way. It is also desirable and probably necessary that the
individual in a group find a quiet confidence in his ability to be
responsible for his own life, and a willingness for him to make choices
regardless of their direction, the final confidence being that he will
make decisions essential to the full realization of himself.

Even in the first session quoted above we find members very open with
each other, sensing somehow the support that was even then present, and
that would grow as the meetings continued. Kay was able to talk about a
hurt that she had kept to herself for two years. Jane revealed herself
to the other women present, a []{#017_c7.html_lpn_287}risk she had not
dared take before, according to her diary notes of the meetings. Mary,
Laura, and Betty tentatively described a source of their unhappiness.
Only Anne was dubious and uncertain, remaining quiet for this session
and several more until she was confident of the support of the group,
then describing the fears and torturing dreams she had, and perhaps in
the end gaining more than anyone else in the group.

The reader will surely want to ask how one can be certain that attitudes
of confidence and respect will pervade a group, a question that points
up one of the differences between individual and group therapy. In the
single client-therapist relationship, these crucial attitudes can
usually be assured, for the entire training of the therapist has
stressed the importance of these principles and his momentary
concentration is directed toward communicating them to his client. But
in the group others are present, and they are not likely at first to be
able to express such feelings. They are too bound up within themselves,
and they are probably little aware of the importance of much else beyond
a need to find relief from their own distress. This difficulty is
something of a paradox in group therapy, being at once a source of
weakness and of strength. If these important attitudes do not develop in
a group, the undertaking is likely to be of little benefit, and the
therapy a failure. If, however, they are nurtured by the therapist and
reinforced by the affirmative feelings of the members of the group, they
are likely to be significantly more effective in the group situation
than in individual therapy. It is one thing to be understood and
accepted by a therapist, it is a considerably more potent experience to
be understood and accepted by several people who are also honestly
sharing their feelings in a joint search for a more satisfying way of
life. More than anything else, this is the something added that makes
group therapy a qualitatively different experience from individual
therapy.

A characteristic of individual therapy that one would not expect to find
in group therapy is the feeling of direction and singleness of purpose.
The individual problems of six individuals could reasonably be expected
to exert a centrifugal effect on the group. But in fact this does not
seem to happen. In both content and []{#017_c7.html_lpn_288}feeling,
groups grow to a remarkable cohesiveness that parallels the unity
evident in individual therapy. For one thing, diverse as symptoms and
situations are, there are only a few kinds of problems that people can
have. Time and time again, the breakdown of interpersonal relations and
the attendant feelings of self-worthlessness provide the content for
group discussions. But perhaps more important than similarity of content
is the unity that comes from a sharing of feelings. In the excerpt
below, two group members, differing by some twenty years in age and
perceiving their problems to be quite different, come to an intimate
understanding on the basis of feeling:

:::: topbot
::: sl
*Mr. Helm:* I thought that there was so much difference in our two ages
that there might be a gap there. Somehow he closed the gap the other
day. I feel that underneath we all have that same feeling. So many of
our problems are all the same.

*Therapist:* I'm not sure, Mr. Helm, that I understand just how you see
that relationship.

*Mr. Helm:* Well, I had the feeling that somehow I couldn't quite
understand the scope of his problem, and how much this problem really
meant to him. Yet, as he spoke on Monday, I had the feeling of great
empathy with him. Not so much that I have the same problem, but because
I could see how another person feels carrying a burden like that round
with you all the time. Because even though we may have different
problems, the feelings these problems create are pretty much the same,
and, uh, the feeling that he's going around carrying the same burden all
the time --- well, thinking about it made me feel much closer to him.

*Miss West:* That's better said. That's what I was trying to say.

*Therapist:* You feel closer to him not because of a similarity of
problem but because of a similarity of feeling.

*Mr. Helm:* By and large, I think that has been typical of the whole
group. Each of us has been able to express our feelings, and the others
have accepted it.
:::
::::

There are also similarities between individual and group therapy on the
level of technique. These may be summarized here and illustrated at
greater length later. As in individual therapy, techniques are important
as media for expressing the attitudes []{#017_c7.html_lpn_289}described
above. They grow out of these attitudes and are an expression of them,
but they are also whittled down and shaped to usefulness by accumulated
experience in therapeutic relationships.

Essentially, what the therapist attempts to do is to reconstruct the
perceptual field of the individual at the moment of expression, and to
communicate this understanding with skill and sensitivity. The various
terms that have been used to describe the kinds of statements that the
therapist makes in individual therapy --- such as clarification of
feeling, reflection of feeling, restatement of content, simple
acceptance, structuring, and so on --- are appropriate to the group
situation as well, and there are other similarities that should be
mentioned in passing. The concern with diagnosis is minimal,
interpretation is not relied on as a therapeutic instrument, insight is
not considered to be an essential change-agent in the process of
learning, transference attitudes are handled just like all other
affect-laden expressions, and the most effective predictor of possible
gain from the therapy is considered to be the experience itself.

These are the similarities.

*And There Are Differences*

Group therapy has identifiable characteristics not found in the
counseling relationship when only two persons are involved. One of the
most important of these distinctive characteristics lies in the fact
that the group situation brings into focus the adequacy of interpersonal
relationships and provides an immediate opportunity for discovering new
and more satisfying ways of relating to people. It seems increasingly
clear that the discrepancies in the perception of self, which are the
source of the discomfort that brings a person to therapy, are products
largely of the experiences the individual has had with a relatively few
persons who have been important in his life. When these experiences are
very hurtful, the individual will hold himself together by adopting a
pattern of problem-solving which is stiff and constricted and not too
efficient, but which leaves him with some sense of control in his life
and enables him to stave off complete disorganization, a frightening and
ever-imminent prospect. He is tremendously in need of some
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_290}experience which will enable him to come closer
to others, and discover thereby those denied aspects of himself which
are important in his relationship with other people. Some severely
disturbed people may find the group situation too threatening and
require individual therapy. But for those who can take the first steps
in opening themselves to others and allowing others to get closer to
them, the experience is likely to be profoundly healing.

The relatively normal person who is less himself because of continued
perceived pressures may gain even more from the group experience. People
in our culture are likely to be isolated. Eric Fromm, in a sociological
analysis of personality, has forcefully described the aloneness of
modern man and the rootless quality of his life. Even the casual
observer can verify Fromm's findings by regarding the facility that
people develop in keeping others away from them. Physical proximity is
forced upon people and is even sought out, but considerable skill is
developed to prevent intimacy of selves. Mechanical entertainment is
welcomed as an instrument to obliterate the last possible chance of
simple relatedness to others. But this isolation so eagerly sought is a
poor mess of pottage, and man knows it with a sure wisdom. No better
evidence can be found than in the response that people often make to
group therapy, where the expectation is that people will come closer to
one another. The opportunity is welcomed and made the most of. As one
girl expressed it:

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
I also recognize now, whereas I was unable before, that security along
economic lines does not necessarily lead to emotional satisfaction. It
is with the latter that I am now concerned, and from my present vantage
point, it seems that I will have to find these feelings of security,
certainty, acceptance, and affection among friends, men, women, or both.
For me, this is a big change in attitude because I have always fought
against building up such affectional ties outside of the family, and,
actually, refused to admit their necessity for a satisfying and rich
life. The risk always seemed too great; if you never grew to depend on
someone else, you yourself would never be hurt, would never be in danger
of being left in the cold.

The group therapy meetings planted the idea and then convinced me that
the atmosphere of acceptance, warmth, real sympathy and
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_291}responsiveness which existed during them is a
vital part of everyone's life and that any risk involved is worth it. It
is this background of acceptance, security, and understanding that I
know I have not had although I am very sure that both my father and
mother would be unable to see that this is true. They both feel that our
home has provided us girls with complete understanding and sympathy.

Exactly what I am going to do with these changed attitudes, I do not
know, but this doesn't seem to be causing me any concern at the moment.
I think that the acknowledgment and the consequent willingness on my
part to let things happen to my emotions is of major importance and
everything else will more or less fall in line.
:::
::::
:::::

As a member of a group, the person learns what it means to give and
receive emotional support and understanding in a new and more mature
fashion. The self is redefined in a context not unlike that which
initially created the need to distort the perception of the self, and of
the self in relation to others. This is perhaps the most compelling
quality of the group experience.

Contrary to expectation, it is sometimes easier for a person to talk in
the group situation than to an individual therapist, and this is a
difference worth noting. A limited experience with several groups of
severely disturbed veterans gives evidence on this point. The
participants in the groups had all received individual therapy for
varying periods extending up to a year, and they were referred for group
therapy because they did not respond to individual treatment. Case
records indicate that a few of the men who were unable to talk about
their traumatic war experiences in individual therapy gained from the
group the stimulus and the acceptance needed to permit them to relive
many of the terrible experiences that they were sealing off from
awareness. Capital is here made of individual differences in the ability
to open up one's life. The group member most able to talk about himself
may start, and thereby relieve pressure from more reticent members, who
later take courage from his example and begin tentatively to follow his
lead. Such expressions as these are common: "I've had that same
experience, too," or "When that happened to you, did you have that same
feeling that I had when . . ." Group facilitation, which has been
studied by social psychologists in other contexts, operates.
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_292}It is not to say all people will find it easier
to talk in a group; while some may talk readily and others learn that it
is safe to talk, a few may remain quiet, with no risks taken, throughout
the sessions. But there is a possible gain in freedom, in the group,
that is important.

Many issues in personality theory and the therapeutic process center
around the problem of values. One of the cardinal principles in
client-centered therapy is that the individual must be helped to work
out his own value system, with a minimal imposition of the value system
of the therapist. This very commitment is, of course, itself an
expression of a value which is inevitably communicated to the client in
the intimate course of working together. This value, which affirms the
individual's right to choose his own values, is believed to be
therapeutically helpful. The suggestion of an array of other values by
the therapist is believed to be therapeutically harmful, possibly
because, if they are presented by the therapist, they will inevitably
carry the authority of the therapist and constitute a denial of the self
of the client at the moment. The therapist cannot simply express a value
for what it is worth; his expression has a clear direction, an
inescapable relevance to the client. The client must actively cope with
it. In group therapy the situation in respect to values is an
interesting one, with consequences that appear very important. As in
work with individuals from a client-centered viewpoint, the therapist
quietly and consistently, in each of his expressions, upholds the
primary value of the individual's right to determine his own way of
life. This value is believed to be so important that the therapist will
not cloud the issue, and possibly threaten the group, by raising other
values for consideration. But values are raised, in plenty, by members
of the group, and this rich and varied expression of ways of life offers
to the individual member of a group many alternate perspectives without
any requirement that he commit himself. The values being expressed are
relevant to the individual speaking; the listeners are free from
pressure to accept or reject; they can use the material as they perceive
it to be meaningful to themselves. In addition, the kinds of values
expressed in a group represent something of a cross section of the
values of the culture in which []{#017_c7.html_lpn_293}the individual
lives, with considerably more variance than could be held by the
therapist alone. The very diversity of values expressed is an important
factor, it is believed, in creating a climate in which the final choice
is left truly with the individual.

Group therapy offers another opportunity, absent in individual therapy,
which may be quite important in the therapeutic process. In the group
the individual may be a giver of help while receiving help. Remarks that
group members have made, in telling about their decision to enter
therapy, suggest that the prospect of a cooperative enterprise from
which they might expect some gain and to which they felt they might
contribute lowers the barriers between a person and therapy. It is also
possible that the act of giving help is a therapeutic experience itself,
but this is simply conjecture. One person expressed the situation this
way:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
I couldn't quite bring myself to go to a private counselor, although I
got the name and address of one and went to the phone two or three times
to call for an appointment --- never quite making the step. When the
opportunity came to join a group, I responded immediately. The
experience, therefore, was very opportune for me. It has helped so much
I am constantly amazed. Each thing I accomplish, I think, "Well, this
group business has certainly done things for me." Today I've discovered
that I'm using the wrong verb --- it *is* doing things for me. After the
last hour Jack commented on how much he had been helped by the group. It
seemed a good sign to me that I was concerned over him rather than so
engrossed in my own problems.
:::
::::
:::::

In group therapy a person may achieve a mature balance between giving
and receiving, between independence of self and a realistic and
self-sustaining dependence on others.

::: top
T[HE]{.sc} P[ROCESS OF]{.sc} G[ROUP]{.sc} T[HERAPY]{.sc}
:::

*Some Details of Organization and Procedure*

Since group therapy is a relatively unfamiliar process, and since many
different kinds of experiences have been designated group therapy, a few
words about the general setting and procedures of group-centered therapy
seem needed. Normally, groups are composed of about six people and the
therapist. This number of []{#017_c7.html_lpn_294}participants has been
arrived at empirically, and research is yet to be done to establish an
optimum number. About this many people seem needed to gain the advantage
of maximum personal interaction, and to attain the economy that has been
one of the attractive features of a group approach. Effective work can
be done with fewer participants, and one or two might be added. But to
go much beyond six seems to slow the group down and to increase the
number who remain on the periphery of the group, uninvolved in the
process. Groups meet in a quiet, comfortable room where everyone can sit
around a table, the desirable room being neither cramped nor too
spacious. The selection of group members will be discussed later, but it
might be noted here that people with quite diverse problems and
personalities may be included. Our practice has been to follow only
broad criteria for grouping, such as groups of adults, adolescents, or
children. Groups meet twice a week, as a rule, for a period of one hour,
though a slightly longer period has often seemed desirable. Again,
flexibility permits adaptation to circumstances; a number of groups have
met once a week and others several times a week, and the length of
meetings has been modified. For any one group, however, some consistency
in pattern of meetings is sought. The decision to terminate meetings is
left to the group. In the settings in which most of our experience has
been obtained, groups have tended to average about twenty meetings.

*How Groups Get Started*

A question frequently asked is, how does a group ever get under way? The
inquirer senses a possible awkwardness in the coming together of a
number of strangers with the purpose of working on personal problems,
and he wonders what the therapist can do to get things rolling. To
respond to the last concern first, the therapist proceeds with the
assumption that the group can get started and work out directions
without his guidance. He generally says something to the effect that the
objectives of the group are known to everyone and that the group can
develop and follow its own leads. There may be some uncertainty at
first, but the best remedy for the uncertainty seems to be the
establishment of []{#017_c7.html_lpn_295}the group's responsibility for
its direction. Many different patterns are evident in the initial
meetings. Some groups have a hard time getting started; there are
tentative statements followed by withdrawal, or there is a nervous humor
which gives time to develop security in the group. Other groups get
right at their business, with no delay, starting with as much
involvement as one finds in individual therapy when the client is
heavily burdened with anxiety and desperately in need of communicating
his distress. A fairly typical pattern is for the various members of the
group to tell something about themselves and to describe their problems,
doing this informally and without pressure. Though beginnings vary, and
later modes of expression show differences from group to group, themes
characteristic of a particular group emerge and are developed in an
identifiable process.

*The Development of a Group and the Concept of Themes*

The concept of themes has helped us follow with greater understanding
the course of therapy for a group. The concept was originated when, in
research efforts, there was need of a scheme for breaking down a long
series of meetings into smaller units which would have some
psychological significance. The units of the single meeting and of the
single typed page of transcription are both arbitrary and without
particular meaning for the people involved. A theme is a topic and point
of focus in discussion, with a clear beginning and a clear stopping
point.^[32](#025_endnotes.html_e32){#017_c7.html_f32}^ There may be one
or a number of themes in a single session; usually there are several.
For each theme, there is a major participant who is the center of focus,
and there are minor participants whose number and intensity of
involvement vary from theme to theme. In a series of sessions, some
themes are short-lived; they are brought up, examined briefly, and
abandoned. Other themes thread their way throughout all the sessions,
recurring with deeper and deeper meaning, and with variations
contributed by different members of the group.

[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_296}A good analogy is with music. A series of group
therapy sessions, when analyzed with reference to themes, is not unlike
a rather loosely constructed musical composition. A theme is stated and
dropped. Others emerge. An original theme is picked up again and
elaborated. The movement is in the direction of greater detail and
deeper emotional expression. Some themes are carried by a single voice;
others are a blend of several voices, each with its distinctive
character. Formal structure is absent, but there is a clear pattern of
development, an unmistakable direction and intent.

*The Process as Viewed by a Group Member*

In one series of researches, the members of a group were asked to keep
diaries of their reactions to the group, makng their notes as soon after
each meeting as possible. These diary notes were written independently
and filed without being read until after the group had terminated, in
order that each writer might be free to express his feelings. Combined
with excerpts from interview materials, these notes bring one to a more
intimate understanding of what a group therapy experience means. The
writer of the excerpts below is Jane Harrison, a member of the group
whose initial session is partially reported on pages 280--285. The
reader might check back to her statements there, in order to get better
acquainted with her problem before reading the notes below. It should be
said that Jane was probably not the "most profited" member of the group.
She probably ranked third or fourth in terms of benefit derived, and it
is because of her median position with respect to gain that her account
is selected for reporting here. The heartening progress, the dismaying
setbacks, the final attainment of limited goals, so familiar in
individual therapy, are seen again here.

EXCERPTS FROM A"SELF APPRAISAL" ESSAY, WRITTEN BEFORE ENTERING THERAPY

:::::::::::::: sl
::: block
As I see my problem today, I can detect signs of its birth in my early
adolescence. It represents primarily a conflict over my desire for
independence and my need for dependence, emotional support, approval,
and acceptance.

[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_297}The conflict has come into prominence
outstandingly in my marriage --- my husband in many respects has much
the same problem as I do. He needs dependence, but he has developed a
façade of independence which outwardly appears very successful. I find
that this results in his inability to accept me as an individual in many
respects.

On the other hand, I resent this --- I resent my need for his approval
and attention. I find that when I am left alone a good deal (as I often
am, since he's a law student), I utilize devious means to get his
attention, such as causing emotional scenes over my in-laws. And then I
follow this with terrific feelings of remorse for what I have done --- I
seem unable to control my feeling in this respect even though I believe
intellectually I realize what I am doing.

Today I'm tied to my husband, and still not making the goal. I still
don't know what I want for *myself* and what I want because of what my
husband will think of me. I still don't have control over my personality
to be able to direct it into my own goals and achieve them. I find that
I project this resentment alternately towards my husband and my in-laws.
I can't stand the idolizing of him that my mother-in-law exhibits. I
feel once again back in my own home --- playing second fiddle. I seek
recognition of myself. I want to be recognized as an individual, but I
don't feel that I have a clear idea of that individual; nor do I feel
that I have adequate control over that individual.
:::

*Diary after first group meeting*

::: block
I think I felt the most empathic feeling with Kay's problem. It seemed
like such a hopeless, unadjusted situation. I also felt a good deal of
envy for her, as someone who has had a marriage that I would like to
have. . . . I felt that after the initial awkwardness, the group gained
a certain identity and solidarity within itself. I feel that we are
identified with each other toward a common goal, and I feel a warmth and
sincerity in the group that I have never felt in another group. I feel
as if I had known the people in the group for a long time --- and rather
well. . . . The most outstanding reaction I had was my feeling of
identity and sympathy for Kay. I couldn't forget about her or her
problem all day.
:::

*Diary after fourth group meeting*

::: block
I had a feeling that momentum was gathering at this session. I
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_298}think we're really getting somewhere. I was
surprised at Laura's reaction to her shortness. I always had a feeling
that girls who were short accepted it and liked it for the assets it
had. I always considered the problem of height to be one that was
singularly attached to tall girls. Perhaps because of my height and the
problem that I faced with it in my early adolescence. But Laura
expressed her feeling for it very adequately and I think I can
understand her. . . . My reactions to myself were very revealing to me.
On the basis of Mary's remark about hostility and admitting it to
ourselves, I realized that actually I loved my mother. But in my fear of
being like her, and my hostility toward so much of what she is, I
wouldn't admit it to myself. It was quite a revelation to me. I feel
very relieved after this session.
:::

*Diary after seventh group meeting*

::: block
When we discussed the requirements of the department, I had a feeling
that the group shared a bond in this, as we haven't before by virtue of
our different problems. I was finally able to verbalize my doubts about
a vocation, which I wasn't able to do before. It was a hard thing to get
out but I felt better afterwards. I felt a close sympathy with Anne and
her inability to talk. I've felt that way a number of times in the group
sessions. It's just an inability to centralize the problem and verbalize
it.
:::

*Diary after eighth group meeting*

::: block
This problem of meeting requirements and a career is looming pretty
large for me now. I find myself wandering around with a sense of failure
and defeat. At first I couldn't express this in the group, but I find it
much easier since Laura feels the same way about it. I feel that there
is a cohesiveness to the group now that we didn't have before; we really
had something in common. And we seem to be moving to some climax.
:::

*Diary after tenth group meeting*

::: block
I felt as if I have something really cleared up in my mind today. I
realized suddenly that I had been saying things that implied this
feeling all along but that the concept of what it was was still not
clear to me. It was the concept of self-worth. I realize that I have
been walking around feeling like a sad sack pretty much all of my life,
and that it was this that kept me from fighting for my goals. A sad sack
never wins, and I took the conviction without ever proving to
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_299}myself that I was capable. This sort of gave me
an added impetus to work for the comprehensive exam, I think. I had the
feeling this session that we were all coming down to pretty much the
same basic problem only that we all had different ways of showing it. It
made me feel closer to the group.
:::

*Diary after eleventh group meeting*

::: block
I felt pretty good during this session. I felt that I had really
accomplished something last time and that I really understood so much
more than in the past. I think that in verbalizing my difficulty with my
mother over the week end, and in verbalizing to myself what I felt was
the solution to the problem, I clarified to myself the stand I was going
to take with my parents in the future. Not really the stand, but the
relationship between us. Kay's talking about roles struck a responsive
cord. Now that I realize that it was my general feeling of worthlessness
that was at the bottom of some of my troubles, I find that I have to
find my place, or as Kay says, my role. I felt that she had really
gained a lot in saying that. I still feel my greatest empathy with Kay
and Laura. Perhaps because Laura represents part of my problems in hers,
and Kay was married happily.
:::

*Diary after twelfth group meeting*

::: block
I really felt as if we were getting somewhere during the last meeting. I
think it was because Mary finally opened up. I felt that for the first
time she was with us. I had been feeling slightly uncomfortable with her
before this. I feel that I am at sort of a stalemate. I understand my
problem now in terms of the concept of self-worth. I just don't have
very much self-affection. But I can't seem to be able to take the first
step forward toward raising my self-affection. It is that I know pretty
much now, I think, what has made me like I am, but I can't seem to make
up my mind what I want to be. I felt that Betty put it very well when
she said that her old established values are getting mixed up --- and
it's disturbing. In a way, I feel that Kay seems to be getting the most
out of the group at present, and making the most progress. I think
finally that I am more certain now than I was that I want to finish my
studies.
:::

*Diary after thirteenth group meeting*

::: block
I feel sort of guilty presenting a problem this morning because
everybody seemed so exuberant. But it has bothered me all week
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_300}end and I just couldn't keep quiet about it. It
sort of set me back to my old feeling of self-worthlessness in relation
to school and everything. And I was beginning to work out something
before it happened. It was wonderful to see Laura so exuberant. But at
the same time, since I didn't feel quite as gay, it made me feel a
little out of things. I sort of felt that Betty felt a bit like that,
too, and after the session when we were walking down to coffee she
turned to me and said, "I feel awful." I knew the feeling that she had,
and I wished I could say something to help her, but I didn't feel much
better, so I'm afraid I wasn't much help.
:::

*Diary after eighteenth group meeting*

::: block
I just can't seem to be able to see my way clear in this new problem. If
it wasn't so tied up with the symbols of my past family life, I might
feel more confident. Sometimes I feel that if I were a more confident
person, more sure of myself and my husband, then my mother-in-law could
say anything and it wouldn't bother me. As it is, it takes huge control
to be with her and be nice, but I feel I have to be nice.
:::

*Interview two months after the nineteenth and final group meeting*

::: block
The group helped in a lot of respects in what I think of myself. It may
not have solved certain problems and it may never solve certain
problems, but it has been worth while. . . . In relation to my husband,
I wouldn't say that relations are any --- well --- there's more
understanding. And I'm not very consistent in my relationship to him,
because I really don't know, I don't know where to be consistent. I
don't know where to give in and where not to give in. . . . I don't know
just exactly where my ego should stop and his begin. . . . If I were
absolutely sure of my independence and my self-worth, it probably
wouldn't have to be put that way. . . . I know now I won't get a
divorce. It's going to be tough going for awhile. . . . I'm working to
build something and actually I'm very proud of him. . . . I didn't have
much faith when I first came, but I notice that during the periods of
anxiety, you get certain flashes of insight into it, and well, you get
pretty excited when you think about it. . . . I guess the fact is that
the group just gives you the motivation to think more constructively
about yourself. . . . And it's a funny thing. I'm not very old, but I
don't feel as young as I felt in February. I was only 23; I'm still only
23, but in February I felt about 16. . . . I was telling Laura that ---
she --- she was at my house for dinner last night. We
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_301}were talking about the group and I said that I
feel older now, but when I get into my mother-in-law's house, I feel 16.
. . . I felt very warmly toward the girls in the group, which is
something I never could have before with a girl. I never could have a
really warm relationship with a girl before. But there's a certain
feeling knowing that others are having problems, too, and trying to
understand their problems, and sort of seeing ways to help solve their
problems with them. . . . I was very much enthusiastic about group
therapy for that reason. There's a certain common bond there, and just
the fact that you can talk to people about your problems and have
yourself accepted. I mean that's the biggest thing.
:::
::::::::::::::

*The Process as Revealed in Research Analysts*

Further confirmation that there is an identifiable process
characteristic of group-centered therapy may be found in various
systematic studies that have been made. These researches are among the
first ordered and quantitative explorations of the process of group
psychotherapy, and the results are of course tentative; but many
intriguing things have come to light, and many new problems have opened
up.

That group-centered therapy is radically different from other approaches
is clear from a simple description of what occurs. Interpretation is
heavily relied upon in some approaches, and various activities in
others; in some, a topic for discussion is set by a brief introductory
lecture; in nearly all approaches, other than the one described here,
the leader makes a consistent effort to "draw out" the members. Most
comparable to group-centered therapy is the analytic technique described
by Foulkes, in which the members are invited to "just bring up anything
that enters your mind. . . ." But even in Foulkes' approach one is
impressed, in reading protocols, with the activity of the therapist in
asking questions, pointing up the discussion, and interpreting behavior.
One of the most widely used approaches is that advocated by the Army, in
which a topic for group discussion is set by the leader. Analysis of a
series of such meetings in an Air Force convalescent hospital indicated
that 81 per cent of all protocol lines were accounted for by the
leader's comments. This preponderance of leader activity in the Army
method may be contrasted with the less dominant
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_302}position of the therapist in the approach
described here, in which therapist participation has been shown to
account for about 5 per cent of all activity. Clearly group-centered
psychotherapy is different from all other approaches; but is it
identifiable in the sense of being consistent with itself, from group to
group?

Research by Hoch (85) throws light on this problem. Verbatim protocols
from three groups with three different therapists, constituting in all
some sixty group therapy sessions reported in twelve hundred
single-spaced typed pages, were analyzed. By placing statements of group
members and of the therapist into categories descriptive of the
significance of the statements, it is possible to compare groups with
reference to the frequency of occurrence of various kinds of statements.
The three groups studied by Hoch were remarkably similar in overall
pattern, the intercorrelations being .84, .86, and .87. Hoch concluded
that the members of the three groups "spent their respective sessions in
very similar atmospheres with respect to the verbal behavior taking
place." But it is important to note that within this group uniformity
there is room for individual variation. When intercorrelations are
computed for individuals within the groups, the coefficients range from
.46 to .97. Thus no person is forced into a group mold, and leeway is
provided for individual differences in manner of self-expression. On the
other hand, group gestalts are sufficiently similar to indicate that
group-centered therapy has a distinctive character.

Hoch was able to identify other characteristics of group-centered
therapy, an account of which will throw more light on what happens. The
frequency of statements judged to be therapeutically positive and
therapeutically negative follows a predictable course. Positive
elements, revealed in statements showing positive planning, insight,
positive attitudes toward the self, positive attitudes toward others,
and so on, clearly increase from meeting to meeting, reaching their
highest point in the final meetings. Negative elements, on the other
hand, are not complementary to the positive elements. It is as though
the members have to go through warming-up periods in which they
establish their confidence and security in the group. Toward the middle
sessions, []{#017_c7.html_lpn_303}negative feelings reach their peak,
with defensive remarks, confusion, requests for help, and negative
attitudes toward the self and toward others gaining prominence. Toward
the final sessions, such negative expressions decrease markedly,
constituting only a small proportion of the total number of statements.

In group-centered therapy, behavior that may be characterized as
"statement of problem" and "elaboration of problem" occurs throughout
the meetings, with no significant falling off toward the end of therapy,
as one might expect. This finding may stem from the fact that therapy
was not carried on for a sufficient number of sessions to resolve all
problems and exhaust the need to bring up new issues. But since no one
is ever without problems, a better explanation of the rather level
course of problem-stating behavior in group therapy may be found in a
study of the protocols themselves, which reveal something of a spiral
pattern in this kind of behavior. There is a tendency to go around the
group, allowing each member an opportunity to explore a theme before a
person who has already had his chance introduces a new theme. And
subsequent themes tend toward a deeper expression of concern. This
tendency, though not a rigid pattern, accounts for the persistence of
problem-stating behavior. It may be that an experience in group therapy
is less sharply demarked from daily life than is individual therapy. The
beginning is less dramatic and the termination less decisive, but these
are matters for further study.

Finally, it should be noted that group-centered therapy, in its
development from meeting to meeting, presents a changing picture marked
by progress. Sessions are not repetitious samples of a static picture.
When several complete series of group therapy sessions are divided into
halves, the second half has a significantly higher concentration of
"good" categories, representing a palpable gain in understandings and
positive attitudes. This trend toward more positive expression is
evident in groups as a whole, and is accentuated for those members of
groups who gain most from the experience. It is also found that members
who gain most, as compared with those who gain least, tend to avoid
general intellectual discussion, to focus on their own problems, and to
grow sufficiently to exhibit more concern for the problems of other
members.

[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_304}These findings confirm, to a surprising degree,
the smaller preliminary study made by Peres (146) several years earlier,
and based upon the analysis of but one group which met for nine
sessions. Peres found that when the group was divided into a "benefited"
group (the four who felt they had gained considerable help) and a
"nonbenefited" group (the three who felt they had gained little) real
differences could be objectively demonstrated between these two groups.
The benefited group showed, throughout the series, an increasing
proportion of statements indicating understanding and insight, and an
increasing number of reports of plans and actions. Unlike the situation
in individual therapy, the benefited group presented more statements of
problems at the end of the series than at the beginning, and more
negative attitudes toward self in the second half of therapy than in the
first, with a peak being reached shortly after the midpoint of the
series. The nonbenefited group showed much flatter curves in all these
respects. One of the most evident differences was that the non-benefited
group engaged in more interactional and "prodding" statements than did
the benefited group. It seems reasonable to say that more of their
attention was focused upon the other persons and less upon themselves
and their own feelings. They were more likely to use such statements as
"What did you do then?" or "You wouldn't say that if you were married,"
or "Perhaps you do that because of antagonism to your mother." The
members of the benefited group, three months after the conclusion of
therapy, reported that they had taken positive actions as a result of
the experience, and that they had found that significant changes in
attitude and behavior had carried over into fields which had never been
a topic of discussion in the group. The nonbenefited individuals
indicated that they had experienced few of these outcomes.

Such studies mark only a small beginning in the understanding of the
process of group therapy. Many questions remain unanswered. Will the
uniformity of pattern suggested by these two studies be evident in the
development of groups composed of strikingly different kinds of people?
What would be the pattern if groups were continued until each person
felt that he could gain no more from the experience? What about content
and import of []{#017_c7.html_lpn_305}statements? No study has yet been
made of the kinds of things people talk about in group therapy. An
analysis of the content of protocols would surely yield rich information
about the problems of adult life. Is it possible to select people who
are most likely to gain from a group therapy experience? How much does
the therapist contribute to the effectiveness of a group? Some of these
questions can be touched upon, but others will have to await
clarification through further research.

T[HE]{.sc} G[ROUP]{.sc} T[HERAPIST]{.sc}

Experience in individual client-centered therapy seems to be the best
preparation for doing group-centered therapy. The differences between
the two practices are largely on the level of technique, and one returns
again to a realization of the significance of the therapist's attitudes.
In both situations, the feelings that the therapist has toward people,
the confidence he has in their ability to be responsible for themselves,
the readiness with which he limits any tendency to intervene on the
assumption that his view of the situation is superior, the consistency
with which he translates a philosophy into action --- these are
fundamental to effective work either with individuals or with groups.
However, the group situation does make some new demands on the
therapist. He now must respond sensitively to six people instead of to
one; he must be able to recognize and handle objectively the cross
currents of feeling that develop within the group; he must clarify his
own feelings towards the several members of the group, in order that he
may respond to each member with consistent understanding. The most
challenging new element in the group situation is the possibility of
releasing the therapeutic potential of the group itself. *Group
therapy*, and not individual therapy in a group, is the goal. If the
therapist is skillful, the group itself becomes a therapeutic agent and
gathers momentum of its own, with therapeutic consequences clearly
greater than would result from the efforts of the therapist alone. For
one thing, members themselves take on the role of therapists, a
development of such significance for the total process that it will be
discussed in a subsequent section of this
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_306}chapter. But let us examine here, using research
findings and illustrations from verbatim protocols, some of the
distinctive features of the therapist's job as he works with a group.

The therapist attempts to understand what it is that a group member is
saying and feeling, to communicate this understanding to the group, and
to make it easier and safer for the individual to push ahead in his
explorations of himself. Telschow (211) has shown, in a systematic and
extensive analysis of protocols, that the most productive statements of
the therapist are those involving simple acceptance of what is said,
restatement of content, and clarification of feeling. Statements of such
nature are accompanied by greater and more penetrating exploration on
the part of the group member. They tend to reduce the threat in the
situation and are "releasing" of the group member who is attempting to
see himself more clearly. Evidence indicates that, although the gross
amount of therapist interaction with members is highly related to the
amount of member activity, the members who gain most from the experience
are those to whom the therapist responds with non-directive statements.
Research has not yet demonstrated the point, but it seems likely that
such statements also give assurance to a member who has not participated
that he can join in without fear of hurt to himself. In the sessions
reported on pages 280--285, one can get a feeling for what the therapist
does in this respect.

But pacing and timing are important. There is apparently an optimum
amount of therapist participation. Telschow devised a measure of discord
in groups and showed that the amount of discord is a function of the
amount of participation on the part of the therapist. The therapist is
not a passive member of the group; he must be in there pitching. If he
withdraws too much, discord mounts, and exploration of feeling becomes
more precarious for members of the group. Below is a brief excerpt from
a group therapy session, illustrating nicely how members of the group
can make it difficult for a person to continue to carry a theme to full
exploration.

:::: topbot
::: sl
*Miss Bell:* Well, I don't have too much of a social life here. I know a
few people, but I don't go out much, because I'm not particularly
interested in dancing and things like that.

[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_307}*Mr. Lewis:* M-hm. What do you usually do for
fun and relaxation?

*Miss Bell:* Oh, I go to movies and read.

*Leader:* M-hm.

*Miss Bell* (*laughing nervously*): And I play cards sometimes ---
that's about all.

*Mr. Lewis:* I hope you take a cocktail once in a while.

*Group:* (*Laughter.*)

*Miss Bell:* Yes, I do. (*Long Pause.*)

*Mr. Lewis:* Well, are --- are you interested in meeting people?

*Miss Bell:* Yes --- I, ah --- (*Pause.*)

*Mr. Harding:* Do you think you are going about it in the right way?

*Miss Bell:* What?

*Mr. Harding:* Do you think you are going about it --- (*Interrupted.*)

*Miss Bell:* No, I know I'm not --- because I know I don't put forth any
effort to --- to that ---

*Mr. Lewis:* Well, of course, those things --- ah --- it's peculiar,
isn't it, always that, ah (*clears throat*) you're not going about it in
the right way, but you can't go about it in the right way because
something is stopping you --- I had a very interesting experience along
those lines one time. Last year, as a matter of fact. A boy, a
nineteen-year-old boy, (*clears throat*) living near me, was
schizophrenic, and he was making a very fine adjustment. And then he
went off the deep end. And, ah --- and very --- enlightening to see him
try to do things and want to be able to go out and do things and not be
able to. As I say, it's not a case of--- that he didn't want to. He just
couldn't --- (*clears throat*) Well, that's the situation with you,
isn't it, Dorothy?

*Miss Bell:* No. (*The group laughs tensely.*)

*Mr. Lewis:* Well, there's something stopping her.
:::
::::

Although the therapist must actively follow the developing feelings in
the group, and express his understanding and acceptance of what is said,
he cannot be so active as to dominate the group. Our practice has been
for the therapist to delay his responses slightly, to give the group
members an opportunity to take the role of therapist. If, as often
happens, some member of the group picks up the feeling and responds in
such a manner that the speaker can continue his self-exploration, the
therapist remains quiet. But if some important feeling goes unrecognized
or if members of the group make continued expression difficult by
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_308}denying the feelings of a member, the therapist
must come in. Research indicates that therapists fluctuate, in amount of
activity, from meeting to meeting, but that there is generally no
tendency to decrease in activity as the sessions continue. Recalling the
purpose of the therapist may provide an indication of when the therapist
should be active and when he should let group members act in his place:
the goal is to maintain in the group a dependable atmosphere of
acceptance and understanding, where threat to the individual member is
minimal, and where there is maximum safety in self-examination. The
expectation would thus be that the therapist skillfully adjusts his
behavior to insure attainment of this goal.

Telschow has established a number of other interesting relationships
evident in the role of the group therapist. A good index of the
"group-centeredness" of therapy may be found in his correlation between
member and therapist activity. For the groups which he studied, a
correlation of .86 was found between number of statements of a member
and the number of therapist responses to that member. The lower this
correlation, the less the therapist is following the lead of the group.

A finding of his research that goes somewhat contrary to expectation is
that restatement of content, by the therapist, is therapeutically
somewhat more effective than either simple acceptance or clarification
of feeling. The superiority over simple acceptance ("Um-hmm," "I see,"
"I understand," and the like) is not surprising, but reflection of
feeling has long been considered a most helpful kind of therapist
response. Its relative inadequacy may lie in the extent to which
reflections of feeling are interpretive, going beyond the perceptual
field of the individual at the moment. Telschow examines this
possibility further and demonstrates that individuals who did not gain
from the group therapy experience responded most frequently to
clarification of feeling by statements of a distinctively defensive
character ("ambivalent acceptance of interpretation, rejection of
clarification, expressions of confusion, defensive remarks, and
deflection of topic being discussed"). They apparently perceived the
reflections of feeling as being threatening to themselves and responded
in a fashion to []{#017_c7.html_lpn_309}protect their current
self-organizations. The issues need further examination, both in
individual and group therapy situations.

To gain an understanding of the role of the group therapist, we may turn
again to the viewpoint of the client. Here are some excerpts from
diaries kept by group members during the course of therapy:

:::::: block
::::: topbot
:::: sl
I can remember a statement that seems to have helped me most. The group
leader's clarification that I do not feel my values to be as important
as those of others seems to be something I have thought about for a long
while in almost those exact words, and I seem to have a vague feeling of
having verbalized it. Recognition of this by someone else gave me a
great feeling of relief. Now I do not feel called upon to hide it.

::: topbot
I have not considered the group leader apart from the group as a whole.
He stays in the background, although occasionally I am aware that he
points up significant feelings which no one else has commented about.
:::

It's interesting about the group leader. He didn't intrude; yet he seems
like a stabilizing influence.
::::
:::::
::::::

On several occasions members have commented that they are aware of what
the therapist is doing when he responds to someone else in the group,
but that he is most unobtrusive when he is responding to them.
Apparently when he is closely following a person, the therapist becomes
a harmonious part of the thinking, aiding the process but not straining
it by injecting new elements.

G[ROUP]{.sc} M[EMBERS AS]{.sc} T[HERAPISTS]{.sc}

There is a fascinating, and therapeutically very important, interplay of
roles in group therapy. A member may introduce a theme and pursue its
development with the assistance not only of the group leader but of
other members as well. When a new theme is introduced, he may find
himself no longer in the role of the perplexed and anxious client but in
the role of the member who understands best what the new client is
saying and who is most able to assist him in clarifying his perceptions
of himself and []{#017_c7.html_lpn_310}his world. With the introduction
of yet a third theme, he may find himself not too much concerned and
remain on the sidelines. Through the length of a series of sessions,
there is a complex interweaving of roles, with different individuals at
different times coming into focus as clients and as therapists. These
therapist activities of group members are of such consequence in the
development of a group that they call for detailed discussion.

An example of a member acting as a therapist, drawn from a verbatim
record of a group therapy session, can say more than many descriptive
passages:

:::: topbot
::: sl
*Mr. Ray:* (My brother) got his medical degree when he was twenty-four.
Before I went into the Navy, I figured out I'd graduate from college at
such and such an age and get my master's at such and such an age, and
then have my doctorate ahead of me. I was very proud of that. (*Pause.*)
But, uh, now, it no longer means very much to me.

*Mr. Berg:* You think that your parents' attitudes fostered that
feeling?

*Mr. Ray:* My parents have never said, "You are not doing as well as B."
\[his brother\]. They were satisfied when I just did average work.
They've never pushed me --- to do better.

*Mr. Berg:* When he went through, they were very pleased with him.

*Mr. Ray:* Oh, definitely.

*Mr. Berg:* And when you went through, do you think you might have felt
somewhat rejected because there wasn't the same furor over your
achievement? (*Pause.*) I guess I'm projecting myself into it!

*Mr. Ray:* Well, I didn't feel, well, uh, accepted as much as I would
like to have. And I thought that my grades had a great deal to do with
it. (*Pause.*) But I just no longer feel that push to do better ---

*Mr. Hill:* You feel that the, uh, responsibility for the grades is your
own, and that it won't matter to anyone else what you do. Is that the
idea? Your motivation stems from yourself rather than trying to please
somebody else.

*Mr. Ray:* Yeah, I think that's it. I'm no longer so much concerned with
showing my parents that I can do well. I still want to show it to
myself, and, uh, I'm more satisfied, that's all. I don't feel the urge
to rush.

*Mr. Hill:* Sort of --- seems to me it would be sort of a load off your
shoulders.

*Mr. Ray:* Oh, definitely. Not bucking up against something that you
feel you can't overcome.

[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_311}*Leader:* Makes you feel a good bit more
independent --- free.

*Mr. Ray:* Definitely, in that I can satisfy myself and I don't have to
worry about satisfying somebody else.
:::
::::

Gorlow's study (71) of the activities of group members as therapist has
thrown much light on this intricate and intriguing process. Among other
things, he has demonstrated that the interaction between group members
changes in quality as therapy progresses. Members seem to learn to be
better therapists. There is a marked increase in behavior characterized
as permissive and accepting and an accompanying decrease in behavior
characterized as interpretive, evaluative, and critical, from the first
to the last part of therapy. It may be that the member-therapists learn
from the leader, absorbing his attitudes and sensing the reasonableness
and helpfulness of what he does. Or it may be that the kind of behavior
that is characterized as therapeutic can emerge only after the person
has made progress himself in therapy. Permissiveness and the ability to
understand and accept a person may be symptoms of greater personal
security. The individual has less need to distort experience and can
respond more accurately, with less protection of his own conflicts.
Support for the latter hypothesis seems to be available in Gorlow's
finding that individuals who are best adjusted before entering therapy
are those best able to assume the constructive attitudes of the
therapist in the initial sessions. As therapy progresses and other
members gain from the experience, relationship between pre-therapy
adjustment and quality of activity as a therapist disappears. However,
throughout the course of therapy, the members who are initially most
anxious and most hostile, as determined by Rorschach records, use
criticism, evaluation, and disapproval to a greater extent than
initially less anxious and hostile members, who tend to use such
techniques as simple acceptance, clarification of feeling, restatement
of content, approval and encouragement, and reassurance. Whatever the
explanation, it seems certain that group members become more able to
respond to the feelings of others in a manner likely to assist them to
explore these feelings further.

Gorlow also found significant and interesting relationships between gain
in therapy and the assumption of the role of therapist.
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_312}The people who gained most from therapy were
also those who most frequently employed, in their responses to members
presenting problems, the kinds of therapist-statements believed to be
most healing. When the use of nondirective behavior by member-therapists
is plotted against time, the curve for those who were judged "most
profited" rises sharply, while the curve for those judged "least
profited" follows a level course. A two-way possibility is evident here.
The achievement of greater personal integration may make it possible for
a person to be more helpful to others. On the other hand, the very
giving of help may be beneficial. Or both may be true. We are sure only
of the relationship, not of the source or direction of causation.

S[ELECTION OF]{.sc} G[ROUP]{.sc} M[EMBERS]{.sc}

Two sets of probabilities are involved in the question of who should
enter group therapy. One is the likelihood that the individual will gain
from the experience; the other is the likelihood that the group will
gain from his presence. Both considerations are important, but we do not
know how to write an equation that will express their subtle
interrelationships, nor can we identify the personality variables that
should enter into such a calculation. All that we have to go on are
certain rules of thumb. These have been derived not from research but
from our conspicuous failures, and they thus mark outside boundaries in
a very loose fashion. But this is the kind of problem that can be pinned
down by research, and in time we can anticipate increased effectiveness
of group therapy as we know how to choose people for participation and
how to match groups for optimum interpersonal accord.

On the positive side, we can apply the same criteria that have been
developed from experience in individual client-centered therapy, as
described on pages 228--230 (Chapter 5). From the standpoint of the
individual, the only criterion that seems consistently applicable is
whether or not he chooses, without pressure, to join a group and work on
a problem of concern to him. One can think of many kinds of people who
would not be expected to profit from a group experience: the extremely
shy person, the overly anxious []{#017_c7.html_lpn_313}person, the
intensely hostile person, the deeply disturbed person. But our
predictions in individual instances, based upon these reasonable
assumptions, have been defeated as often as they have been sustained. A
person racked by guilt over profoundly disturbing sexual experiences is
able to clear away much of her anxiety and lay substantial plans for
rebuilding her life. A teacher so shy that she could hardly talk in the
group writes voluntarily a year later that the experience meant more to
her than she could express, that for the first time in years she was
really enjoying her work. A very withdrawn person, diagnosed as
schizophrenic, who has been incapable of keeping appointments with his
individual therapist, attends his group regularly and sits there
quietly, with possibly little gain, it is true, but with some evidence
of greater social competency than he had shown previously. Boys from a
gang in Harlem, tough as society can make its outcasts, and by best
prediction poor bets in therapy, come regularly --- and regularly use
the first three-quarters of their hour in bitter mockery of one another,
only to use the last few minutes each week in an intimate exploration of
their consuming hatred of their parents and of all authority. We simply
don't know how to say who will gain and who will not, and sense no
better way of answering this question than to leave it up to the
individual.

On the other hand, we do have some tentative hypotheses concerning
individuals who tend to disrupt a group, and concerning the composition
of groups with reference to the relationships of the people to be
included. Several groups in our experience have had the going made rough
by disturbed but psychologically sophisticated persons who can use their
knowledge of psychodynamics cruelly on others. Members of the group seem
less able to protect themselves from this kind of knowing hardness. If a
person has been in therapy for a year or two, with uncertain gain, we
are beginning to think it best for him to continue to work in individual
therapy, rather than in a group. We have had unhappy experiences of men
with "anxiety state" diagnoses in groups where one of the members had
psychotic tendencies. Unable to respond to the feelings of others, these
deeply disturbed people have occasionally said things that could not be
tolerated by their []{#017_c7.html_lpn_314}anxious and still sensitive
fellow group members. In general, we feel it best not to include in a
group the extremely hostile and aggressive person, whether psychotic or
not, because he makes it difficult, if not impossible, to achieve the
atmosphere of acceptance and freedom from threat that is essential to
the success of the group. Finally, as to overall composition, we think
it desirable not to have a group made up of people who have continued
close daily contact outside of the group. Some groups so composed have
been successful, but others have floundered on the feelings of guilt
that carry over from the group situation to daily life. Expressions of
hostility and of self-doubt which can be sustained in the context of the
group are perceived differently in contacts outside the group and appear
too threatening to the organization of the self that the person is
struggling to maintain. By way of illustration, in our current planning
for work with several groups of married couples -we have considered it a
reasonable caution to ask husband and wife to join different groups
which will meet at different times. We believe that this arrangement
will insure greater freedom to the individual and decrease the
confusion, in daily life, that might result from feelings of guilt and
from possible distorted perception of the partner's expressions in the
group.

The question of the desirability of combining individual and group
therapy occasionally arises. We have done so, with no reason to suggest
that this should not be done and with some evidence that the combination
is particularly effective. We feel the decision should be left to the
individual and his therapist.

Partly as a selection procedure and partly as a means of helping the
person get ready to enter a group, we routinely have an initial
individual interview with each applicant. Here there is an opportunity
for the person and his group therapist to become acquainted with each
other, so that in the first meeting of the group there are some feelings
of intimacy. The client also has an opportunity to learn something of
the nature of the group experience and to make a final decision on
whether to participate or not. And the therapist has an opportunity to
protect the interest of the total group in those few instances where it
seems best to suggest that the person work in individual therapy for a
while, []{#017_c7.html_lpn_315}before deciding to join a group. These
interviews involve some structuring of the coming experience, and every
effort is made to create in this first meeting the feelings of
acceptance and respect which will be nurtured to full flower in the
group.

T[HE]{.sc} E[FFECTIVENESS OF]{.sc} G[ROUP]{.sc} T[HERAPY]{.sc}

The assessment of the effectiveness of group therapy is difficult, as it
is with all therapies. In final analysis, we have to rely on an overall
clinical appraisal, based on the observation of a number of cases, made
by people who are competent to make such judgments. The judgments of
those who have worked with groups is unequivocally on the positive side.
Group therapy does work. It is an effective approach to helping people
with their problems. More specifically, and by the same standards, the
kind of group therapy described here is beyond doubt productive of
personal gain to the individual participants. Let us examine some of the
evidences of gain that we have at this early stage of exploration.

Attempts to assess changes in adjustment have often had to rely in part
on the individual's own estimate of his growth. Shaky as such estimates
may be, they cannot be overlooked without omitting important data. In
our efforts better to understand the process of group-centered therapy,
we have frequently asked group members to write evaluations of their
experience, sometimes anonymously and sometimes with identification.
These have ranged from statements that work with the group has been of
some value to the expressed opinion that it has been a profoundly
significant experience. Even after discounting the statements for a
tendency to be kind and helpful to the investigators, the total
impression remains that people do find much help in group therapy. These
gains are sustained for at least two years, as indicated by follow-up
inquiries, and in some reports the statement is made that the group
provided only an initial impetus for growth.

In statements gathered three months after the conclusion of therapy,
Peres found that individuals expressed not only gains
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_316}which had been experienced in the handling of
specific problems and conflicts, but also two other types of gain. These
were: greater acceptance of self and willingness to be oneself; and
internalization and continuance of the process of therapy. These latter
types of gain may be illustrated by statements from members of the
group. The greater readiness to actualize the self in social situations
is exemplified in the following quotation:

::::: topbot
:::: block
::: sl
I gained a great deal of self-confidence just by being a member of the
group and being accepted by all of them. . . . It seemed to me that by
being frank about my feelings in the group meetings, I was accepted by
all of the others. This carried over, to a great extent, to other
situations. Now upon meeting new people, I'm just "me" without
repressing things and feelings for fear that others might not
understand. (146, p. 170)
:::
::::
:::::

The idea that the process may be taken over and continued within one's
self is an interesting one. A statement by a group member may clarify
the meaning of this.

::::: block
:::: sl
::: top
There's something I find myself doing when I experience tensions outside
the group. I find myself kind of verbalizing the feeling as I do in
counseling, kind of reflecting back to myself my own feelings; in other
words, I was a kind of counselor to myself, and I worked through some of
my own problems that way.

Well, I think that what happened was, I sort of took over the process or
internalized it, so to speak, of what goes on in a counseling situation.
That helped me in other problems that were not necessarily expressed
here.

I'm beginning to feel that maybe it's not just the particular insights,
but the process that underlies the insight that is so valuable. . . .
You feel permissive about your own feelings, you can reflect them, and
that makes you sort of an independent individual. (146, pp. 170--171)
:::
::::
:::::

Or this statement by another member:

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
Much of this understanding was achieved in therapy contacts and much
more after the cessation of contacts when I internalized the habit of
trying to consciously be aware of my *real* feelings --- an
internalization of what went on in therapy. (146, p. 171)
:::
::::
:::::

[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_317}These statements indicate something of the
feeling of change which is experienced by the participant in group
therapy. Whether this is an alteration in feeling only, or is correlated
with other changes, these data do not disclose.

In the verbatim protocols of group therapy sessions there are reported
behavioral changes which are perhaps a more substantial basis for
appraisal of change than the final summary statements. A kind of change
that is most frequently observed is that the individual begins to
perceive his world differently. Circumstances may not alter appreciably,
but his perception of the situation and his behavior in the situation
change. Here is an excerpt from a verbatim protocol which illustrates
the point.

:::: sl
::: topbot
*Mr. Flowers:* An interesting thing happened to me the other day. I got
a letter from my father. He writes beautiful letters, but my wife and I,
we talked it over, and we thought that his feeling was a little
unrealistic. He didn't seem really to understand our problems --- We
always felt a little hostile to him for that --- writing in altruistic
terms --- my wife was making a noble sacrifice going to work --- and
things like that. The letter I got yesterday --- I read it through and
thought, "Gee, that's a swell letter." So I gave it to my wife to read.
I said, "Don't you think that's different?" And she says, "Come to think
of it, I don't see any difference from the rest of them."

*Mrs. Smith:* You mean that the letters haven't changed?

*Mr. Flowers:* Evidently, they haven't. I looked over it again and it
did seem to be the same thing, but I extracted from it a feeling of
interest, that's all.

*Mr. Arnold:* Well, I had something very much the same --- I realize
that I feel different in my relation to my father and mother and that,
uh, actually no change, or very little change, has taken place in them,
since my feelings have changed. The change has been almost entirely in
my department. Having spent part of the week end with them, I was able
to look things over, and they're pretty much the same. But I can respond
to them differently. I don't respond with aggression as much as I used
to do.

*Mr. Flowers:* That's very similar to the experience I had in this last
visit with my parents. Previously there had always been arguments ---
pretty generally on an abstract topic. That's an outlet for my
aggression, I guess. I'd get him very upset, disturbed --- defending his
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_318}identification with the Republican Party. But
this time nothing like that happened. Any discussion we had we merely
agreed upon or stated differences of opinion on. There wasn't that
tension --- that really uncomfortable feeling that I always used to get
with him. It was very different.
:::
::::

And corroborative behavioral evidence is found. A college man with no
social contacts learns to dance and enjoys going to parties; several
delinquent boys obtain jobs; a man finds that his compulsive daydreams
have suddenly just stopped occurring; a woman on the verge of divorce
finds that there is much substance in her marriage; several students
report improved academic grades; and so on. These changes do not occur
for everyone, of course, but they are reported with enough frequency to
give assurance that something important is happening to the people
involved; over and above these, one finds expressions of greater
satisfaction with living. As one girl put it, "The other day walking
down the street, I found myself humming a tune. I didn't know it was me!
Why I haven't done that in years."

Ultimately we must assess the effectiveness of group therapy in
quantitative terms. We shall want to know what percentage of successful
experiences can be expected, and we shall want some index of relative
efficiency between group therapy and individual therapy. Only a
beginning has been made at such quantitative statements. In an extensive
research project involving sixteen participants in group therapy, the
three group leaders judged that eight of the members made clear gains
whereas eight others made none, or only uncertain gains. Their judgments
were corroborated by objective measurements. These figures may be
overestimates or underestimates. The gains observed may have been only
temporary, or the observation of no gain may have been refuted by later
growth initiated in therapy. But this fairly rigorous appraisal is
encouraging. More explicit and detailed statements must await further
study.

SUGGESTED READINGS

::: sl
For a summary of the historical development of group therapy, the reader
is referred to Klapman, *Group Psychotherapy* (102). Other basic
[]{#017_c7.html_lpn_319}books on group therapy are: Moreno, *Group
Therapy* (135); Slavson, *Analytic Group Psychotherapy* (192); Foulkes,
*Introduction to Group-Analytic Psychotherapy* (61); and Schilder,
*Psychotherapy* (177).

For accounts of client-centered group therapy with children, see both
Axline's book (14, Chapters 20, 21, 22) and her article on the handling
of racial tensions in a group of children (15).

Published research in group therapy is practically nonexistent thus far.
The work of Peres (146) is one of the few studies which have been
published. It is hoped that other studies to which reference has been
made will be published in the near future.
:::

[]{#018_c8.html}

<div>

[]{#018_c8.html_c8}

</div>

# []{#018_c8.html_lpn_320}*Chapter* [8]{.chapnum} • Group-Centered Leadership and Administration {.chaptitle}

By [T[HOMAS]{.sc} G[ORDON]{.sc}, Ph.D.]{style="font-size: 150%"}

![](html/docimages/line.jpg){height="10" width="100%"}

Probably no one who has tried consistently to carry on individual
psychotherapy with an orientation that is essentially client-centered
has failed to think about the possibility of applying this philosophy to
group leadership and organizational administration. Staff members
carrying on therapy at the Counseling Center at the University of
Chicago have persistently raised the question whether such factors as
acceptance, understanding, and permissiveness would have effects equally
therapeutic for groups as for individuals. Would it be feasible to try a
therapeutic approach in situations outside of the clinic office? What
would be the effect upon a group if its supervisor tried consciously to
create an accepting atmosphere in which its members could work? Can you
be "therapeutic" in your relations with those for whom you are boss,
leader, administrator? What would be the impact upon a group of teachers
in a high school if the principal used procedures that encouraged them
to express openly their feelings of frustration and discouragement,
their criticisms of administrative policy, as well as their more
positive feelings? What might be the effect upon an industrial
organization if a consultant hired by management acted on the conviction
that his role was to get the organization to learn to solve its own
problems with the []{#018_c8.html_lpn_321}resources within the
organization itself? Such questions have puzzled, provoked, and
challenged us, and this chapter will be devoted to their consideration.
There will be an attempt to formulate certain propositions concerned
with the nature of groups and an attempt to construct a tentative
definition of a social therapeutic approach --- a group-centered
approach --- in leadership and administration.

There are many reasons why it was inevitable that interest would develop
in the application of the principles and philosophy of client-centered
psychotherapy to supervision and administration of groups. Many of us
have found it extremely uncomfortable to hold certain "therapeutic"
attitudes about the disturbed client, yet quite different attitudes
about the members of a factory group, a faculty, a social-action
organization. Was it just a role we were playing in the therapeutic
sessions? That did not seem to be true, for with continued clinical
experience as client-centered therapists, we have come to develop
unusually strong and genuine attitudes about clients' capacities for
self-direction and self-initiated psychological recovery. Rather, it
seems that attitudes learned in the clinical setting, even though they
*are* genuine, are not easily transferred to other social settings.
These attitudes are transferred, apparently, only as we actually
*experience* the effects of trying out a therapeutic approach in each
new situation, first with a group of clients, then in a classroom, then
with a discussion group, then with a staff group. When we first meet a
new interpersonal situation, we are never really sure that the approach
will be effective. Consequently it becomes disturbing to discover that
as a *therapist* you feel no need to direct another's life, but as a
*group leader* you frequently do just that. Or you know the effect of a
nonthreatening atmosphere on clients, yet find yourself consistently
threatening members of your office staff by interpreting their behavior,
interrupting their statements, or reassuring them that their concern
about their lack of progress is unwarranted. The realization of our own
inconsistencies has resulted in some soul-searching on our part. It also
has stimulated our thinking about these matters and has led many of us
to experiment with a group-centered approach with groups.

[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_322}Our early experiences were not wholly
successful. Through them, however, it was discovered that individuals in
groups responded much the same as clients in therapy. We could see
clearly the strong resistances to change, the initial dependence upon
the leader for direction and guidance, the effects of evaluation and
diagnosis, the inevitable frustration of group members on their own. We
could see also the impact of a permissive atmosphere and the force of
the leader's understanding and consistent acceptance. In short, it was
impressive to observe some of the same psychological forces at work in
these groups as had been seen in therapy with individuals. These early
experiences, then, did much to stimulate thinking about therapeutic
group leadership.

There has been another kind of experience which has contributed to our
growing interest in this area. This has been an attempt to try out a new
type of administration in our own Counseling Center organization. Over a
period of a few years, we have experimented with several different
procedures and different organizational structures. The essential
element in all of these has been maximum participation of all staff
members in matters which concern the total group. Although we have much
to learn, and our staff functioning is not always what we might hope
for, we feel from this experience that we have become more aware of some
of the important elements in organizational leadership and
administration.

Impetus to our own thinking and experimentation has been provided also
by the research and theories of others who recently have become
interested in these problems. Some of us have drawn upon the ideas of a
number of investigators and groups, and reference will be made to them
throughout this chapter. The writer has been influenced by the Tavistock
Institute of England, by the group dynamics movement in this country,
and by those persons who are responsible for the National Training
Laboratory at Bethel, Maine.

Finally, motivation for our thinking and work in this area is
undoubtedly due also to the challenge which most social scientists feel
as they survey the present-day problems of our society.
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_323}The crucial problems of our civilization are
human problems. All of us hope to contribute something to the resolution
of the conflicts between different nations, different racial and
religious groups, labor and management. We see the tremendous need for
discovering ways of increasing the participation of the common citizen
in matters which concern him. Gordon Allport has put it well:

::::: block
:::: sl
::: top
. . . the only alternative to a keener analysis of the behavioral
environment and more active participation in reshaping it is to give way
progressively to outer authority, to uniformity, to discipline, and
dependence upon the leader. The battlefield exists here and now within
each of us. The answer to growing complexity in the social sphere is
renewed efforts at participation by each one of us, or else a
progressive decline of inert and unquestioning masses submitting to
government by an elite which will have little regard for the ultimate
interest of the common man. (6, p. 125)
:::
::::
:::::

S[OME]{.sc} P[ROPOSITIONS]{.sc} R[EGARDING THE]{.sc} A[DJUSTIVE]{.sc}
C[APACITY OF]{.sc} G[ROUPS]{.sc}

At this stage of our thinking it would be presumptuous to claim a
well-formulated system of theory about groups. Nevertheless, out of our
experiences we can begin to construct a tentative outline for a theory
that will be consistent with these experiences. Admittedly, this will be
a sketchy outline. At present it exists as a mere skeleton, devoid of
flesh at many points. Its inclusion here is based upon the hope that it
will make more clear our subsequent formulation of the group-centered
approach to leadership and administration.

This theoretical basis for thinking about groups will be presented as a
series of propositions. Many of these are of the nature of assumptions,
and are stated in a form that would make it difficult for them to be
tested experimentally. It would be correct to say that these
propositions simply represent one of several possible frames of
reference for thinking about groups.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
I\) A group is defined as two or more persons who have a psychological
relationship to each other. That is, the []{#018_c8.html_lpn_324}members
exist as a group in the psychological field of each other, and they are
in some kind of dynamic relationship to each other.
:::
::::
:::::

Here we are attempting to set up certain criteria that can be applied to
differentiate a group from other collections of individuals. Borrowing
from the definition of Krech and Crutchfield (106), a group is made up
of persons whose behavior has direct influence upon the behavior of the
other members.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
II\) Groups demonstrate during some specific time period some degree of
instability or disequilibrium as a result of forces within the group.
The group, then, is a dynamic system of forces. Changes in any part of
the group produce changes in the group as a whole.
:::
::::
:::::

This proposition re-emphasizes the notion that the behavior of members
of a group affects the behavior of other members. But it also gives to
groups the qualities of a system of inner dynamic forces that are in a
state of continuous change and reorganization. Take, for example, an
industrial organization whose personnel manager decided to introduce a
new system of evaluating employees. According to Proposition II, such
action on the part of the personnel manager will produce changes in
other parts of the organization. Supervisors may resent the added paper
work made necessary by the new procedures; certain employees may
perceive the new procedures as a means of weeding out the less capable
workers; the union steward sees this action as a breach of the
merit-rating system agreed on by the union and management; a line
supervisor resents the authority of the personnel department over the
"line." A seemingly isolated act, then, actually upsets the equilibrium
of the entire plant structure.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
III\) Group behavior which serves to reduce the disequilibrium produced
by changes in the inner forces of the group may be described as
adjustive behavior. The degree to which the group's behavior is
adjustive will be a function of the appropriateness of the methods
employed by the []{#018_c8.html_lpn_325}group as they are related to the
nature of the internal imbalance.
:::
::::
:::::

This proposition states in a more technical way a fact which we all
recognize. That is, how successfully a group adjusts to an internal
disruptive force depends upon its employing direct and appropriate
methods of attack on the problem. This principle has its counterpart in
individual behavior. A person finds himself in a conflict-producing
situation which upsets his own equilibrium. He becomes tense and
uncomfortable. His turning to alcohol may produce a temporary relief
from the tension, but it is far from being an adjustment appropriate to
the state of conflict which exists in the total organism. Until the
person becomes aware of the nature of the conflict, his behavior is not
likely to be adjustive. In the same way, groups frequently exhibit
non-adjustive or partially adjustive behavior, examples of which are so
numerous as to defy classification. Scapegoating, projecting, inhibiting
expression of feelings, blaming the leaders, attacking other groups,
withdrawing, regressing to a strong dependence relationship to the
leader --- these are some of the more obvious partial solutions employed
by groups.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
IV\) A group's adjustive behavior will be most appropriate when the
group utilizes the maximum resources of its total membership. This means
maximum participation of all group members, each making his most
effective contribution.
:::
::::
:::::

This proposition is a way of saying that the best decisions or the most
appropriate actions of a group will be those based upon the maximum
amount of data or resources of its members. Thus the most effective
group will be the one in which there is participation of all group
members, each member making his most creative contribution. This idea
has been expressed in the report of the President's Committee on Civil
Rights:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Democracy assumes that the majority is more likely as a general rule to
make decisions which are wise and desirable from the point of view of
the interests of the whole society than is any minority. Every time a
qualified person is denied a voice in public affairs, one of the
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_326}components of a potential majority is lost, and
the formation of a social public policy is endangered. . . .

How can the concept of the marketplace of thought, in which truth
ultimately prevails, retain its validity if the thought of certain
individuals is denied the right of circulation? (218, pp. 8--9)
:::
::::
:::::

Although these statements are taken from the context of "civil rights"
for citizens of our nation, they reflect the essence of the proposition
above --- namely, that what is best for a group is that which has been
formulated out of the contributions of all of the group's members.

If this proposition is valid, it helps to clarify the value of
"participation." The concept of group-member participation can be found
in almost every article dealing with the problems of group leadership
and administration. It has been stressed as a principle of industrial
supervision, community action, and labor-management relations. In
psychology this concept has earned the label "ego-involvement." Too
frequently, however, one gets the impression from some of this
literature that participation and ego-involvement on the part of
group-members are things to be achieved so that the group-members will
more readily accept the plans, goals, or decisions *already formulated
by the leaders.* Obtaining participation thus becomes a *leader
technique* for satisfying the members' natural desires for achievement,
status, and recognition. True, participant groups do seem to have better
morale than leader-centered or authoritarian groups. Nevertheless, not
always is participation also seen as contributing to the total
efficiency of the group. Not always is there a genuine belief on the
part of leaders that participation pays off in terms of better
decisions, more production, economic gains, more appropriate group
adjustment.

This narrow conception of participation as a method of obtaining willing
compliance has been noted in the attitudes of some industrial
executives, as pointed out by French, Kornhauser, and Marrow. They
define three main patterns of control in management, one of which is
characterized by efforts to obtain through "participation" and
"cooperation" the workers' compliance, loyalty, good will, and welfare.
These writers emphasize that such dealings are a device employed by
management.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_327}Under these circumstances, "democratic
cooperation" is at best a euphemism, and at worst a deceptive
make-believe process. Sometimes management is deliberately using the
attractive symbols of democracy, participation, man-to-man discussion,
group decision, etc., to create the desired atmosphere within which it
can smoothly manipulate the attitudes of its employees, retain their
loyalty, and still run the business "as it should be run," without
irritating interferences from below. (62, pp. 44--45)
:::
::::
:::::

I am reminded of the remark of a training-group leader to the effect
that his greatest concern was how to reconcile his intellectual
convictions that the group must decide its own goals and methods of
reaching those goals with his equally strong ideas of what those goals
and methods *should* be. This same dilemma is seen in individuals in the
initial stages of learning client-centered psychotherapy as they come to
examine whether their own basic attitudes about people are consistent
with the "technique" they are learning. A minister in one of the courses
in psychotherapy once asked, "How can I as a minister use this approach
in my counseling and yet get the client to end up with the conviction
that it was his faith in the Divine which was responsible for his
recovery?"

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
V\) A group has within itself the adjustive capacities necessary to
acquire a greater degree of internal harmony and productivity and to
achieve a more effective adjustment to its environment. Provided certain
conditions are met, the group will move in the direction of greater
utilization of these capacities.
:::
::::
:::::

This is a re-statement of the basic client-centered hypothesis as
applied to a group rather than to an individual. Like that hypothesis
about the individual, it stresses the positive growth forces which, if
released, result in greater internal harmony and productive efficiency
and more effective adjustment to the environment. It is an hypothesis
that emphasizes the inner capacity of a group. It states that every
group *has* this capacity, but implies that it is a matter of process or
development for a group to approach the *realization* of that capacity.
In other words, a group may not be able to solve immediately an existing
problem, yet it []{#018_c8.html_lpn_328}can and will develop in a
direction which will lead to the best solution of that problem provided
certain essential conditions are met.

It will be apparent that, although expressed in the form of a
proposition, this idea is more in the nature of an hypothesis which the
group-centered leader chooses to hold in his relations with members of a
group. He could choose to hold an entirely different belief about groups
--- one that placed less stress upon the inner capacities of the group
and more stress upon its inherent weaknesses and tendencies toward
submission to outside forces. Such an hypothesis seems to be preferred
by many writers, as is indicated in the following quotation from the
writings of Freud:

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
A group is extraordinarily credulous and open to influence, it has no
critical faculty, and the improbable does not exist for it. . . .
Inclined as it itself is to all extremes, a group can only be excited by
an excessive stimulus. Anyone who wishes to produce an effect upon it
needs no logical adjustment in his arguments; he must paint in the most
forcible colors, he must exaggerate, and he must repeat the same thing
again and again. . . . It respects force and can only be slightly
influenced by kindness, which it regards merely as a form of weakness. .
. . It wants to be ruled and oppressed, and to fear its masters. . . .
And, finally, groups have never thirsted after truth. They demand
illusions, and cannot do without them. They constantly give what is
unreal precedence over what is real; they are almost as strongly
influenced by what is untrue as by what is true. They have an evident
tendency not to distinguish between the two. . . . A group is an
obedient herd, which could never live without a master. It has such a
thirst for obedience that it submits instinctively to anyone who
appoints himself as its master. (65, pp. 15--21)
:::
::::
:::::

It is true, perhaps, that history provides many examples of groups in
which such characteristics have predominated, and this fact makes it
understandable why some would choose to adopt this kind of hypothesis
about groups. It is possible, however, to find in history examples of
groups which have demonstrated quite different characteristics --- those
which require us to have a great deal more respect for the inherent
potentialities of the group for self-direction, self-protection, and
appropriate adjustments. It is just []{#018_c8.html_lpn_329}such a
respect that seems a part of the attitudes of those who have chosen to
operate with groups in terms of the hypothesis that is contained in
Proposition V. While recognizing that groups have both the tendencies
described by Freud and also more positive tendencies, some leaders
choose to hypothesize that the latter are the stronger.

This proposition is explicit in its emphasis upon "movement," growth, or
development of the group. This is to say that the group's achievement of
a state in which it is able to utilize its maximum potential is the
result of a certain process of development. Groups usually do not have
this characteristic. Quite the contrary, most groups operate far from
this ideal. Apparently few groups in our culture are ever provided with
the conditions whereby they might move toward maximum utilization of
their potential. It is more common for a group to rely upon the
contributions of only a part of its membership while the rest of the
group dissipates its energies in *reacting against* the control and
authority of the more active members. It is here that group behavior can
be deceiving. Often all members of a group are *active*, but upon closer
examination it is usually found to be what McGregor (123) has called
*reactive* behavior. As Allport has pointed out, "a person ceases to be
reactive and contrary in respect to a desirable course of conduct only
when he himself has had a hand in declaring that course of conduct to be
desirable." (6, p. 123) Few groups ever reach the state where its
members are given this opportunity.

How do groups reach such a state? How do groups approach the maximum
utilization of their potential? What kind of process is necessary for
groups to move in this direction? These are the crucial questions, yet
we have no definitive answers for any of them. Our own experience would
lead us to believe that certain conditions facilitate this process.
There may be others of which we are not aware. Before describing some of
the conditions that we feel are required for the releasing of this group
process, it would seem necessary to examine our concept of leadership as
it relates to our framework for looking at groups.

A C[ONCEPT OF]{.sc} G[ROUP]{.sc} L[EADERSHIP]{.sc}

[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_330}Accompanying the gradual evolution of this
theoretical framework for thinking about groups and organizations, there
has emerged in the writer's thinking a particular concept about group
leadership. Changes in thinking both about groups and about the
leadership function in groups have gone on simultaneously, one serving
as a check against the other, and each contributing something to the
other. Both are still undergoing constant revision. This close
relationship between a theory of group functioning and a concept of
group leadership is probably as it should be. A conceptual framework for
thinking about groups must include a theory of the leadership function.
What is "group leadership"? What is meant by the "leadership function"?
What sort of concept of group leadership will be consistent with the
particular way in which groups have been perceived in the preceding
pages?

*The Leadership Function*

Leadership is most commonly perceived as a function, or group of
functions, carried out by some individual member of a group. This
particular person is sometimes thought of as the group member who has
been given or has acquired the *responsibility* for the group. Thus, the
industrial supervisor is responsible for those workers who are
designated as members of "his" work-group or "his" section. Implicit is
the idea that the leader is responsible to someone "above" him, usually
his leader or supervisor. Frequently, the leader is thought of as the
person in a group who has been given or has acquired the *authority*
over other members of the group. "By virtue of the authority vested in
him" the leader has the "power" to make certain decisions affecting some
aspects of the lives of members in his group. Responsibility for a group
and authority over a group frequently are combined inseparably in the
idea of leadership. Nevertheless, it is not uncommon to stress one or
the other. Thus, the military leader has certain authority over "his"
men. A person also may be perceived as a leader because of certain
distinctive *skills or abilities* which he possesses or because he has
more of one particular skill []{#018_c8.html_lpn_331}or ability than
others in a group. The teacher, the business executive, the team captain
may owe their positions as leaders to this kind of differentiation from
the group members. In our particular culture we prefer to think that
leadership is usually based upon this differential. It is in this
connection that leadership has most often been thought of as a role that
is gained through the acquisition of certain stereotyped leader
qualities or skills. One must be a good speaker, have a forceful
personality, "know people," be educated, keep ahead of the others, and
possess any number of highly desirable character and personality traits.

These are common ways of looking at leadership. It is seen as a function
carried out by a *person.* It is something invested in one particular
group member. Whether or not that member is perceived as being
differentiated from the others as regards responsibility, authority,
skill, knowledge, status, or power --- the fact is that the
differentiation is made. Associated with this differentiation are
certain expectations that the leader has more at stake, will take a more
active role than others, has certain powers over the others, is more
capable than others in selecting group goals, can make "policy
decisions," will give the group guidance and direction. Such
expectations may be thought of as parts of a generalized attitude on the
part of group members toward the leader: *dependence*. McGregor, in
discussing the characteristics of the supervisor-subordinate
relationship in industrial organizations, elaborates on this point as
follows:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Psychologically the dependence of the subordinate upon his superiors is
a fact of extraordinary significance, in part because of its emotional
similarity to the dependence characteristic of another earlier
relationship: that between the child and his parents. The similarity is
more than an analogy. The adult subordinate's dependence upon his
superiors actually reawakens certain emotions and attitudes which were
part of his childhood relationship with his parents, and which
apparently have long since been outgrown. The adult is usually unaware
of the similarity because most of this complex of childhood emotions has
been repressed. Although the emotions influence his behavior, they are
not accessible to consciousness under ordinary circumstances. (123, p.
428)
:::
::::
:::::

[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_332}McGregor's analysis of this relationship is
undoubtedly an accurate one. Yet it must be pointed out that he is
observing leadership as it exists today, not only in industry, but in
almost all organizations --- leadership that is a function carried out
by a single person.

It is quite possible, however, to think of leadership in a different way
--- namely, as the property of the total group or organization.
Leadership, in these terms, becomes a set of functions, not vested in a
single person, but rather functions which must be carried out by the
group. Leadership is, then, not a role to be played by one member of a
group, but rather a set of functions to be performed within the group in
order that the group may make adjustments, solve problems, and develop
its potentials. Benne and Sheats (23), as well as others associated with
the "group dynamics" movement, have effectively encouraged this way of
looking at leadership. They have called attention to the notion of the
"diffusion of leadership" throughout the group, implying that the
leadership functions should ideally be taken over by group members.

Leadership, then, may be thought of as a set of functions which are the
property of the group and which, under ideal conditions, become
distributed within the group. This concept of "distributed leadership"
is an important one. It is possible to see it now in relation to one of
our earlier propositions about groups --- namely, that a group will make
the most appropriate adjustment when it utilizes the maximum creative
potential of its membership. Stated simply, the adjustive behavior of
the group will be most appropriate when each member is free at any time
to take on some of the functions of leadership. As emphasized earlier,
however, this state rarely exists in groups. Most organizations operate
far from this ideal. It is rarely possible to say of a group that its
leadership is distributed or that its members are making their maximum
contribution.

::::: block
:::: block1
::: topbot
*The very existence of a group leader*, *either real or perceived*, *may
be a deterrent to the distribution of leadership throughout the group.*
:::
::::
:::::

This statement needs further examination, because most groups
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_333}*do* have leaders. Some groups have a
*structured* leader-role which is kept filled by some member of the
group, as in almost all of our industrial and business organizations,
our educational, religious, and political institutions --- in fact,
practically all of the institutionalized groups in our culture.
Sometimes the group members have something to say about the choice of
person to fill the role, sometimes not. Other groups have a leader
*imposed* on them, in which case the members have little voice in the
selection of the leader. This would be true of the countless groups of
students who walk into their classes for the first time and find their
leaders already chosen for them. In a sense, this would be true also of
the family group; for the newborn child enters this group finding the
leader, the head of the family, already selected for him. In other
groups, there may not be either a structured leader-role or an imposed
leader, but rather a *perceived leader.* In such groups, the group
members perceive a leader amongst them, sometimes despite the fact the
person to whom the group looks for leadership may not realize he is thus
perceived. Frequently this person is differentiated from the other
members simply by his status, his superior knowledge, his age, his
behavior, his dress, or any number of other factors. This is seen in
groups that are formed spontaneously, such as a party group, an *ad hoc*
committee, or an action group. Boys' gangs, play groups, informal
discussion groups --- all seem to develop leaders that are often only
perceived as such. The members of such groups look to particular persons
for leadership, and accept their assumption of the leadership role. The
perceived leader has a less secure position than the chosen or imposed
leader, needless to say, for the perceptions of group members change
much more easily than does the structure of an institution.

Here the thesis has been advanced that leaders inhibit group growth, yet
almost all groups, if not all, have leaders. This appears to be a
stalemate. The difficulty, however, probably can be found in the very
nature of previous conceptions of leadership and the leader-role. A
solution to this dilemma might be that a concept of leadership is
emerging which would make it possible for a group to have a particular
kind of leader who would facilitate the distribution of leadership, and
would accelerate the []{#018_c8.html_lpn_334}development of a group
toward the maximum utilization of its potential.

*A Concept of Leadership and a Paradox*

What is emerging from recent attempts to utilize "therapeutic"
approaches in group leadership and administration is both a new concept
of leadership and a paradox growing out of this concept. The paradox may
already be apparent from the previous paragraphs. It may be stated more
explicitly as follows:

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
*The most effective leader is one who can create the conditions by which
he will actually lose the leadership.*
:::
::::
:::::

Thus, the person who finds himself the leader of a group will, by
creating the proper conditions, distribute the leadership function
throughout the group. It seems that there may be a direct relationship
between the degree to which the leadership is given over to the group
and the extent to which the group will utilize the maximum potential of
its members. The resemblance is striking between this principle and the
belief of the client-centered counselor that the more willing he is for
the client to assume responsibility and direction for his own life, the
more rewarding is the release of the strengths and capacities which
exist within the client.

Why should it be true that leadership is distributed throughout a group
only to the degree that the leader relinquishes it? It is known how
dependence upon a leader operates to inhibit independent behavior on the
part of group members. We have seen, too, how authority produces
reactive rather than constructive and creative behavior. We have
evidence of the reluctance of people to "show their ignorance" in the
presence of the expert, or the well-informed person. People apparently
must feel secure and free from threat in order to be themselves, in
order to participate freely, in order to expose their ideas or feelings
to others. Traditional leadership, it seems, rarely gives people such
security and freedom.

By giving up the leadership to the group, it might be said that the
leader progressively becomes more of a group member. He
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_335}becomes another potential contributor to the
group effort. Thus, the goal of the effective leader becomes one of
gradually getting acceptance from the group members as a person who is
"just one of them." It should be pointed out, however, that this goal is
often used by leaders simply as a technique for disguising the real
differences between them and the group --- a technique that is often
satirized as the "buddy-buddy" approach in group leadership. "Just think
of me as one of you," an administrator was recently overheard saying.
The industrial executive especially goes to great lengths sometimes to
create the impression that he is "just one of the boys on the team." It
is very doubtful that these techniques accomplish their purpose of
changing group members' perceptions of the leader as the one who has
more authority, status, responsibility, or skill. Frequently, leaders
even employ this approach as a subtle technique for influencing the
group in the direction the leader would like to have it go. They attempt
to disguise their influence on the group through posing as group
members. Some leaders, however, honestly believe that they should become
just members of the group, and they have no ulterior motives in doing
so. Even in this case, if the members perceive a person as a leader,
that person is only escaping the situation if he denies that he has such
a role. From our experience, it would seem almost a principle that,
whenever a person is perceived as a leader, the process of transferring
his leadership to the group cannot be accomplished by fiat. This is to
say that he can best transfer the leadership *by remaining as the
leader*, until he can effectively create the conditions required for
members to *learn* to assume the leadership. This principle seems, at
first, like a contradiction, but in practice it usually happens that the
leader who pretends to be just another member is actually perceived as
one who secretly has goals for the group, or who is compensating for his
previous attempts to direct the group, or who is actually insecure about
his ability as a leader.

Here, then, is a concept of leadership in which it is recognized that
the commonly accepted leader-role acts as a deterrent to the
distribution of the leadership functions throughout the group. Yet it
stresses the importance of distributed leadership, if the
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_336}group is to utilize the maximum potential of its
members. At the same time it calls attention to the fact that the
transference of the leadership functions from the leader to the group is
a process that involves the group members' learning to assume these
functions. This theory attempts to explain that it is not usually
possible for the leader either to dump the leadership onto the group or
to pretend that he is giving it up when in reality he wants to keep it
himself. Finally, the thesis is advanced that the leader can actually
facilitate the process of leadership-transference by accepting his role
of leader, but carrying out a different kind of leadership function ---
one that makes the focus of his efforts the creation of certain
conditions required for releasing the adjustive capacity of the group.

In the next section an attempt will be made to examine more in detail
the role of this "nonleading leader." What conditions does this type of
leader try to create? What are the critical dimensions of this kind of
leadership? An effort will be made to draw on both our own experience
and the experiences of others in order to describe how such a leader
functions. Finally, it will be necessary to face some very crucial, but
puzzling problems that grow out of attempts to try out this type of
leadership in real situations.

A F[ORMULATION OF]{.sc} G[ROUP]{.sc}-C[ENTERED]{.sc} L[EADERSHIP]{.sc}

From recent attempts to apply principles derived chiefly from
psychotherapy to group situations, it is possible to begin to define
certain aspects of the group leader's role that seem to be critical from
the standpoint of their effects upon the group. First, it may be well to
look at the leader's role in a broad sense. It might be emphasized that
a leader certainly may choose one of several approaches to group
leadership and administration. The approach that is being formulated
here is only one of a number of different approaches. It has been called
a "group-centered" approach because this term seems to emphasize that
the primary concern of the leader is in facilitating the group's
development, helping the group clarify and achieve its goals, aiding the
group []{#018_c8.html_lpn_337}to actualize itself. He discards his own
goals, puts aside his concern for his own development, and centers his
attention outside of himself. The term "group-centered" has little value
in and of itself, and certainly it is not our intention to place
emphasis upon the mere name. Leadership has many dimensions, and whether
or not an approach to groups is "group-centered" or "leader-centered" is
only a very general level of description. A term was needed, and this
term was selected.

Others (95) have used the term "social therapy" to describe an approach
which is essentially similar in its emphasis upon group development,
active participation of group members, and the use of some of the
methods of psychotherapy by the group leader. In many ways this is a
more descriptive term, yet "therapy" may have certain undesirable
connotations in connection with its use with groups. Needless to say,
however, the approach that is presented here is believed to be
therapeutic in a real sense. Defined quite broadly, group-centered
leadership is an approach in which the leader places value on two goals:
the ultimate development of the group's independence and
self-responsibility, and the release of the group's potential
capacities.

It might be said that the group-centered leader chooses to adopt goals
which are long-range rather than immediate. He is confident that the
group will solve its immediate problems, yet he helps the group become
more capable of solving future problems. He is confident that the group
will take action, but he accelerates the process whereby its action will
be self-initiated. He is interested in the group as a developing social
organism. He sees his function as that of helping the group to work out
its own adjustment, and by so doing to become more self-responsible than
before. And because he holds such values, the group-centered leader is
more comfortable adopting a role that seems to him consistent with these
values.

Group-centered leadership has its origins in the application of
principles of client-centered psychotherapy to groups and organizations.
Consequently, it is to be expected that the group-centered leader holds
attitudes similar to those of the client-centered therapist. As these
have been described in a previous
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_338}chapter,^[33](#025_endnotes.html_e33){#018_c8.html_f33}^
they will not be presented here. It will be well, however, to translate
these attitudes into terms applicable for the group leader. The
group-centered leader believes in the worth of the members of the group
and respects them as individuals different from himself. They are not
persons to be used, influenced, or directed in order to accomplish the
leader's aims. They are not people to be "led" by someone who has
"superior" qualities or more important values. The group-centered leader
sees the group or organization as existing for the individuals who
compose it. It is the vehicle for the expression of their personalities
and for the satisfaction of their needs. He believes that the group as a
whole can provide for itself better than can any single member of the
group. He believes in the group's fundamental right to self-direction
and to self-actualization on its own terms. Rogers in an earlier
publication, examining the attitudes which he feels he must have as an
administrator, asks himself certain questions:

::::: block
:::: top
::: sl
1\. Do I trust the capacities of the group, and of the individuals in
the group, to meet the problems with which we are faced, or do I
basically trust only myself?

2\. Do I free the group for creative discussion by being willing to
understand, accept, and respect *all* attitudes, or do I find myself
trying subtly to manipulate group discussion so that it comes out my
way?

3\. Do I, as leader, participate by honest expression of my own
attitudes but without trying to control the attitudes of others?

4\. Do I rely upon basic attitudes for motivation, or do I think surface
procedures motivate hehavior?

5\. Am I willing to be responsible for those aspects of action which the
group has delegated to me?

6\. Do I trust the individual to do his job?

7\. When tensions occur, do I try to make it possible for them to be
brought out into the open? (171, pp. 546--548)
:::
::::
:::::

C[ONDITIONS]{.sc} W[HICH THE]{.sc} G[ROUP]{.sc}-C[ENTERED]{.sc}
L[EADER]{.sc} T[RIES TO]{.sc} C[REATE]{.sc}

As an implementation of his basic philosophy and his attitudes, the
group-centered leader tries to create for the group some of
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_339}the same conditions which in individual and
group therapy have been found essential for releasing the constructive
forces within the client.

*The Opportunity for Participation*

Group problems require group decisions and group action. For a group to
move toward maximum utilization of its potential, the members of the
group must feel that they at least have the opportunity to participate
in matters which will affect them. Denial of that opportunity seems to
pave the way for reactive, resistive behavior on the part of the members
of an organization. This idea is not at all a new one, but it has
received more scientific validity in recent years as a necessary
condition for both group and individual development. In the exciting
work of the investigators who have conducted the Peckham experiments
(144), a public health project in an English community, we have a
dramatic illustration of the effects of providing the opportunity for
families to participate in self-selected activities. It is clear from
the descriptions of this
project^[34](#025_endnotes.html_e34){#018_c8.html_f34}^ that the
citizens began to be interested in their own health and subsequently
took active steps to improve it because they were simply given the
opportunity to participate.

The experiments on changing food habits which have been reported by
Radke and Klisurich (152) seem to show clearly the values of housewives'
participation in the process of arriving at group action-decisions.
Golden and Ruttenberg (67) describe several examples in industry of the
beneficial effects of management's extending to labor the opportunity to
participate in matters that traditionally have been considered the
prerogative of management alone. In another study, conducted by the
Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan (206) and mentioned
in an earlier chapter, it was found that one of the factors
distinguishing supervisors of low-productivity work-groups from
supervisors of high-productivity work-groups was that more of the latter
encouraged employee participation in the making of decisions. Even in
the area of child-rearing practices there is
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_340}some evidence of the values of giving children
an opportunity to participate in matters concerning the entire family.
In this connection, Baldwin, Kalhorn, and Breese (17) found that in
those families characterized as "democratic" the child was given
adequate opportunity to express his own views, he was consulted about
questions of policy, and his opinions were given the same consideration
as those of an adult. Children from such homes tended to show better
social adjustment during their later school years and also greater
increases in I.Q. Some of the effects of active participation of group
members in a relatively self-directing training group have been reported
by the writer (70). Marked changes in attitudes toward others, increased
understandings of self, and increased clarity of goals were reported by
these group members as products of their group experience.

These studies are representative of an increasing number that strongly
suggest that the opportunity for group members to participate is a
necessary condition for the growth of a group. But will not the members
of an organization usurp power from the leaders? How can those with less
training, less intelligence, and fewer skills make adequate decisions
for a group? Are not the leaders better qualified to decide on broad
policy matters? These are some of the questions that are frequently
asked, not coincidentally, by those who are in a position of leadership
in a group. Our own experience would be that group members may usurp
power, but it is only as a *reaction against* the perceived threat of
the power of their leaders. When the source of threat is removed, our
experience has been that the problem actually becomes one of how to get
the members to take *more* responsibility, not less. We probably tend to
underestimate how much of human behavior is behavior in reaction to the
perceived threat of authority --- and how little of human behavior is
self-initiated. To understand how strong are the external stimuli to the
usual kind of group behavior, we have only to observe the initial
frustration and dependence of groups that are put on their own by their
leaders.

This dependence was illustrated in the first session with a group of
high school "problem children." After the leader had explained that they
were being given the opportunity to meet []{#018_c8.html_lpn_341}once a
week to talk about whatever they wanted to, the group found it difficult
to begin, as illustrated in the following verbatim excerpt from the
recorded interview:

:::: sl
::: topbot
(*Long pause.*)

*B:* Gonna waste a lotta wire dat way. (*Refers to the wire recorder.*)

*T:* Yes.

*Leader:* Hm?

*B:* Gonna waste a lotta wire dat way.

*Leader:* You're worried about --- that nobody's --- that we have long
pauses, hmm?

*B:* M-hm.

*T:* No station identification either. (*Giggles.*)

*Leader* (*laughing*): During the pause, hm?

*B:* Corn, corn. (*Long pause.*)

*B:* Trouble is, you should give us something definite to talk on. This
way we will get all mixed up. Nobody wants no --- nobody knows what to
talk about. Give us a definite point.

*Leader:* It's kind of uncomfortable to just be free to talk about
anything you want to. You'd almost want me to tell you what to talk
about.

*G:* Well, just give us a point *to* talk about. Just place somethin' in
front of us. You can't whittle without a piece of wood in your hand. You
gotta have something to whittle on.

*B:* I think it'd be better if you asked us a little --- a little bit of
questions. It's like dis, you know. You won't find out nuttin outa
nobody unless you ask questions, because you can go up in --- in a
class, and if the teacher has a question on the board, the only way
she'll get somebody to answer is to call on a person herself.

*Leader:* In other words, you would --- you would feel, and as I gather
you are speaking from your own feelings there, that you kinda don't want
to talk unless something --- somebody ---

*B:* Something --- there's a definite point to talk about.

*Leader:* I see. (*Pause*) Well, what I've tried to convey is that I
don't have anything in mind I want you to talk about. In other words,
this is an opportunity for you to talk about whatever you'd like to talk
about.

*S:* Give us something to talk about.

*P:* After you're through wit' your school hours and go home, whatever
you do after school hours --- that's your business, isn't it? I mean,
like the school --- you go over your girl friend's house and they don't
think --- []{#018_c8.html_lpn_342}think it's right for you to go way
over there. And they --- they tell you that you can't go to this school
unless you stop goin' over there.

*Leader:* I gather you kinda feel it's a person's own business where he
goes after school hours, and I gather you kinda resent their telling you
what to do about that.

*A:* I don't think the school has no right to say what kind of sweaters
we ought to wear. I was wearin' a sweater that Miss --- said I should
take it off. I go to this school now, she said, and I shouldn't wear the
sweater of a different school.

*S:* Doesn't matter what sweater; they got no business tellin' you how
to dress.

*Leader:* You feel they're kinda interfering with something that's your
own business.

*P:* That's right. They even tell you which boys to hang around with.
(*Others:* Yeah.) I got in trouble . . .
:::
::::

It is clear from this illustration that the group members were very
reluctant to begin discussing problems of their own. It is almost
certain that in most other situations with adults they have depended
upon the adults to provide the structure and the impetus. In time,
however, one of the group cautiously opened the discussion and was soon
followed by another. When they began to see that the leader was
understanding and accepting of these early comments, others joined in,
coming forth with strong feelings about the school and its attempts to
control them. This continued for the remainder of the hour-long session,
no more appeals being made to the leader for direction. At the second
session the same pattern was repeated; that is, the group showed a
similar dependency on the leader for getting the discussion started,
then cautiously took over the responsibility and eventually carried the
discussion for the remainder of the session.

Returning to the question of whether group members are really qualified
by training or native ability to make adequate decisions for a group,
our experience in our own staff functioning would lead us to answer in
the affirmative. True, group decisions often turn out to be less than
adequate, and the issue has to be reopened for further staff
consideration. Yet it seems to many of us on the staff that some of the
most inappropriate []{#018_c8.html_lpn_343}decisions we make are those
which have been arrived at without total staff participation --- without
considering all the data which could be brought to bear on the problem.

This question of the group members' ability versus the leader's ability
to make sound decisions for a group is often examined inaccurately.
Actually the question is not whether the group members *or* the leader
can make the soundest decisions for a group. It is whether the leader
without the group members can make better decisions than can the total
group *including the leader.* One of the things we have seen in our own
organization is the willingness --- or rather eagerness --- with which
the group solicits and uses the various specialized skills contained in
the total group membership. On the matter of making decisions in an
industrial organization, Morris L. Cooke, a consulting engineer, has
written:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Management today may include thousands of employees --- all agents of
the stockholders --- ranging from the president . . . down to the
lowliest gang boss. . . . It has been a treasured theory that those of
us who have the authority --- by virtue of title, salary, or what have
you --- to make decisions, actually do make them; whereas, as a matter
of fact, most well-rendered decisions grow wholly out of the assembled
facts. When these preliminaries to a decision have been well conducted,
usually only one wise decision is possible. The making of decisions, of
course, is not a function reserved for the top. They are being made
constantly at all levels in an industrial organization. (68, p. 464)
:::
::::
:::::

Thus, decision-making is seen as a process --- a procedure by which
relevant data are obtained from and examined by the total group. Those
of us who have tried working in a group in which all members are given
opportunity to participate in making decisions sometimes wonder how it
was possible for us in past leadership roles to base our decisions on
such inadequate data and on so few of the pertinent elements, the most
important of which are often the attitudes and feelings of the members.

*Freedom of Communication*

A second condition which the group-centered leader attempts
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_344}to create is the absence of barriers to free
communication between all members of the group. In most groups or
organizations this condition is seldom met. Why is it necessary for all
the members of a group to be able to communicate freely with one
another? There seem to be at least two important reasons for this.
First, if there are barriers to free communication between individuals,
hostile attitudes developing as a result of normal interpersonal
conflicts are much less likely to be resolved. This is Newcomb's thesis
in his stimulating article on autistic hostility.

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
Hostile impulses commonly arise, then, when status-relationship is so
perceived that another is viewed as a threat. . . . If, as a result of a
hostile attitude emerging from the newly perceived status relationship,
communication with the other person is avoided, the conditions necessary
for eliminating the hostile attitude are not likely to occur. (142, p.
72)
:::
::::
:::::

Freedom of communication, then, is a necessary condition for friendly
interpersonal relations between members of a group. A group fighting
within itself and not communicating is seldom capable of adequate
adjustive behavior.

A second reason why free communication is a requirement for an effective
group is that it is important for group members to develop mutual
understandings --- sign-processes common to all the members, as the
semanticists would say. It is difficult for a group to reach agreement
as to the most appropriate action in a particular situation if the
various members interpret the situation in radically different ways ---
that is, if the situation for each person has a different meaning and
this meaning is not shared by the others in the group.

The writer recently carried out a project aimed at the development of a
more objective method of evaluating pilots than the methods in current
use. Strong opposition to the project was encountered almost
immediately, forcing the researchers to engage in extensive
communication with those who were blocking the project. Only after many
conferences and discussions did it become clear that the proposed
evaluation procedures had different meanings for different groups of
people, somewhat as follows:

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_345}*The researchers:* The proposed procedures meant
a more reliable, more objective, more diagnostic, and more valid measure
of pilot performance. They would help the airline companies by weeding
out the poorer pilots, and they would help the pilot by insuring him
against inaccurate and prejudiced assessments of his skill.

*The pilots:* The proposed procedures meant debasing the pilots'
"profession" by assuming it was possible to quantify their performance
as has been done for unskilled workers. The procedures meant a powerful
tool which management could employ as an excuse for firing pilots. They
meant a means of making public the quantitative differences in the
abilities of pilots --- that is, pilots would be graded and classified.

*The examiners:* The proposed procedures meant more "paper work." They
also meant a method of checking on the accuracy of the examiners'
grading. The new procedures also would devaluate the significance of
their job by "taking the fine judgment and skill out of evaluation,"
thus making them mere "clerks" or "recorders."
:::
::::
:::::

It was naïve to expect that these people would work cooperatively on the
development of the new procedures. Only after these different
perceptions of the new methods were eventually understood and shared by
all the persons involved did it become clear to all what the
requirements were for any new evaluation procedure. Cooperation was
effected only after a large number of conferences with representatives
of each interested group. Free communication between these groups had
the effect of creating a new perception of the proposed evaluation
procedures which was shared by all. The task became one of cooperatively
working at the development of a procedure that would be objective yet
not mechanical, that would be standardized yet leave room for the
individual judgment of the check-pilot, that would differentiate
qualified and unqualified pilots but not show degrees of proficiency
among those who qualified. The result was a procedure that was far more
appropriate to the realities of the situation than one that might have
been developed before the groups shared their different perceptions.

The barriers to communication within groups or organizations exist only
as they are perceived by the individual members as barriers. What is a
barrier to one person may not be to another.
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_346}Thus, highly formalized communication procedures
--- written memoranda, prescribed channels, and parliamentary procedures
--- may be perceived as barriers to free communication by some group
members, but others may find such procedures in no way limiting to their
communication. Similarly, such procedures may limit communication in one
organization, and may not in another. Nevertheless, it is likely that
there are certain things that universally limit free communication in
groups. These may be such conditions as physical space separation,
absence of face-to-face contacts, clumsy and complicated methods of
communication, and excessively demanding jobs which do not permit time
for communication. Apparently, these conditions, which can be thought of
as barriers existing in the physical reality of an organization, are
important. Yet the significance of such barriers can be overemphasized.

Perhaps even greater barriers to free communication are the more subtle
conditions that are frequently perceived by the group member as threats
to his own self. This is to say that each individual group member
constructs *within himself* the really effective barriers to free
communication. If this is true, it is clear why a nonthreatening climate
is another fundamental condition required for releasing the adjustive
capacities of groups.

*A Nonthreatening Psychological Climate*

The concept of a "group climate" has been used by a number of different
investigators as an abstraction for certain characteristics of a group
that seem to have potent effects on the behavior and attitudes of its
members. The concept achieved wide recognition as a result of the
studies of Lewin, Lippitt, and White (119) on the effects of
experimentally created social climates on the behavior of children.
These researchers used the concept of climate to stand for different
patterns of adult leadership. They differentiated three basic patterns:
autocratic, democratic, and laissez-faire. These terms came to be used
to describe the "climates" that the investigators assumed were induced
by the three different leadership patterns. Thus, for them, the
different climates were equated with the different leadership patterns.
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_347}Anderson and Brewer (8) have used the concept of
climate in almost the same way --- that is, they have equated the
climates of different classrooms with different patterns of teacher
behavior. Withall (225) has also defined classroom climate in terms of
whether the teacher's behavior was learner-centered, teacher-centered,
or neutral. All these studies define climate by the kind of behavior
exhibited by the leader or teacher.

It is possible, however, to think of climate as something perceived or
felt by the students in a class or the members of a group --- that is,
climate can be examined from the frame of reference of the group
members. Thelen and Withall (212) have attempted to do just this, but
they obtain from their subjects only a positive or a negative reaction,
and it is difficult to know just what these reactions mean to the
members. Their study is important, however, in that it attempts to
obtain a measure of climate as perceived by the group member, though it
does not give many clues as to the dimensions of the perceived climate.

Some evidence of the actual dimensions of climate has been obtained in
studies of the effects of client-centered therapy as seen through the
eyes of the client. As a matter of fact, it has been from the recorded
statements of our clients that we have obtained the greatest number of
clues as to the nature of the psychological climate as experienced by
them. If we can accept this kind of evidence, it seems that clients most
often experience a feeling of lack of threat. They feel they are in a
"safe" atmosphere. They feel they are not being judged or evaluated.
They feel they are being understood --- the therapist is listening
carefully and understanding what they are saying. They feel "accepted."
The therapist seems to convey to them that he accepts all aspects of
their personality --- their feelings of hopelessness, hostility, and
dependence, as well as their more positive feelings. In this situation
they feel free from outside pressures to change.

This same kind of nonthreatening, accepting psychological climate is
what the group-centered leader tries to create for his group. This aim
is rooted firmly in his belief that the individual, when free from
forces which he perceives as threats to the self or the self-concept,
will actualize the positive and constructive forces that are within him.

[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_348}S[OME]{.sc} D[ISTINCTIVE]{.sc} F[UNCTIONS]{.sc}
C[ARRIED]{.sc} O[UT BY THE]{.sc} G[ROUP]{.sc}-C[ENTERED]{.sc}
L[EADER]{.sc}

Some of the conditions which the group-centered leader tries to create
have been examined. Just how does he go about this task? What is
group-centered leadership in more operational terms? Considerably more
research is needed before we can state with any degree of certainty what
are the essential dimensions of his role. An attempt will be made,
however, to define certain distinctive functions which he carries out in
the group.

*Conveying Warmth and Empathy*

There are characteristics of leader behavior which are difficult to
describe, but apparently easy for people to perceive in a leader. Warmth
and empathy are terms used to represent something basic in a leader's
manner which is of importance in his attempt to create a nonthreatening,
accepting atmosphere. Undoubtedly it is a pattern of behavior which
manifests itself in the leader's speech, his facial expression, his
gestures. We hear people speak of others as "cold," "stiff,"
"unfriendly." These terms mean *something* to others, though it is not
certain what the essential behavior variables are that form the basis
for such perceptions. Perhaps they are related to an individual's liking
for others, perhaps to his own feeling of security with others --- his
ability to act spontaneously in the presence of a group. The general
emotional tone of an entire group is often influenced by the presence or
absence of these qualities in the leader. The ability to empathize may
be another way of saying that one person is capable of taking the role
of the other, an essential aspect of all interpersonal communication and
a factor which is so important in individual therapy. Just how these
leader characteristics affect a group is not clearly known. One
hypothesis would be that group members identify with their leader and in
the process internalize some of his attitudes and behavioral patterns.
*This would mean that group members may gradually begin to behave toward
others in the group in much the same way as the leader behaves toward
them.* They would become more warm and friendly to each other, more
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_349}empathic in their relations with others. Under
such conditions communication is undoubtedly facilitated.

*Attending to Others*

In work with various groups it has been sobering to observe how little
the members attend to what others say. Without attention there can be no
understanding and hence no communication. Apparently the act of
attending carefully to another person is a difficult task for most
people. They are usually thinking what they will say when the speaker
stops. Or they focus on some specific point made by the speaker and then
fail to attend to the rest because they are thinking up arguments
against the specific point. It is by no means uncommon in groups to
observe one person bringing up a point, then a second person bringing up
another point, a third person offering an entirely different suggestion,
and so on --- none of them responding to the contribution of the
previous speaker. It is doubtful in this case that they are really
attending carefully to each other. This is not communication in any
sense of the word. As long as people feel that others are paying little
attention to what they say, they are likely either to keep pressing
their point or to withdraw with the feeling that their contributions are
not valuable or not welcome.

How do groups acquire the practice of attending carefully to each other?
Here it seems the group-centered leader serves an essential and
significant function. He demonstrates an extraordinary kind of
concentrated attention. Having no need to get his own ideas across,
having no "axe to grind," and sincerely respecting the worth of the
contributions of every group member, he is able to attend to others. By
doing so he conveys to the speaker that his contribution is worth
listening to, that as a person he is respected enough to receive the
undivided attention of another.

It is not enough, however, that the leader simply attend. He must convey
this sense of full attention to the speaker. There are certain cues that
can give the group member some proof of the leader's attention (nodding
of the head, looking directly at the speaker), yet these are not always
adequate proof. If, however, the leader paraphrases the speaker's
comment, he thereby furnishes []{#018_c8.html_lpn_350}conclusive proof
that he has attended. Transcribed group discussions under group-centered
leadership reveal that the leader is constantly prefixing his comments
with such phrases as:

::::: block
:::: block1
::: topbot
You are saying . . .

You feel . . .

If I understand you correctly . . .

I'm not sure I follow you, but is this it . . .

I gather that you mean . . .

Let's see if I really understand that . . .
:::
::::
:::::

Here is a function carried out by the group-centered leader which is
rarely carried out consistently by any other member of a group. It is a
difficult task, for it requires the leader to concentrate outside of
himself. To do this, the leader cannot be thinking such things as:

::::: block
:::: block1
::: topbot
Is the group going in the direction I want it to go?

I disagree with that statement.

I wonder what they think of me.

How can I get other members to talk?

That is an irrelevant remark.
:::
::::
:::::

This ability to attend to the statements of others is probably directly
related to the leader's own feeling of security in the group, his
confidence, his threat-tolerance. The leader who is not comfortable in
his role will be responding so much to internal stimuli that he will
find it difficult to respond to anything outside of himself.

In our earlier attempts at group-centered leadership the mistake was
often made of trying to paraphrase almost every comment made by group
members, somewhat after the practice of the individual therapist. Had
there been a better understanding of the function of rephrasing or
reflecting, this error might have been avoided. In practice, too
frequent reflection by the leader may actually inhibit communication by
forcing the members to channel all comments through the leader.
Reflection of comments by group members appears to have the primary
function of conveying to the members the sense that their contributions
are welcome and []{#018_c8.html_lpn_351}are considered worth while. As
the group members begin to feel this, the leader's reflections become
less necessary. Furthermore, *this function*, *too*, *is gradually taken
over by the group members themselves.* Here is the distinctive
contribution of the group-centered leader. He brings to the group a
useful function which did not previously exist, and the group then
incorporates this function into itself.

*Understanding Meanings and Intents*

It is not even enough that the group-centered leader attends to what
others say and gives some proof of this by reflecting back to the
speakers. It might be enough, provided people said what they actually
meant. We know, however, that people seldom do. They are prevented from
doing so both by the limitations of language itself and by internal
inhibitions which operate to protect the individual from threat.
Furthermore, even if people actually said what they meant, it is not
always true that the listener will understand. This discrepancy between
expression (of the speaker) and impression (of the listener) has been
pointed out clearly by Ichheiser, who writes:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Our answer is an insistence that some, and frequently even a great
degree of, discrepancy between expression and impression is the *normal*
state of affairs and that we are bound to misunderstand extremely
important aspects of human relations if we fail to take these ever
present, basic discrepancies fully into account. . . . The expectation
that there is some kind of "natural harmony," or even a complete
identity, between expression and impression is based on the silent
assumption that the mechanisms of expression and those of impression are
somehow, in a predetermined way, attuned to each other. . . . Between
the inner personality, its attitudes, sentiments, and tendencies, and
the external personality there is always a certain degree of
incongruity. In human relations we have always to suppress, or at least
to modify, the frank expression of some factors. (93, p. 8)
:::
::::
:::::

The group-centered leader tries to function in a way which will reduce
this tendency of individuals "to suppress, or at least to modify, the
frank expression of some factors." One of the ways he does this is by
trying to understand the actual meaning []{#018_c8.html_lpn_352}or the
intent of members' comments and behavior. That is --- to express this
idea in somewhat different terms --- the leader tries to adopt the
internal frame of reference of the other person, to perceive what the
other person perceives, to understand what is in the central core of the
speaker's conscious awareness --- in a sense, to take the role of the
other person. The group-centered leader in this respect is relying on
what Reik (161) has vividly described as "free-floating attention." His
attention goes farther than the words or content of the speaker. He is
after the latent meaning, the "secret intent," or what Ichheiser has
called the "expressional" aspect of communication. For example, as the
group-centered leader listens to a lengthy anecdote being told by a
group member, he may be thinking in some such manner as follows:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
This person seems to be talking about a personal experience he had. The
group previously was arguing the relative merits of two different
courses of action. He must be giving this experience to support one of
those courses of action. I'll listen to see if this seems to be true.
Yes, I think that's it. I wonder which of the two he is trying to
support. Now I see. This experience is one in which a course of action
like Plan A failed. He seems to be for Plan B. I wonder if he feels this
is fairly conclusive evidence that Plan A will fail in this case. Yes,
he certainly does. He thinks his experience is almost identical to ours
at the present. Yet he hasn't actually said that he favors Plan B; he is
only saying Plan A failed in this instance.
:::
::::
:::::

Having gone through some such process of thinking with the speaker and
trying to understand his intent or the meaning of his illustration, the
leader might respond with something like this:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
"Jim, if I understand you correctly, you feel fairly convinced that,
because of this experience with Plan A in a pretty similar situation to
our own, you don't think it will work here. And are you therefore saying
that you probably prefer Plan B, is that it?"
:::
::::
:::::

This is not what Jim *said*, but it reflects the *intent* behind his
anecdote. The group-centered leader is always alert to perceive such
meaning and reflect it back to the speaker for verification. This is
very much like what the client-centered therapist is
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_353}attempting to do, in individual therapy, as
indicated in an earlier
chapter^[35](#025_endnotes.html_e35){#018_c8.html_f35}^; consequently no
further attempt will be made here to illustrate this function. In a
group situation, however, this function of the leader may have
additional effects over and above conveying understanding to the
speaker. By extracting out of a member's comments the intentional
meanings, the leader also may be helping others understand what he is
"really" saying, thus facilitating communication to a very great extent.
Again, the leader is bringing to the group another function which did
not previously exist there, or existed only to a limited degree. Our
hypothesis is that because such responses by the leader are rewarding to
the group (they facilitate communication and thereby accelerate the
sharing of meanings), gradually *they will be taken over by the group
members themselves.*

It may be profitable to discuss this function of "understanding meanings
and intents" in relation to what other writers have called
"interpreting" by the group leader. We refer particularly to our
understanding of group interpretation as it is used by such writers as
Jaques (94) and Bion (27). From their writings the distinct impression
is gained that it is facilitating to the group for the leader to
interpret what may not be in the conscious awareness of group members.
From the writer's own experience, both as leader in groups and as
observer of groups where leaders have used the technique of interpreting
"unconscious" meanings, such interpretations are usually not
facilitating and are frequently disrupting. This is, however, an issue
which can be settled only through research. Certainly it is not even
justified to say that "reflecting meanings and intents" is not
interpretation in a sense. Nevertheless, there does seem to be a valid
distinction between the two, at least in operational terms.

Perhaps the essential difference between interpretation and reflection
of meanings and intents, as it is being used by the group-centered
leader, is that reflection is an attempt to perceive only what exists in
the conscious awareness or the internal frame of reference of the group
member at the moment. On the other hand, these other writers seem to
imply that interpretations help to []{#018_c8.html_lpn_354}bring to
conscious awareness what might have been for the group member quite
"unconscious." This difference is probably essentially the same as the
one that appears to exist between interpretation as used by some
psychoanalytic therapists and the method of "adopting the client's frame
of reference" used by client-centered therapists.

One final word about this function of the group-centered leader may be
appropriate. The writer has in the past made a distinction between
"group-oriented" and "individual-oriented" leader reflections. An
illustration may make this distinction clear. Let us suppose a group has
been discussing the advantages and disadvantages of two courses of
action --- call them Plan A and Plan B. Half of the members have been
arguing for one and half for the other. The leader may reflect the
individuals' statements as they are made in the discussion, using
reflections such as:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
"Frank, you feel Plan A won't work and you would strongly urge us to try
Plan B."

"Bill, as I get what you are saying, Plan B is bound to fail because of
the reasons you just mentioned."
:::
::::
:::::

On the other hand, a more group-oriented reflection may be made after
several members have expressed their views, such as:

:::::: topbot
::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
"It seems to me that the group is definitely divided on this issue and
it doesn't seem able to reach agreement."
:::
::::
:::::
::::::

Each of these types of reflections may have a useful function in
group-centered leadership. They may, however, accomplish different
results. The writer has used both types of reflections. Some group
leaders seem to prefer using group-oriented reflections almost
exclusively. Here is a very important problem which would be amenable to
investigation through research. On the basis of the writer's limited
experience, it seems doubtful that the leader can convey to group
members as much attention, understanding, and acceptance through
group-oriented reflections as he can through individual-oriented
reflections, although it may be that once the leader has created an
adequate psychological climate, group-oriented reflections may be
facilitating. When used []{#018_c8.html_lpn_355}exclusively, and during
the early stages of the group's development, group-oriented reflections
frequently arouse considerable resistance. This may be due to the fact
that frequently not all group members perceive the same group dynamics
as does the leader.

*Conveying Acceptance*

The extent to which the leader can convey acceptance of others is a
critical requirement of group-centered leadership. Much has been said
about acceptance in describing the role of the client-centered
therapist. The group-centered leader apparently must have some of the
same attitudes as the individual therapist. He must be willing to accept
the group where it is at the moment, even though this might mean that
the group has no clear-cut goals, that the group-members are hostile and
suspicious of their leader, or that the group is dependent and
submissive. It means that the group-centered leader must convey a
genuine acceptance of what the group members wish to discuss, what they
decide to do and how they plan to do it.

What does acceptance mean in a more practical sense? Perhaps this
concept will have more real meaning if we come down to the level of
everyday problems as they occur in different group situations. In small
discussion groups, for example, acceptance means the leader's
willingness for the discussants to bring up whatever they would like.
There can hardly be "irrelevancies" as far as the group-centered leader
is concerned. It is not up to him to decide if the group is "sticking to
the topic." He accepts all comments without evaluating whether they are
good, pertinent, or valuable to the group. He is willing to accept
decisions that have been arrived at by the group. For the school
administrator, as another example, it would mean accepting hostile
feelings expressed by his teachers. He would accept new ideas suggested
by them. He would accept the group's decision to re-evaluate the school
curriculum. For the social worker attempting to stimulate community
action on problems of delinquency, it would mean a willingness to accept
the initial lack of interest on the part of the citizens or their
inability to arrive at a decision for community action. He would accept
their feelings of inadequacy and hopelessness, as well as their
impractical schemes and dreams.

[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_356}But what about all the pressures on these
leaders from their supervisors? How can a leader be accepting of his
group if the members decide to do something which would endanger his
position or which would be at variance with his system of values? These
are real questions for the group leader. The concept of "limits" applies
here, just as it does in individual therapy. Apparently, *the
group-centered leader must have a clear notion of the limits within
which he can be completely and genuinely accepting.* If, for example, an
industrial supervisor cannot, without losing his job, permit his workers
to come and go on the job whenever they wish, he will find it impossible
to convey genuine acceptance of such behavior. If a high school
principal or a college president cannot, because of lack of funds,
permit his teachers to vote a pay raise for themselves, he will not be
able to accept such a decision of the group. All leaders must operate
within certain prescribed limits. These are the reality factors in the
situation. It is true that some leaders are in situations where there
are very few limits, as in the case of the group therapist. Other
leaders must work in situations where there are many limits, as must the
foreman in an industrial organization. The group-centered leader, then,
is always accepting and permissive *within limits*, but because of his
faith in the group's own capacities he sets fewer limits than the leader
who basically trusts only himself. Furthermore, the group-centered
leader tries to be clear in his own mind about what limits he must set
in order to feel secure enough to be accepting of the group. Having much
more faith in the potentialities of his group, he is much less inclined
to feel pressures on himself from his own superiors and thus translate
these into limits for his group. The insecure leader, the one who is not
willing to rely upon the strengths of his group members, the one who
must take upon himself the responsibility for the group --- this leader
will invariably come to rely more and more upon setting up restrictive
limits, formal rules and procedures, and complex structures within his
organization.

In our own Counseling Center organization we seem to have been moving in
a direction of fewer limits, less structure, and more simple procedures.
For example, we have almost entirely []{#018_c8.html_lpn_357}dispensed
with formal standing committees, parliamentary procedures, formal
channels of communication, static roles. It would be almost impossible,
as well as foreign to the attitudes of our staff members, to construct
an organizational chart. We have done away with closed meetings; all
members are welcome to attend --- and participate in --- all committee
gatherings. It has been, however, a slow process of growth for us to
become less dependent upon structure and formalistic procedures. At
times it has seemed more chaotic and disorganized, and sometimes we have
rushed to set up structure as a corrective. Yet we usually have returned
to the more functional mode of operating as quickly as we have relearned
the lesson that such procedures seldom motivate or accelerate action and
behavior. Our own experience has been paralleled to some extent by that
of the Tavistock Institute of Human Relations in England. In
conversations with members of this organization we have gained the
impression that they have been experimenting with some of these same
principles of organization and administration. Flexibility is valued
highly in their organization, and staff members are given freedom to
define and develop their own roles. Elliott Jaques writes:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
In the day to day management of the Institute itself, group principles
have been used. All decisions are made by committees by group decision,
and individuals are then made responsible for carrying these decisions
out. So far as possible, each individual participates in making the
decisions, the action for which he will be responsible. (96, p. 9)
:::
::::
:::::

Conveying acceptance and permissiveness, then, is another function which
the group-centered leader brings to the group. It is rarely present in
groups, and in most organizations group members seldom feel that their
contributions will be accepted. But once again, we are convinced that
*when the leader brings acceptance to the group*, *there is a gradual
taking-over of this function by the group members.* They become more
accepting of each other, they become more tolerant of differences among
themselves and they begin to help each other to feel that their
contributions, not just those of the leader, are welcome and will be
accepted. []{#018_c8.html_lpn_358}Consequently, it becomes easier for
the members to express their own real attitudes and feelings and to
accept the same in others.

*The "Linking" Function*

There is another important function which the group-centered leader
serves in the group, and for want of a more exact term it will be called
the "linking" function. An analogy may be helpful in communicating the
meaning to the reader. All of us have observed raindrops striking
against the top of a window. Some of them, after hitting the window,
form a little stream which carries the water to the bottom of the
window. Different streams form and give the effect of parallel channels,
each carrying part of the water to the bottom. If, however, I take my
finger and link a new drop to an already existing channel, the water
will follow this channel rather than forming one of its own. If I were
able to provide a link between each new raindrop and the already
existing channel, I would then have a steady stream of water streaking
down the window in just one channel. Something like the first
description seems to happen in most groups. It can be seen most clearly
in face-to-face discussion groups. The drops may be likened to the
contributions of individual members of the group. One person will say
something, then a second person adds a new idea but does not always
convey the relationship of his idea to the meaning of the first
contribution. The thought of each member streams down the window in
separate channels. Occasionally, someone may enter in and relate his
thought to one of these channels, but then another member adds something
which he relates to another channel. Usually it is possible in a group
to see several channels streaming along in parallel rivulets of thought.
If, however, the group-centered leader makes an effort to perceive the
linkage between each new comment and then conveys this relationship to
the group, the discussion takes on the characteristics of the second
description. The discussion seems to flow down one channel, building up
force as each new contribution is linked to it. This does not mean that
the channel cannot be changed once it has started. Using the raindrop
analogy again, it occasionally happens that several drops hitting close
together may deposit enough []{#018_c8.html_lpn_359}water to change the
direction of the main channel when they are linked to it. By relating
the new contribution to the main stream, the leader may see the group
change its stream of thought in the direction of this new influence.

The "linking" function of the group-centered leader is related closely
to his function of understanding meanings and intents. This is because
the meaning or the intent of a member's comment often *is* the link to
the main stream of thought or to the previous comments. Its actual
linkage is frequently hidden by the content of the comment. Thus, by
clarifying the meaning or intent of a comment, the group-centered leader
makes clear to the group how the new contribution is related to previous
discussion. Perhaps an illustration from a recorded group discussion
will make this clear. In the following excerpt the group is carrying on
a discussion of how one of the members, a social worker, should approach
a group of young married people to get them to take social action in
their community:^[36](#025_endnotes.html_e36){#018_c8.html_f36}^

::::: sl
:::: block
::: top
*1. Bill:* I would like to go on record with a very serious objection
here. This was the implied assumption that somehow church socials or
gatherings in communities for discussion are somewhat more valuable and
better and people should do these rather than go bowling. I felt this
implied assumption. Why shouldn't men rather go there than to church ---

*2. Don:* I don't go along with that implied assumption.

*3. Bill:* Well, *I* certainly wouldn't. I would like to bring in a
diagnosis that my wife has made from the feminine viewpoint of our
society. She, perhaps not peculiarly, much prefers the company of a
group of men to a group of women. And I don't think this is necessarily
a sex factor. She says you can almost predict what a group of women are
going to do.

*4. Jane:* I'll say.

*5. Bill:* They're forced into a mold somehow by our society. She
doesn't understand what it is. But a group of women get together and one
group is pretty much like another. And very often women join groups not
because they want to but because of social pressures. Where men --- they
seem to live in a much freer and easier society where what
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_360}they do and who they join with is a function of
their own choice. In ---

*6. Frank:* I think Mrs. Adams \[Bill's wife\] overestimates
considerably both the interest and the variety of man's society.

*7. Group:* (Laughter.)

*8. Leader:* Bill, your point would be what? I'm not sure I understand
what ---

*9. Bill:* That much of the operation of women in these social groups is
not a function of choice on their part. It's not satisfying their
personal needs. It is a function of the role that society kinda forces
them into.

*10. Leader:* You are using that as an illustration of your original
objection to the effect that we should attach certain values, positive
or negative, to these interests and you object very strongly to doing
that --- saying that one interest is of more social value than another
one?

*11. Bill:* It seemed to me that what we were essentially saying is that
the things that the men wanted to do were not as good for them --- were
not satisfying their needs --- as well as the things that men didn't
want to do. And I just kinda didn't ---

*12. Cathy:* If women get together to clean up the alleys, after all
it's the women who have to sit and look at the alleys all day. The men
are out working all day. They are not as concerned about the alleys as
their wives. They should be. The fact that there isn't a playground for
the children, by and large the mothers would be more concerned about
that than the fathers. Questions of this sort wouldn't necessarily hit
home to her husband. It seems to me they would be much more interested
than their husbands might, who also because of our culture would say,
"Why, that's the mother's job."

*13. Stu:* Well, would you carry that further and say that social action
interests in general are more natural to the woman?

*14. Cathy:* They aren't more natural. I'd say that the culture sort
of---
:::
::::
:::::

![](html/docimages/line1.jpg){height="4" width="100%"}

:::: block
::: sl
*8.* The leader here is attempting to understand the meaning and intent
behind Bill's last three comments. This is especially important here,
since in number 2 Don interrupts to defend himself and in number 6 Frank
humorously objects. The group responds to Frank with laughter, thus in a
sense rejecting Bill. The leader does not understand the link between
Bill's comments and the previous discussion.

*10.* Here the leader is linking Bill's illustration to a previous
objection of his, yet he does this in the tentative form of a question.

[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_361}*15. Stu:* Yeah, owing to our cultural
situation, would you say in general that they are more politically
active, and so forth?

*16. Leader:* Are we really understanding Cathy? I'm not sure that I am.
You see a basic difference here, Cathy, between the interests of men and
the interests of women?

*17. Cathy:* I see a great deal of difference when it comes to group
discussion, yes. That it can be that there is more interest in a
neighborhood group, particularly in the working class, that the wives
and mothers would have a more neighborhood interest.

*18. Leader:* In terms of leader behavior, this would --- you are simply
saying that this would be a better diagnosis of women's needs and that
we have to be careful in diagnosing women's needs versus men's.

*19. Cathy:* I think we have to be very careful.

*20. Sam:* I would like to rise to kind of a point of order and wonder
are we trying to be a sociology class in this emphasis upon diagnosing
needs. To me we keep wandering from what our primary job is. I just sort
of pull that out ---

*21. Cathy:* You're right.

*22. Sam:* I'd be quite glad to pull back in my shell, but I'm wondering
if we are not beyond ourselves. We have no resources in this area. We
keep bringing up personal records which really don't count for much in
our total assessment.

*23. Leader:* Diagnosing individual needs is not pertinent to our
problem, Sam?
:::
::::

![](html/docimages/line1.jpg){height="4" width="100%"}

:::: block
::: sl
*16.* Again the leader is trying to understand Cathy and to link the
meaning of her somewhat involved illustration to the previous comments.
Stu, on the other hand, in numbers 13 and 15 is apparently trying to
push Cathy to a broader generalization, which she does not accept in
number 14.

*18.* The leader here provides the linkage between the difference Cathy
sees between the interests of the sexes and the role of the leader,
which was the topic under discussion prior to Bill's comment in number
1.

*22.* Apparently Sam has not perceived any linkage between the
discussion of group members' needs and leadership. He feels dissociated
from the original topic.

*23.* Although Sam has not stated his feeling as such, the leader
reflects tentatively Sam's meaning, thus even linking Sam's comments to
the preceding topic of needs.

[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_362}*24. Sam:* Well, I was about to jump in with all
sorts of personal references. I work with these groups all the time and
I can present some anecdotes on the other side but it occurred to me
that that wouldn't be relevant.

*25. Stu:* It seems to me we are analyzing here, or raising the
question, about the function of leadership. If one attitude toward
leadership is accepted --- in general the community center's point of
view on leadership, the social worker's point of view --- well, then,
one must know --- one must be able to diagnose the needs of the people
in order to function as leader. If another concept of leadership wins
the day here, then we can dispense with all of this diagnosis.

*26. Sam:* Then we should discuss the two aspects of leadership and not
diagnosis.

*27. Leader:* Stu, you are not willing to accept that that is the best
way of leading --- diagnosing the group and going out and fulfilling
needs for ---

*28. Sam:* Yes. That's the point I'd rather argue.
:::
::::

::: top
In a group there may be as many different "channels" of thought as there
are members. This often can be seen in the early stages of group
development, when each member has his particular "axe to grind," when
contributions are likely to be more ego-centered than group-centered,
when members are responding to their own personal needs to the exclusion
of what is going on outside of themselves. It is during this stage that
the group-centered leader's linking function is so important. It might
be said that the leader by perceiving these linkages helps the
individual members to become aware of elements in the total perceptual
field which
:::

![](html/docimages/line1.jpg){height="4" width="100%"}

:::: block
::: sl
25\. Stu, taking over the linking function, makes a successful attempt
to tie together the ideas about needs and the earlier topic of
leadership.

*26.* Sam's comment is not accepting of the group's exploration of the
problem of diagnosing needs. Stu's linkage in number 25 was much more
useful, as well as accepting, to the group.

*27.* The leader in trying to catch Stu's meaning went beyond him a
little. He might better have said, "You see the problem of diagnosis in
relation to one type of leadership but not necessary for another type."
:::
::::

[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_363}previously were not perceived. It can be said
that the leader helps the group members to enlarge the scope of the
phenomenal field to which they respond, thus increasing the chances that
their contributions will be more appropriate to the existing situation.

*As with the other distinctive functions which the group-centered leader
brings to the group*, *this linking function is gradually assumed by the
group members themselves*. Individuals in the group begin trying to see
how each new contribution is linked to previous contributions. They
begin to ask a speaker, "How does this point that you are making tie in
with what others in the group have been saying?" or "Does this mean
then, in terms of what Jack said, that you have a different point of
view than his?" or "I gather from your comment that you don't like the
way the group is going and yours is a suggestion that we try a new
approach?" When the linking function becomes distributed throughout a
group, invariably there is a noticeable absence of comments indicating
that group members are lost, such as "Where are we?" "Haven't we
digressed?" "I don't know whether this fits in or not," "Can someone get
us out of our confusion?" The linking function seems to have the effect
of orienting each member in terms of the group process. We might say
that it provides continuity to the discussion.

An attempt has been made in the preceeding pages to isolate and define
five functions which the group-centered leader brings to the group:
conveying warmth and empathy; attending to others; understanding
meanings and intents; conveying acceptance; and linking contributions to
channels of thought. These are functions which the group-centered leader
carries out more or less continuously until they are taken over by other
members of the group. There are undoubtedly other facilitating functions
which have not yet been observed or defined. Further experience and
research is sorely needed. These five functions are those which have
been found effective in creating the conditions under which some groups
have been helped to move more quickly in the direction of greater
utilization of their capacities. Now it will be well to examine some
special problems which arise in attempting to utilize a group-centered
approach in real situations.

[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_364}S[OME]{.sc} P[ROBLEMS IN]{.sc} A[PPLYING]{.sc}
G[ROUP]{.sc}-C[ENTERED]{.sc} L[EADERSHIP]{.sc}

Leaders who attempt to make use of a group-centered approach soon
discover that it is not without difficulties and problems. Attention
will be given to only a few of the more important problems encountered
in implementing this approach and to some of the ways different leaders
have tried to handle them.

*Planning for the Group by the Leader*

Is planning by the leader inconsistent with the group-centered approach?
Can the group-centered leader make plans for his group without taking
away from the members a measure of their responsibility? Our experience
points to the fact that the way a group reacts to previous planning by
the leader depends to a great extent upon the relationship which exists
between the leader and the group. A group whose members are either
hostile and resistant to the leader or still dependent upon him for
direction and motivation will usually either fight against the leader's
plans or accept them with submission. In either case, pre-planning by
the leader has the effect of reducing the possibility of spontaneous
emergence of plans from the group itself. The group-centered leader sees
planning for this type of group a definite deterrent to group members'
learning to plan for themselves. However, when a group-centered leader
has successfully lost leadership functions to the group, when he is
perceived more as another group member than as a leader, his attempts to
plan for the group are no different from attempts made by any other
member. The group now feels secure enough to accept his suggestions, or
reject them, for what the suggestions are worth. His suggestions are
then not accepted *because they are the leader's*, nor are they strongly
rejected as a reaction against the authority of the leader.

We have come to understand more about the function which planning
serves, both for the leader and the group. Often planning is no more
than a means of control, a way of influencing the group in the direction
desired by the leader. Thus, the teacher plans a lecture and to some
extent thereby directs the thinking of the group; the administrator
plans which member of his group should []{#018_c8.html_lpn_365}do a
particular job, or he works out methods of implementing a staff policy.
This type of planning seems entirely inconsistent with the
group-centered philosophy of leadership. In another sense, we see
planning as an attempt to bolster the insecurities of the leader. Some
leaders are insecure in a free situation, finding it hard to tolerate an
absence of structure. They seem to need rules, regulations, plans,
procedures, organization, agendas, and other similar props. Such
over-planning seems to be a characteristic of the "formalistic" leader
(7). Here, it seems, is a fruitful area for future investigation.
Perhaps we can differentiate leaders on the basis of differences in
tolerance for a group's initial floundering, for informality and
flexibility, for functional operation. Of one thing the writer has
become convinced --- namely, that if a leader feels he *must* provide a
certain amount of structure for his own security, he should honestly
inform the group about his plans. A group will distrust a leader whom
they feel is subtly manipulating them to reach his goals. There is also
good reason for the leader to be sensitive to resistance to his planning
and to be willing to discard his plans should the group decide to reject
them.

*Getting Members to Participate*

A problem in trying a more group-centered approach is that of getting
all members to participate. Frequently a leader has been heard to say,
"I have tried to get my group to participate, but they do not seem
willing to do so; there has to be a leader to get them going." Also we
read about different techniques recommended for encouraging
participation, such as role-playing, breaking down the group into
subgroups, calling on nonparticipants or asking them questions. While
such techniques undoubtedly succeed on occasion, it is a question
whether participation so obtained actually facilitates the group's
development. First, such participation is not spontaneous; secondly,
these techniques may have undesirable effects on some of the group
members. The recorded comments from an interview with one member of a
discussion group are pertinent here:

:::: sl
::: topbot
*S:* I know that I resented and resisted very much certain members of
the group saying to me outside or even inside the group that I should be
a []{#018_c8.html_lpn_366}great participator. I didn't feel like it. I
didn't feel that I could be. And I think the whole group felt I should
get in on all four feet --- and I just couldn't. One day when I was sort
of forced into a role-playing scene --- I resented it very much --- I
have, as I say, resisted the fact that the group has wanted me to jump
in when I was not ready.

*Interviewer:* Didn't really feel ready and there was a little
resentment to being ---

*S:* I didn't want to be manipulated. I think I've learned a lot. I have
learned that I can get in there --- I don't know how much I've given but
they seemed to like certainly what I did yesterday and in the other
groups --- both of them --- I think I've given quite a lot. But I know
there were days and days when I wasn't giving a thing, or very little,
to the whole group.

*Int.:* That is --- you're saying that as a result of this experience
--- learning about yourself--- that you *can* get into a group
eventually. I'm not quite sure --- is that what you're saying?

*S:* Well, yes. But I think you have to \[few words missed\] anyone.
Wait until I'm ready, wait until I catch up with the group. I think
there may be cases where you can manipulate the person in but I resented
that sort of thing. I think you have to learn the terminology and all
that, which I did not know.
:::
::::

This group member obviously resented attempts to get her to participate,
probably because participation was so closely related to her own
feelings of security. The group-centered leader relies upon the effects
of the nonthreatening, accepting climate to encourage participation,
rather than upon techniques. He is, moreover, as willing to accept a
person's hesitancy to participate as he is to accept other kinds of
behavior.

The group-centered leader, however, must have a certain amount of
patience, tolerance, and security because he will be faced with
situations where group members do not at once participate. There will be
long pauses in group discussions. In some groups the members will absent
themselves from meetings. Sometimes there will not be volunteers for
particular jobs. Failure to show genuine acceptance of such behavior or
an unwillingness to wait for members to participate inhibits the
development of an atmosphere conducive to spontaneous and creative
participation, if we can generalize from our experiences with groups.
Direct []{#018_c8.html_lpn_367}attempts by the leader to take over at
these crucial points seems to increase the group's dependence upon the
leader. The principle on which the group-centered leader relies is that
participation will be facilitated when he succeeds in removing all the
outside pressures on the members to participate and depends entirely on
the inner forces of the members.

*Leadership Never Becoming Completely Distributed*

In some groups all the leadership functions probably will never become
completely distributed throughout the group. This may be due to the
pressures put upon the leader from his own supervisors. For example, a
school administrator may feel that he has to retain certain leadership
functions, such as the hiring and firing of his teachers. To this extent
he may feel that he cannot give up all responsibility to the group. What
is the effect of this? Theoretically, the retention by the leader of any
of the leadership functions reduces the chances of the group's
actualizing itself to the fullest extent. In practice, however, it may
mean that the group-centered leader can still demonstrate trust in the
group within these limits. He still can be a therapeutic influence on
the group, though not as therapeutic as if he were able to trust the
group with the handling of all functions.

In other groups the members may never assume all the leadership
functions because of the fact that they cannot completely alter their
perception of their leader as one who is differentiated from them on
some basis. For example, it may be most difficult for a group of
adolescent children ever to perceive their adult leader as a person
without some authority over them. There may be other differentials that
are difficult to erase in the perceptions of group members, such as age,
sex, education, size. Such differentials may be so strongly ingrained in
our culture that they make it very difficult for group members to
perceive their leader on an equalitarian, nonauthoritative basis. This
is but a conjecture. We may find that under the proper conditions even
these differences will not prevent people from establishing
relationships with others that are essentially nonthreatening.

[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_368}*Group-Centered Leadership in Large
Organizations*

How successful can group-centered leadership be in large organizations?
The limitations are obvious at once. In a large industry, for example,
frequent face-to-face contacts are almost impossible. Space barriers to
communication are inevitable. We need to think through carefully the
implications of this conception of leadership where large groups of
people have to be represented by others. What is to prevent the
representative from failing to represent accurately the decisions,
desires, and contributions of his constituents? Will not special
interest and pressure groups make it impossible to operate a large
corporation, a state, or even a nation using principles of
group-centered leadership? We are raising more questions than can be
answered. So far it has not been possible to implement extensively this
type of leadership with such large groups. It is difficult to see,
however, why the principles which are emerging from the application of
group-centered leadership in smaller groups would not be as valid in
larger groups. Perhaps we only need more ingenuity in devising new ways
of implementing the philosophy. In this connection we have found it
challenging to learn about recent attempts to apply some of these
principles in industry. Golden and Ruttenberg (67) describe experiments
with joint labor-management committees in the garment industry. Again,
the Tavistock Clinic has been working effectively as consultants in
industry through utilization of policy committees made up of workers,
management, and the research consultants (210). All policy decisions are
made by these committees, and its members have an equal voice in shaping
the conduct of the research project. Though these experiments are only
brave beginnings, they may point the way to more extensive application
of therapeutic methods of leadership and administration to larger groups
and organizations.

::: top
O[UTCOMES OF]{.sc} G[ROUP]{.sc}-C[ENTERED]{.sc} L[EADERSHIP]{.sc}
:::

::: top
It is much too early to state with any degree of certainty what outcomes
can be expected from the group-centered approach to leadership. We must,
for the present, rely primarily upon []{#018_c8.html_lpn_369}observation
and limited research findings. Nevertheless, there may be some
justification in merely pointing to certain outcomes which, as a result
of our experiences, we have begun to expect from group-centered
leadership. It should be emphasized, however, that each of these should
be considered as an observation which requires experimental
verification. These outcomes may be thought of as falling into three
categories: (1) the meaning of the group experience to the individual
group member, (2) the internalization of the leadership functions by the
group members, and (3) changes in the group functioning.
:::

*The Meaning of the Group Experience to the Individual Member*

One of the expected outcomes of group-centered leadership is the effect
upon the individual member of experiencing membership in a
self-directing, nonthreatening, and accepting group. It appears that
members of such groups react to their experience in much the same way as
clients who have completed individual therapy. Apparently,
group-centered leadership has positive "therapeutic" effects on the
group members.

*Group Members Feel They Are Understood.* If a nonthreatening
psychological climate exists for a group, the members of the group seem
to feel that they are being understood. They feel that others are
attending carefully and are making a sincere effort to understand them.
This is one of the things that stands out clearly as we have attempted
to find out what is being experienced by group members. Thus, after a
three-day conference of Christian and Jewish college student leaders in
which the group leaders attempted to create a nonthreatening climate,
one of the delegates writes:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
The next morning, in our first discussion group, I was again
disappointed, this time by the unaggressiveness of our group leader, and
the tendency of the group to go off on tangents. But, strangely enough,
each time I felt like objecting to such strange procedure I recalled my
notes of the evening before and decided to string along --- to try to
accept and understand the feelings of others. It wasn't long before I
was glad of this decision, for when it came my turn to speak, I was
overjoyed by the honest effort of the others in the group to
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_370}understand me. I expounded on points of view I
have held within myself for years, as it soon became evident that I
would not become ridiculed. . . . Because of this, understanding which
might normally take years to acquire was achieved in a matter of hours.
(187, p. 49)
:::
::::
:::::

In contrast to the perceptions of this member who participated in this
conference are the statements of members of another group in which they
apparently felt a different kind of climate. In this latter group the
leaders, at least during the early sessions, selected goals for the
group, evaluated comments of the group members, and freely made
deep-level interpretations of the statements of some of the members.
During one of these early sessions the following remarks were recorded:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
"The reason I didn't volunteer for jobs is because I haven't felt that I
was a part of the group. This is because people haven't responded to
what I say --- people don't listen, don't take up my suggestions."

"People haven't listened to me. Therefore, I had consciously taken a
nonparticipant role."

"Every time I make a suggestion or question the leader, he slaps me in
the face. Either he calls it a projection or a defense. I work it out
one day, and the next day he slaps me down again."

"We never stop to understand the first point."

"There is a need here for an understanding of each other."
:::
::::
:::::

The contrast is apparent between the psychological climates of these two
groups, as seen from the frame of reference of the members. These
statements seem to attest to the fact that group members need to feel
that others listen to their contributions and try to understand. Without
this feeling, they feel threatened, they tend to hold back and retreat
from the group, or they make renewed efforts to get their individual
point of view across until they feel certain it *has* been understood.
The result is that either the group loses potential contributors or else
each member responds solely in terms of his own needs with little regard
for the group needs. Alpert and Smith (7) have appropriately described
such behavior as "anarchic participation."

[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_371}*Group Members Feel They Are Accepted.* A study
conducted by the writer (70) gave some evidence that one of the outcomes
of membership in a self-directive group is an increased feeling of
acceptance by group members. Personal interviews were conducted with
individuals who had gone through an experience in a relatively
self-directing group. Although the leadership of the group did not in
many respects conform to our conception of group-centered leadership,
free discussion was encouraged, the atmosphere was relatively
permissive, and responsibility resided in the group to work out its own
internal problems and to select its goals. On the basis of a content
analysis of the recorded interviews, statements were classified into
various categories. Six of the sixteen group members made statements
which fell into the following category:

:::: block
::: top
*Feel more accepted by others; feel more secure*, *more spontaneous*,
*less defensive of self*, *less withdrawn*, *more confident.*
:::
::::

Excerpts from two of the recorded interviews may convey the flavor of
such attitudes:

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
Here at the laboratory I'm tackling the most difficult problems that
I've always had to face in my life. . . . I'm face to face with my group
adjustment. . . . I almost had to overcome some of the childhood hurdles
of feelings about groups that I had as a child. I always was more or
less of an isolate. . . . It seems to me right now my own feelings are
becoming very much involved and that I'm beginning to react
spontaneously on the basis of what's in me, rather than as an objective
professional person. . . . I have something that I've never felt in my
whole life. . . . People are supporting me and helping me. Everything
that I have to say --- maybe not everything, but many things that I have
to say --- they seem to be of value to somebody. In other words, for the
first time I am finding myself in group life.
:::
::::
:::::

::::: block
:::: sl
::: bot
As an individual, I think I have gained self-confidence from it which I
have felt I lacked. I've always felt uncertainty about my ability. . . .
I wouldn't have believed I would have done as much talking in our group
as I did. I'm never the one to speak up first. I've been inclined to let
other people do the talking.
:::
::::
:::::

Apparently, group members gain more acceptance of
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_372}themselves, just as does the client in
individual therapy. Thus, unless a worker in an industrial organization
feels free to criticize his supervisor's judgment or question a policy
of management, unless he feels it is safe for him to put forth an idea
of his own without being ridiculed, that worker will not be an active
participant in the organization, and the total group has lost a
potential contributor. The group will be denied the data or the skills
which this worker might have brought to bear on a problem and will have
reduced the chances of arriving at that solution which would be best for
the organization as a whole.

Freedom to participate and freedom of communication have been mentioned
as conditions required for releasing the adjustive capacities of a
group. It is here that the interrelatedness of all of these conditions
is most clear. Although there may be no "external" barriers to
communication, and there may be provided all kinds of opportunities for
a group member to participate, there will be self-imposed barriers and
inhibitions within each group member who does not feel acceptance in the
group climate. Perhaps this is why stereotyped and institutionalized
"techniques" for getting group members to participate and communicate so
frequently fail to achieve their purpose. In and of themselves,
mechanical methods seldom produce freedom of communication and creative
participation in a group. There must be something else --- an accepting
and permissive climate --- before people will make available to a group
their maximum creative potential. Perhaps this is illustrated in the
following verbatim excerpt from a recorded interview with a young woman,
a member of a discussion group:

:::: sl
::: topbot
*D:* I think that follows from the same thing I said about the
leadership. Am I still adjusting in that situation so that I'm afraid to
throw out anything that might be a revolutionary idea or might be
something startling, because I'm a little bit afraid of what's going to
happen? I think I've gotten to that point of deciding that it isn't
good, but what I'm going to do about it is something else again.

*Interviewer:* What you're really saying then, is that you feel a little
bit of reluctance to reveal perhaps your whole self. It might be that
there's something that you're holding back there.

[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_373}*D:* Uh-huh. I think there's something, whether
it is in a group relationship or personal relationship, I hold back
something of me. And I have --- and I think when I say, "What do your
friends think of you," and so on, that would be one thing that would
occur to me. My friends have said, "You don't give at all of yourself."
Well, I think that is right --- or consciously think so. I can't figure
out what I don't give, but I think this has pointed out, they're
probably right.

*Int:* One of the learnings might be, now, a little more sensitivity to
that fact, that perhaps there is some truth in that.

*D:* I think there is.

*Int:* As I get your feeling, you're not real sure what it is that
you're holding back ---

*D:* That's right. I'm not.

*Int:* That's why it's kind of puzzling.

*D:* Yes, I'm not at all sure what it is.

*Int:* You're much more sure that perhaps this thing is true, but you're
not just sure what aspect of yourself is being held in check.

*D:* I think that is right. It's a definite desire to please and not to
get into something that might not please. I like to please. And
apparently I have gotten a great deal of satisfaction in being a nice
little girl and so forth and soon --- I think I can work that back to
childhood. That was the thing that would appeal to me --- I was a nice
little girl --- I was a good girl and so forth and so on, and that I
enjoyed.

*Int:* And you can even see perhaps some origins of this that you do
have the feeling of wanting people to like you and like the things you
do.
:::
::::

From these statements it would appear that this group member is
beginning to understand how closely related are her feelings of being
accepted by others and her participation in groups. Here is a person who
has in the past been unable to give of herself freely, she has held
herself "in check," withheld her "revolutionary ideas."

*Group Members Feel That Responsibility for Evaluation Lies Within
Themselves.* Another meaning which a self-directing group experience has
for individual members seems to be that they begin to shift the
responsibility for evaluation from the leader (or others) to themselves.
They become more willing to look at themselves honestly. The
group-centered leader, because he tries to remove the threat of
evaluation from group members, []{#018_c8.html_lpn_374}accelerates this
process. Thus, some of the members in the group which was studied by the
writer stated:

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
"I think I feel less compulsion to solve problems tomorrow. . . . I
think I may be impatient on occasion but that I will now be able to
attribute my impatience in part to myself, not to the situation
entirely."

"I think I am looking at things more honestly, evaluating myself more
honestly."

"I'm more willing to accept my part in bringing on frustrations in a
group."
:::
::::
:::::

These persons seem to be feeling safe enough to look at themselves, to
evaluate their own roles in groups. It is difficult to conceive of
situations, though there may be some, in which a person who feels that
he is being evaluated against someone else's standards does not feel
threatened. It appears that whenever responsibility for judging and
evaluating a person lies outside of that person, some of his behavior
must of necessity be directed towards meeting those standards, towards
conforming to a pattern prescribed by the standards, or towards defying
them. The situation is usually complicated by the fact that a person
seldom is sure what standards another person has for him. Consequently,
he is forced to act on the basis of what must always be an approximation
or estimation of how another feels he should behave. In groups, this
uncertainty about how one should behave is a serious barrier to creative
participation and free communication.

All of us have seen this uncertainty operate in groups, especially in
those that are in the early stages of development. Members refrain from
participating because others "who know so much more" than they do will
evaluate their contribution as inadequate. Their energies are wasted in
attempting to conceal from the group "how little they know." This
phenomenon is most easily observed in the classroom, but it can be
discovered in all kinds of groups or organizations. A new employee in a
business office, fearing that his supervisor will discover how little he
knows, stumbles through his new job not daring to ask questions which
might prevent him from making costly errors. A military pilot attempts a
hazardous []{#018_c8.html_lpn_375}flight for which he is not competent,
rather than face being evaluated by other pilots as less competent than
they. A committee member consumes the time of the group by holding forth
at great length on a subject about which he has some knowledge in order
to cover up his lack of knowledge about the topic under consideration. A
junior executive spends his energies figuring out what will please the
president, rather than behaving in ways appropriate to the problem on
hand.

External evaluation has another effect which acts as a deterrent to
effective group functioning. Evaluation, either positive or negative,
can be such a threat to an individual that he reacts with hostility.
Using theoretical constructs, the individual seeks to defend his
existing organization of self-attitudes --- his self-concept --- by
attacking the source of the threat --- usually the evaluator himself.
This type of reaction to external evaluation can have several effects
upon a group. The group member who has been evaluated reacts to it by
behaving in the group in terms of a new goal --- defense of self through
attacking others. No longer is his behavior appropriate to the group
problem. He has his own problem, and quite often his problem remains
unknown to the others in the group. For the time, then, this member is
lost to the group. His hostility, however, may even have a secondary
effect, that of producing counter-hostility in other members. So
actually the effects of evaluation may not be limited to merely the
effect upon a single member. One rotten apple spoiling the barrel may be
an appropriate analogy here. We have all been in groups where the
hostility of one member set the tone for the entire group and made it
impossible for the group to accomplish much of anything.

*Group Members Gain Understandings of Themselves.* It appears that
another effect of group-centered leadership may be that group members
acquire new understandings of themselves or else understandings become
reinforced or clarified. This would parallel the client's experience in
individual therapy. Whenever an individual experiences a situation from
which the common sources of threat have been removed, he apparently
begins to look more at himself and gain understandings of his attitudes
and behavior. Furthermore, because group-centered leadership fosters
active []{#018_c8.html_lpn_376}participation on the part of group
members, interaction among members increases, thus making it likely that
they will learn how they affect others and how they function as members
of a democratic group. We shall again draw upon some of the statements
obtained through interviews with the members of the group studied by the
writer (70). There were 49 statements which fell into the following
categories:

::::: block
:::: top
::: sl
1\. I am or have been too "autocratic," desirous of power,
task-oriented, impatient, insensitive to feelings of others, demanding,
not permissive enough.

2\. I am or have been too dependent on what others think, too cautious,
needing too much support and approval, afraid to disagree, too
"laissez-faire."

3\. I am more aware of amount and intensity of own feelings and their
cause and effect; less afraid of own feelings.

4\. I am or have been a dodger of responsibility in a group, withdrawn,
an isolate; have been a talker but never a doer.

5\. I am or have been putting up a false front to others, behaving in
terms of false standards; not my real self.

6\. I know things about myself that I didn't know before; what has been
learned fits in with past experience.
:::
::::
:::::

Here we see individuals obtaining new or reinforced understandings of
themselves as members, as potential group leaders, or simply as persons.
Instead of rigidly defending their existing self-structure, as people do
in most group situations, these members seem to be actively reorganizing
their self-structure.

*Internalization of the Functions of the Group-Centered Leader*

In the previous discussion of the varoius dimensions of group-centered
leadership it was suggested repeatedly that some of the distinctive
functions that are brought to the group by the group-centered leader are
gradually taken over by the members of the group. Group members become
more warm and empathic in their relations with each other; they begin to
attend more carefully to others; they show an increasing understanding
of the meaning and intent of the contributions of others; they become
more accepting of the contributions of others; and they gradually take
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_377}over the function of trying to perceive the
linkages between members' comments and the channel of group thought. In
short, the members of a group whose leadership has been essentially
group-centered seem to become more and more like the group-centered
leader in their attitudes and behavior toward others. If further
research substantiates this clinical observation, we can point to this
as probably the most significant contribution of the group-centered
leader to the group. It is significant because of its implications for
improving human relations, for reducing misunderstandings between
individuals by facilitating communication between them. If it is true
that group-centered leadership releases tendencies to relate with others
on a more accepting and understanding basis, might it not be a hopeful
beginning in effecting more cooperative behavior between individuals,
more effective decision-making in groups, more respect for the worth of
every member of the group, more willingness to listen to other points of
view? Could it mean that group-centered leadership would reduce
misunderstandings and hostility between labor and management as they
work together on joint committees, reduce intolerance among members of a
high school class, alleviate jealousies and petty conflicts between
members of a college faculty or between employees in an office ---
perhaps even promote shared understandings between representatives of
unfriendly nations?

There is some research evidence for these changes in the attitudes and
behavior of group members toward each other as they operate in the
group. Sheerer's study strongly suggests that there is increased
acceptance of others by clients during client-centered therapy. She sees
the implication of her finding as follows:

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
If we apply this to some of the problems of social psychology, it might
mean that increased acceptance of minority groups, foreigners, and the
like, could best be achieved by some type of group therapy which would
tend to alter the individual's acceptance of and respect for himself.
(189, p. 174)
:::
::::
:::::

One of the delegates to the Conference of Christians and Jews felt
himself become more understanding and accepting of others as a result of
his experience. He writes afterwards:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Whenever I revealed my faith to a person, I had the feeling that I
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_378}was no longer to be judged as a person, a human
being, but as a Jew. This week has been for me something unique. I have
been able to say to myself that I am here among people who not only
understand, but *want* to understand. And the corollary of this has been
that I have sought to understand them. As a human being both of these
directions of understanding are important --- equally important. (187)
:::
::::
:::::

The findings of Gorlow
(71),^[37](#025_endnotes.html_e37){#018_c8.html_f37}^ provide the most
clear-cut evidence of the increase in acceptance of group members toward
each other. During the later stages of group therapy the group members
actually became "therapists" for each other.

*Changes in the Group Functioning*

The outcomes of group-centered leadership may be examined from the frame
of reference of changes in the group functioning. What changes take
place in the actual behavior of the members as they operate in the
group? How does group-centered leadership affect the group's adjustive
behavior?

*The Change from Ego-Centered to Group-Centered Participation.* In
groups in which we have tried a group-centered approach, it has been
noticed that in the early stages of the group's development the
contributions of members are frequently ego-centered. By this is meant
that the members seem to be behaving primarily in response to their
momentary internal needs and tensions, in contrast to the group needs.
It appears that before individuals can become contributors to a group
effort they frequently must relieve these tensions within themselves.
For example, in the early stages of a group's development individuals
may be trying to enhance their status in the group by displaying their
competence or the extent of their knowledge. Frequently this is done
without much regard for the appropriateness of their comments in
relation to what has been transpiring in the group. Each person may have
his own "axe to grind" or special notion to get across. Sometimes it is
a strong feeling which must be expressed. In these early stages of
ego-centered participation one hears such comments as:

:::: sl
::: topbot
"This may be off the subject, but I'd like to say this . . ."

[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_379}"I'd like to have the group consider another
problem . . ."

"This doesn't answer Jim's question but it is important to me . . ."

"Would the group mind if I raised a different problem . . ."

"If I don't say this, I'm going to bust . . ."
:::
::::

An excerpt from a recorded session illustrates such an ego-centered
contribution:

:::: sl
::: topbot
*Jane:* Would they object to it also if they would be in the group? I
mean, the set-up apparently is that the men are going out and mixing
with other men ---

*Bill:* My feeling is ---

*Jane:* --- and the women are objecting to it ---

*Bill:* My feeling is --- my feeling is ---

*Jane:* If the women would be ---

*Bill:* My feeling is that in a good many cases it's truer than that.
They don't want too much interaction. They are afraid --- you see, the
men have so much more freedom than they have. They feel that. They want
to restrict his mobility to the home --- to them --- and restrict his
relationships.
:::
::::

Here Bill is fairly bursting with his idea. His need to get it before
the group is so strong that he interrupts the previous speaker. It is
doubtful that he either heard or understood Jane's comment.

If the leader attends carefully to the meaning and intent of these early
contributions and conveys understanding and acceptance, it has the
effect of freeing the individuals to participate more in terms of the
total group situation. Perhaps we have here an example of how
individuals at first are demonstrating a kind of "tunnel vision" ---
that is, their perceptions are limited to their own needs and tensions.
Later their perceptions widen in scope and include the needs of others
in the group. Ego-centered participation thus gives way to
group-centered participation.

This widening of the effective psychological field of the group member
is undoubtedly only one explanation for the change in the nature of his
participation. We need to understand more clearly why this change seems
to take place under group-centered leadership. Another possible
explanation would be that as the group []{#018_c8.html_lpn_380}member
feels more and more accepted in the group he no longer has to defend his
self-organization. He is now more free to devote his energies to helping
the group solve its problems.

*The Increase in Spontaneous Expression of Feeling and Meaning.*
Group-centered leadership seems to accelerate the process whereby group
members begin to feel secure enough to express their true feelings and
attitudes --- to say what they mean. As they begin to perceive the
nonthreatening nature of the group climate, they throw off their
disguises and shed some of their defenses. In most groups attitudes and
feelings remain bottled up and become displaced, invariably showing up
in some new situation where it is difficult for others to see the
connection between the feeling and the new situation. If, however, real
attitudes are expressed toward their real objects, they are more easily
understood and handled. Consequently, in an atmosphere which permits
spontaneous expression of feeling a group will be more effective in
solving its problems, because when a group of individuals must work
together their effectiveness is dependent upon mutual understanding and
shared meanings. We should expect that when there is greater
correspondence between what members say and what they intend to say,
when members are willing to make public to the group their real
attitudes, creative ideas, and true feelings, then it is more possible
that mutual understandings will be developed. From mutual understanding
follows consensus, and out of consensus comes action that is most
appropriate to the needs of the group.

*The Decrease in Dependence Upon the Leader.* One of the most noticeable
outcomes of group-centered leadership is the decreased dependence of
group members upon the leader. In discussion groups this is reflected in
a greater number of member-initiated problems brought before the group,
in fewer requests for the opinions and judgments of the leader, in more
comments which are in disagreement with the leader. In our own
Counseling Center organization it has meant that members of the staff
have taken the initiative to develop new areas of service to the
community, they have tried out new counseling methods of their own, they
effectively carry on the functions of the Center in the absence of any
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_381}one person or group of persons. Instead of
energies being expended in trying to figure out what the leader might
want or approve, in a truly self-directing group individuals discover
they can be truly creative. The conditions exist in which each member
has the opportunity for real self-actualization, self-expression, and
self-development. Individuals learn to assume responsibility for their
own feelings, ideas, and behavior.

*The Acceptance of Group Standards.* We have seen clearly the process
whereby a group formulates its own standards, provided there is the
proper psychological climate in which it may tackle this problem. The
significance of "group standards" has been repeatedly referred to in
studies of worker production in industry. The Western Electric studies
(163) demonstrated how groups set their own standards, and how
successfully the group members reach standards which the group sets
itself. Our own experiences are consistent with these findings, and in
addition have convinced us that standards that a group sets for itself
will be more realistic, more attainable, and more comfortable than
standards that are imposed upon the group from the outside. Furthermore,
when individuals have a hand in setting their own standards they are
much more likely to accept and to maintain those standards. Also, a
group frequently will set for its members standards that are much higher
than those that would be set by some external authority. We have all
been in groups that have set goals for themselves that the administrator
or supervisor would not have dreamed of requiring of the group. It may
be that a group is like an individual in that the standards it sets for
itself are likely to be appropriate unless the group is in some way
reacting against standards that it feels are being imposed on it from
the outside. We see this type of reaction operating in the common
practice of workers' restriction of output in industry, often because of
the imposition of rates by "expert" time-and-motion-study engineers. In
industry it has been shown that when a group participates in setting its
own standards there is much more acceptance of this standard, as
exemplified in the study by Coch and French (41). Similarly, the study
reported by Radke and Klisurich (152) of the buying and consumption
habits of housewives and their families showed a
[]{#018_c8.html_lpn_382}greater acceptance of a change in food habits in
those groups that arrived at decisions themselves than in those groups
that were given lectures. These studies, as well as our experiences,
have led us to expect that standards, values, and decisions arrived at
by group members themselves will be accepted to a greater degree by the
group members than those that are not arrived at in this way. Lewin and
Grabbe have stated this problem clearly, as follows:

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
The fact that . . . change has to be enforced on the individual from
outside seems so obvious a necessity that it is often taken for granted.
Many people assume that the creation, as part of the re-educative
process, of an atmosphere of informality and freedom of choice cannot
possibly mean anything else but that the re-educator must be clever
enough in manipulating the subjects to have them think that they are
running the show. According to such people, an approach of this kind is
merely a deception and smoke screen for what to them is the more
honorable, straightforward method of using force. It may be pointed out,
however, that if re-education means the establishment of a new
super-ego, it necessarily follows that the objective sought will not be
reached so long as the new set of values is not experienced by the
individual as something freely chosen. (113, p. 61)
:::
::::
:::::

Here is a fact of tremendous significance. If we accept its validity, it
means radically changing most of our conceptions about supervision and
administration. The group leader who sees his chief function as
providing the conditions whereby the members arrive at decisions
themselves is carrying out a role that is quite different from that of
the leader who spends his energies devising the most effective ways of
communicating *his* decisions to the group and who usually must keep
motivating the group to carry out those decisions.

We may say, in conclusion, that these observations, which we have dared
to present as expected outcomes of group-centered leadership, are based
upon much too little experience and upon far from adequate research
findings. Undoubtedly our perceptions have been influenced by the
enthusiasm with which we have approached this area. Nevertheless, these
beginnings have been impressive to us, for we cannot help feeling that
along this road social science may be traveling toward a more
significant meaning []{#018_c8.html_lpn_383}of democracy. This democracy
will mean a more active and vital participation of the common man in all
matters which concern him. It will mean an opportunity for the
self-actualization of each group member and for the maximum utilization
of the potential of each group.

SUGGESTED READINGS

::: sl
For accounts of applications of a therapeutic approach in industrial
consulting, the articles by staff members of the Tavistock Clinic are
recommended. An entire issue of the *Journal of Social Issues* (95) has
been devoted to their work. Covner (44) gives a good description of a
consulting approach that is based upon some of the principles of
client-centered therapy. The reader interested in a type of group
leadership that is more interpretive than the group-centered approach
will want to examine the two articles by Bion (27, 28). McGregor's
article (123) and the articles under the editorship of Alpert and Smith
(7) offer theoretical but stimulating conceptualizations about
leadership. Some of the principles of group-centered leadership can be
seen in their application to larger social groups in the report of the
Peckham experiment (144), in the book by Golden and Ruttenberg (67), and
in the issue of the *Journal of Social Issues* under the editorship of
McGregor, Knickerbocker, Haire, and Bavelas (124). Many of the
references suggested at the end of Chapter 9 will be of interest to
readers who are concerned with group-centered leadership in education
and teaching.
:::

[]{#019_c9.html}

<div>

[]{#019_c9.html_c9}

</div>

# []{#019_c9.html_lpn_384}Chapter [9]{.chapnum} • Student-Centered Teaching {.chaptitle}

![](html/docimages/line.jpg){height="10" width="100%"}

There is something peculiarly compelling about the central hypothesis of
the client-centered approach, and the individual who comes to rely upon
this hypothesis in his therapeutic work finds almost inevitably that he
is driven to experiment with it in other types of activity. If, in
therapy, it is possible to rely upon the capacity of the client to deal
constructively with his life situation and if the therapist's aim is
best directed toward releasing that capacity, then why not apply this
hypothesis and this method in teaching? If the creation of an atmosphere
of acceptance, understanding, and respect is the most effective basis
for facilitating the learning which is called therapy, then might it not
be the basis for the learning which is called education? If the outcome
of this approach to therapy is a person who is not only better informed
in regard to himself, but who is better able to guide himself
intelligently in new situations, might a similar outcome be hoped for in
education? It is questions of this sort which plague the counselor who
is also a teacher.

As a result of this kind of questioning, a number of workers who had
used a client-centered approach in therapy began to experiment with
adaptations of this orientation to the classroom situation. The field
was uncharted, and there was much fumbling and trial and error. Many of
the attempts were unsuccessful or only partially successful. Yet because
the quality of learning which frequently resulted was so different from
that taking place in the ordinary classroom, further experimentation
seemed unquestionably demanded. A sobering aspect of the experience was
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_385}the growing realization of the revolutionary
character of what was being attempted. If education is most effectively
conducted along lines suggested by client-centered therapy, then the
achievement of this goal means turning present-day education upside down
--- a task of no mean magnitude.

At this juncture in our experience it was heartening to find others who,
starting from somewhat different lines of thinking, were coming to
similar conclusions. The first of these to come to our attention was
Nathaniel Cantor (39) whose book on *The Dynamics of Learning* (made
available to us in manuscript form some two years before publication)
expressed a viewpoint similar in many ways to the one we were reaching.
Cantor, with his background of interest in Rankian thinking and his
training in sociology, was stressing such points as the following:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
That "the teacher will be concerned primarily with understanding and not
judging the individual."

That "the teacher will keep at the center of the teaching process the
importance of the student's problems and feelings, not his own."

That "most important of all, the teacher will realize that constructive
effort must come from the positive or active forces within the student."
(39, pp. 83--84)
:::
::::
:::::

Not only were these views of Cantor very congenial to our own developing
methods in education, but his reproduction of large blocks of classroom
discussion in approximately verbatim form served a highly important
function. Just as publication of verbatim counseling cases had focused
attention both on principles and on the full meaning of the
implementation of those principles, so Cantor's material indicated not
only the meaning of his generalizations, but the radical alteration in
educational method which was implied in his principles. While some of
his conclusions were not in accord with our own experience, nevertheless
the area of common agreement was encouragingly large.

Somewhat later Earl Kelley, taking his start from the significant
demonstrations of perceptual behavior being developed by Adelbert Ames,
brought out his provocative little book, *Education for What Is Real*
(100). Although his conclusions often seemed to
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_386}go far beyond the data of the perceptual
studies, his thinking was very much in accord with that of Cantor and
our own group.

Still later Snygg and Combs, developing the implications of a
phenomenological approach to psychology, devoted two trenchant chapters
to the goals of education and the task of the teacher. Their conclusions
simply cast in somewhat different terminology the thinking which we had
been attempting to implement.

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
Education, from this point of view, is a process of increasing
differentiation in the individual's phenomenal field.

However, differentiation of the field is something which can be done
only by the individual himself. It cannot be done for him. As a living
organism searching his field for means of self-maintenance and
enhancement he differentiates only those aspects which are necessary and
helpful to the achievement of his purpose. Change in his field does not
have to be motivated. In fact it cannot be prevented. It must continue
as long as he is unsatisfied, that is, as long as he lives. As a living
organism with a tremendous drive toward growth and self-enhancement he
requires only practicable and socially acceptable opportunities for
growth and development. (200, p. 238)
:::
::::
:::::

Thus progress in discovering the implications of client-centered therapy
for education, and in implementing those implications, was forced
primarily by our own compelling experiences as we modified our classroom
procedures, but it was enriched and furthered by the contributions which
have just been mentioned. Indeed, the thinking of these authors has
become so inextricably mingled with that of our own staff that it would
be impossible to say what was the specific origin of many of the ideas
and concepts developed in this chapter.

This is not to indicate that our indebtedness is limited to these recent
expositions of radically new points of view in education. In one sense
our experience is a rediscovery of effective principles which have been
stated by Dewey, Kilpatrick, and many others, and a rediscovery of
effective practices which have certainly been discovered over and over
again by competent teachers. Aichhorn (1), for example, came upon some
of these same practices through the same channel, psychotherapy. Yet the
fact that others have come to somewhat similar conclusions, not only in
recent years []{#019_c9.html_lpn_387}but in the more distant past, takes
away nothing from the vividness of our own experience of discovery as we
have tried to implement our therapeutic viewpoint in the field of
education. It is from this latter first-hand acquaintance that the
material of this chapter comes.

::: topbot
T[HE]{.sc} G[OAL OF]{.sc} E[DUCATION]{.sc}
:::

It may avoid needless misunderstanding if it is clearly stated at the
outset that education which embodies the principles of client-centered
therapy has relevance for only one type of educational goal. It is not
education which would be relevant in an authoritarian culture, nor would
it implement an authoritarian philosophy. If the aim of education is to
produce well-informed technicians who will be completely amenable to
carrying out all orders of constituted authority without questioning,
then the method we are to describe is highly inappropriate. In general
it is relevant only to the type of goal which is loosely described as
democratic.

Let us endeavor to be more specific as to the educational goal for which
a student-centered type of teaching appears to be relevant. The basic
element has been stated by Hutchins.

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
The foundation of democracy is universal suffrage. Universal suffrage
makes every man a ruler. If every man is a ruler, every man needs the
education that rulers ought to have. . . . The main purpose of a
democratic educational system is the education of rulers. (92)
:::
::::
:::::

This would seem to mean that the goal of democratic education is to
assist students to become individuals

:::::: block
::::: block1
:::: sl
::: topbot
who are able to take self-initiated action and to be responsible for
those actions;

who are capable of intelligent choice and self-direction;

who are critical learners, able to evaluate the contributions made by
others;

who have acquired knowledge relevant to the solution of problems;

who, even more importantly, are able to adapt flexibly and intelligently
to new problem situations;

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_388}who have internalized an adaptive mode of
approach to problems, utilizing all pertinent experience freely and
creatively;

who are able to cooperate effectively with others in these various
activities;

who work, not for the approval of others, but in terms of their own
socialized purposes.
:::
::::
:::::
::::::

Admittedly there are a number of educators who do not profess these
goals, and in some cultures a majority of educators would be opposed.
Even in our own culture these are the functional goals of very few
educators. The method of operation of our grammar schools, colleges,
universities, and professional schools is ample evidence that the usual
goal is very different --- more in the direction of producing a student
who can reproduce certain informational material, who has skills in
performing certain prescribed intellectual operations, and who can
reproduce the thinking of his teacher. The approach to education which
we are about to describe is not aimed toward these latter goals, but is
an attempt to find a method which will achieve the goal described here
as democratic.

Whether this goal is appropriate to our current culture is a question
which each reader must decide for himself. Since our culture to a very
large degree is organized on an authoritarian and hierarchical basis and
only partially upon a democratic basis, it may seem to some that
education should reflect this ambivalence. Each must reach his own
conclusion on this point.

S[OME]{.sc} T[ENTATIVE]{.sc} P[RINCIPLES AND]{.sc} H[YPOTHESES]{.sc}

As we have fumbled about in our attempts to develop a student-centered
teaching which would build on the concepts of client-centered therapy,
certain basic hypotheses have been crystallized which are very parallel
indeed to the hypotheses of therapy. Some of these are stated below, in
what may seem to be a rather technical form. Stated thus as hypotheses,
there is always the risk that they will be understood as flat statements
of fact. It []{#019_c9.html_lpn_389}should therefore be emphasized that
they are tentative in character, and still largely unproved by research
in the educational field.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
*We cannot teach another person directly; we can only facilitate his
learning.*
:::
::::
:::::

This is an hypothesis with which any thoughtful teacher will agree. It
is indeed only a formal restatement of the old adage that "You can lead
a horse to water but you can't make him drink." Operationally, however,
most teachers utterly ignore this basic hypothesis. Watch a faculty
group concerned with the formation of a curriculum. How much shall we
cover in this course? How can we avoid overlap between these courses?
Isn't that a topic best taught in the third year? What percentage of our
first-year course shall be given to this topic? These are samples of
questions discussed --- and they are all of them based on the
hypothesis, which every faculty member knows is false, that what is
taught is what is learned.

Here, more than at any other point, is evidenced the revolutionary
nature of a student-centered approach to education. If instead of
focusing all our interest on the teacher --- What shall I teach? How can
I prove that I have taught it? How can I "cover" all that I should
teach? --- we focused our interest on the student, the questions and the
issues would all be different. Suppose we asked, what are his purposes
in the course, what does he wish to learn, how can we facilitate his
learning and his growth? A very different type of education would ensue.
An educational program --- whether at the elementary, college, or
graduate level --- which had the facilitation of learning as its clear
and definite and primary operational purpose would be a program vastly
different from the ones with which we are most familiar.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
*A person learns significantly only those things which he perceives as
being involved in the maintenance of, or enhancement of, the structure
of self.*
:::
::::
:::::

Here is an hypothesis which is basic to personality theory as we have
come to understand it. Many would differ with it, and point out the
degree of learning that takes place in subjects which
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_390}surely have no relevance to the self. Perhaps
the meaning of the hypothesis can be illustrated by referring to two
types of student in, let us say, a course in mathematics or statistics.
The first student perceives this mathematical material as being directly
relevant to his professional purpose, and thus directly involved in his
long-range enhancement of self. The second student is taking the course
because it is required. For the maintenance and enhancement of self he
regards it as necessary that he stay in the university. Therefore it is
necessary that he pass the course. Can there be any question as to the
differences in learning which take place? The first student acquires a
functional learning of the material. The second learns how to "get by"
in the course. Or suppose that the information which is being given is
in regard to the topography of a certain region. How different will be
the learnings of a group listening because this is a required course in
geography, and a platoon of infantry who are going into those hills and
valleys to seek out the enemy! The maintenance of self is very little
involved in the first group, and very deeply in the second.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: top
*Experience which, if assimilated, would involve a change in the
organization of self tends to be resisted through denial or distortion
of symbolization.*
:::
::::
:::::

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
*The structure and organization of self appears to become more rigid
under threat; to relax its boundaries when completely free from threat.
Experience which is perceived as inconsistent with the self can only be
assimilated if the current organization of self is relaxed and expanded
to include it.*
:::
::::
:::::

These hypotheses have to do with the fact that learning, particularly if
it is significant, is often a threatening thing. There are times when
the new material of education is immediately perceived as making for the
enhancement of self, but in a great many other instances the new
material threatens the self or, more exactly, some value with which the
self has become identified. This is very obviously true in the social
sciences. To learn the objective facts about prejudice may threaten
prejudices which are valued. To learn about the distribution of
intelligence in the []{#019_c9.html_lpn_391}population may disturb
beliefs with which the individual is identified. To perceive certain
facts relating to our economic system may threaten middle-class values
with which the student has identified. But the threatening character of
new learning holds true of the physical and biological sciences and the
humanities as well. To learn a new mathematical method may imply
inferiority in the old method with which the learner is identified. To
learn an appreciation of classical music or literature is likely to
imply a negative judgment on appreciations already developed at a lower
level. We should doubtless be considerably surprised if we knew the
proportions of individuals in any student group at any given time whose
basic set was a skeptical, resistant, "Oh yeah?" attitude. The reader
can to some degree measure this in himself by thinking back over the
last five lectures or classes or sermons he has attended. To how much of
the material did he find himself inwardly resistant?

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
*The educational situation which most effectively promotes significant
learning is one in which* (*1*) *threat to the self of the learner is
reduced to a minimum, and* (*2*) *differentiated perception of the field
of experience is facilitated.*
:::
::::
:::::

The two parts of this hypothesis are almost synonymous, since
differentiated perception is most likely when the self is not under
threat. If we take this hypothesis as a description of what education
should provide, it will be seen that such education would be far
different from present-day programs.

It may be objected that learning goes on in spite of, or even because
of, threat. Witness the platoon which is likely to be fired upon as it
goes into enemy territory, and *because* of this threat learns rapidly
and effectively about the terrain. It is true that when reality provides
the threat, the learning of behaviors which will maintain the self goes
on apace. If the desired training has no other goal than to maintain the
self as it is, then threat to self may not impede the progress of
learning. But in education this is almost never true. What is desired is
growth, and this involves change in the self. Whenever such a broader
goal is envisaged, then threat to the self appears to be a barrier to
significant learning.

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_392}T[HE]{.sc} A[PPLICATION OF THESE]{.sc}
P[RINCIPLES IN THE]{.sc} C[LASSROOM]{.sc}

The abstract hypotheses just cited are obviously the product of
experience, not the forerunner. We shall endeavor to present some of the
experiences out of which they grew, and the present formulation of a
teaching approach which implements them.

*The Creation of an Acceptant Climate*

As in counseling, our first experimental approaches to the teaching
situation relied rather heavily upon teacher technique. Gradually the
realization grew that if the teacher's attitudes were such as to create
an appropriate classroom climate, the specific techniques were
secondary. This relationship between basic attitude and specific method
is well stated by Eiserer.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
If teachers accept students as they are, allow them to express their
feelings and attitudes freely without condemnation or judgment, plan
learning activities *with* them rather than *for* them, create a
classroom atmosphere relatively free from emotional strains and
tensions, consequences follow which are different from when these
conditions do not exist. The consequences, on present evidence, seem to
be in the direction of democratic objectives. It is apparent that the
above conditions can be achieved in more than one way --- that the
climate for self-directed learning by students is not the result of only
one kind of practice. (53, p. 36)
:::
::::
:::::

As to the effect of this climate upon the student, Shedlin, who has
achieved effective results in this type of teaching, has this to say:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
A classroom climate of permissiveness and understanding provides a
situation free of threat, in which the student can work without
defensiveness. The decks are kept clear for him to consider the material
being discussed from his own internal frame of reference. His desire for
acceptance is realized, and because of this he feels the demand upon
himself to be responsible for his own interpretations and insights. He
feels the full strength of another person's belief in his integrity. An
interesting and important outgrowth of this self-acceptance is the
observable improvement in his inter-personal relations with others. He
will tend to show greater understanding and
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_393}acceptance of them, and develop freer, more real
relationships with them. This has great importance from the standpoint
of the communication and extension of the basic classroom mood. (186)
:::
::::
:::::

Although the type of climate described is essential throughout the
conduct of the course, the teacher who is eager to experiment with this
approach in education will wish to know how to develop such an
educational climate at the beginning of the course. The answer here
seems to be twofold. First, a permissive and understanding climate,
which respects the selfhood and purposive individuality of each student,
can be developed only in so far as the instructor holds a philosophy
which is consistent with these elements. The point of view developed in
the second chapter of this book seems to hold for teaching just as much
as it does for counseling. In the second place, the teacher will want to
implement this point of view from the very first in his work with the
class. Since this experience will run almost directly counter to all the
previous educational experience of the student, careful thought should
be given to the techniques used.

It is desirable that the seating arrangement be a circle, or some
physical arrangement which gives the instructor the same type of place
as any member of the class. It is important that the purposes of the
students should be foremost. The sessions may be started with a
description by students of the problems they are facing, or with a
discussion of problem areas. The writer has sometimes started a course
with as simple a statement as this: "This is a course labeled Dynamics
of Personality (or whatever course is being taught). I suspect each of
us had some sort of purpose in enrolling, even if that purpose was only
to gain another credit. If we could begin telling what our purposes
were, perhaps we can, together, build the course in such a way as to
meet them." As personal purposes are stated (often hesitantly and
haltingly), they are simply accepted, or the attitudes connected with
them are clarified. Gradually issues arise out of these purposes, and
the class is embarked upon its own curriculum construction.

However, this is not to say that things will run smoothly. In students
who have, for anything from one to twenty years, experienced a class as
a passive experience, such an opening of a course
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_394}is at first puzzling, then downright
frustrating. Negative feelings, often very strong ones, are aroused. At
first they are not expressed because one does not "talk back to" or
correct the teacher; but as tension mounts, some bold soul bursts out,
"I think we're wasting our time! I think we ought to have an outline,
and follow it, and that you ought to teach us. We came here to learn
from you, not to discuss among ourselves!" When negative attitudes such
as these are understood and accepted, students begin to recognize the
climate that exists. Some may not like the procedure, may heartily
disapprove, but all recognize that this is a very different situation
from that existing in the ordinary classroom.

In this type of climate, changes take place in the student's thinking.
When students are given the opportunity at the end of the course to
express the meaning which the course has had for them, the emphasis is
frequently upon the effects of the general atmosphere in the class.
Witness this statement of a student who had just completed the first
student-centered course of his experience --- a course in adjustment
counseling.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
I believe the effect upon me was therapeutic, and this may be why the
struggle for expression of my fresh attitudes becomes so difficult to
objectify. I say therapeutic even though I was not conscious of any deep
need for help. I did not feel disturbed at all at the beginning of the
quarter; yet I like to call the experience therapeutic. I say
therapeutic and I want the word to convey a slightly different meaning
than it usually does; that is to say, we can benefit from the
therapeutic process when we are aware of being disturbed, unhappy, and
confused, but we can profit by the very same process in our own everyday
lives when we have experiences which pull us out of our "status quo,"
our whirlpool of mediocrity and monotony, of passivity and ambivalence.
Probably a simpler way of putting it is to say that I experienced growth
of some kind. The two words are intimately related. Yet I feel that even
to connote this "nonpathologic" meaning, the word therapy is more
concrete and descriptive of what happens when one feels an eventful,
inspiring change within himself.

I can remember the first meetings --- tension . . . defensiveness . . .
huge slices of dense silence . . . impulsive bursts of hostility . . .
quick flashes of insight from here and there . . . confusion and
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_395}rationalizations . . . subtle projections and
stinging interpretations. It was so hard for us to take over. We were so
dependent upon the customary leadership. We rebelled at taking the
responsibility for our own learning. We wanted to "get something" *from*
you. We wanted to "get something" *from* the course. Thus our needs
would be met. Thus we would be one step nearer to our educational goal.
Many of us had a hard time getting rid of this dependence. Some never
did. As for me, I waddled along for the first three or four weeks rather
confused and sometimes indifferent. Later I began reading and thinking
about this and that in therapy. I read what I wanted. I found myself
digging for understanding. I felt no pressure from you or the class. I
read for myself. I learned for myself. I was satisfied with myself but
never became smug about it. I came to class to see what I could glean
from the free exchange of ideas; I verbalized my own when I felt I could
and listened to others struggle with the issues in therapy. I felt I was
really "in it." The hour grew shorter each week. (It's too bad I had a
9:30 class. I found myself wrestling with the ideas discussed in our
class and consequently missing many essential notes in the 9:30 class.
Classes should not run together like that. I believe a lot of effective
learning is lost by not having time immediately after class to think
over the material discussed.)

I felt completely free in this course. I could come or not. I could come
in late and leave early. I could talk or be silent. I got to know a
number of the students rather well. I was treated like a mature adult. I
felt no pressure from you. I didn't have to please you; I didn't have to
believe you. It was all up to me. I went at my own pace and surprised
myself. I *never* did as much reading for any single course as I did for
your course, and besides that I believe it was the most meaningful and
effective reading I have done. I also believe that this emerging
confidence in myself carried over into other studies. My wife has
noticed my new attitude toward study and my lively interest in my work.
We are both happy about it.
:::
::::
:::::

Note that it is the freedom from pressure, the acceptance of his silence
or talking, the fact that it is all "up to me," which seems to have had
the greatest effect upon this student.

The work of Anderson (8) has shown that classroom climate or atmosphere
can be objectively measured at the elementary school level. Withall
(224, 225) has completed a research which had as its purpose the
measurement of classroom climate in terms of its
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_396}"teacher-centeredness" or
"student-centeredness." While his scale leaves much to be desired, since
the steps on it were subjectively rather than objectively determined, he
has at least shown that qualities such as we are discussing can be
measured with the tools of science and subjected to rigorous
investigation. Both he and Anderson have also shown that classroom
climate is largely a product of the teacher's behavior. The atmosphere
which prevails will depend primarily upon what the teacher does and how
he does it. When such studies as these have been carried further, it
appears very likely that the psychological climate of the educational
experience will be shown to have a prominent influence upon the amount
and type of learning which takes place.

Frequently the teacher who is considering some experimentation along
these lines believes that he cannot undertake it, "because we must use
an assigned test" or because "my section must pass the same examination
as sections taught in a conventional way," or "I am held responsible for
seeing that my class covers such and such readings each week."
Consideration of these points will perhaps serve to illustrate the
primary importance of teacher attitudes. If for example this class must
meet the same examination as other sections, the teacher's attitude, as
expressed to the class, would take this into account: "I would like this
course to be, in so far as possible, *your* course, to meet the purposes
you would like to have it meet. There is one limitation which is imposed
upon me as well as upon you, and that is the examination which every
section of this course must take. With that limitation in mind, what
purposes would you like this course to serve?"

We may summarize by saying that every group has some limitations, if
only the fact that they meet for a limited, rather than an unlimited
number of hours each week. It is not the fact that there are
limitations, but the attitude, the permissiveness, the freedom which
exists within those limitations, which is important. To be sure, if the
limitations are extreme, and result from the wish of the instructor
rather than from outside forces, then a student-centered climate may be
stifled, but within a very broad range of psychological structuring, a
permissive climate may be built. Thus Cantor seems to be more
comfortable in demanding that his []{#019_c9.html_lpn_397}classes read a
prescribed assignment each week. While this may not aid in creating a
suitable climate, it is not a barrier to it, as his verbatim excerpts
indicate. The essential principle might perhaps be the following: Within
the limitations which are imposed by circumstance and authority, or are
imposed by the instructor as necessary for his own psychological
comfort, an atmosphere of permissiveness, of acceptance, of reliance
upon student responsibility, is created.

*The Development of Individual and Group Purposes*

It has already been mentioned that a student-centered course begins
around the purposes of the students. Throughout the course this should
also be true, though the specific methods used will certainly vary.

Perhaps the most extreme method is one which has not infrequently been
used by the writer. Each class session is opened with some variant of
"What do we wish to discuss or do today?" Naturally the class then takes
its start from some individual question or contribution. This might seem
like a most unsatisfactory and haphazard approach, since individual
need, or even individual maladjustment may dictate the initial
contribution. Yet it is fascinating to watch the process as it occurs.
If the issue is one which the group in general has not found of
interest, discussion quickly lags, or veers, by most interesting steps,
into areas which are of general concern. A listener --- and this
includes members of the class and the instructor --- would feel that
considerable time is being wasted. Yet the other side of the picture is
that under this procedure the class quickly comes to grips with the
deepest issues in the field under consideration. The writer has had the
experience of teaching a sequence of courses in somewhat conventional
style and also in a student-centered fashion. Issues which he had felt
were too advanced for a first course, and must be left until late in the
second term for informed consideration, may be reached and intelligently
and deeply considered within a few weeks of the beginning of the first
term by a group handled in permissive fashion. Hence while there is
often an appearance of some confusion and waste of time, the actual
learning process appears to []{#019_c9.html_lpn_398}proceed at an
accelerated rate when the course is built by the students about their
own changing purposes.

One way in which the teaching function appears to differ from the
counseling function, as we now see it, is that the teacher may be useful
to the group's exploration of purposes by indicating some of the
possible resources which members may use. In a course in adjustment
counseling, for example, students were told of a variety of ways in
which they might implement their purposes --- through class discussion,
through lectures if they desired, through reading of published material
and unpublished cases, through observing play therapy sessions, through
visiting counselors on the job, through listening to recorded counseling
interviews, and so on. They would probably have been unaware of a number
of these resources if the instructor had not mentioned them.

But suppose they choose to have only lectures? This will test rather
deeply the instructor's philosophy. If the group asks him to do
something which is basically counter to his own ethical principles ---
such as requesting him to arrange for them to listen to a counseling
interview without the client's permission --- then in justice to himself
as a person he will wish to refuse. But if the group differs with him as
to what is effective in learning, and wishes him to give lectures, he
may find it most consistent with his deeper views to acquiesce. A
lecture which is given at the request of the class is quite a different
experience for all concerned than one which is imposed upon the group.
The instructor would still have the responsibility of checking from time
to time as to whether he is meeting the current purposes of the group,
since it is the immediate perception of purpose, not the perception as
it existed three weeks ago, which is the basis of such a course.

We may say the aim of the instructor is continually to assist in
eliciting the contradictory and vaguely formulated individual purposes
which gradually combine into a group purpose or purposes. He will
participate in furthering these purposes by pointing out resources of
which the students may be unaware, and will either clearly accept or
clearly reject the roles assigned to him by the group in furtherance of
their own purposes.

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_399}*The Changing Role of the Leader*

As we have tried to find the most effective means of releasing the
capacities of students in the educational situation, we have
experimented with this procedure and that. If the leader deals with the
group by responding solely to the emotionalized attitudes and feelings
expressed, voicing a clarification or an understanding of these without
any structuring comments, the group experience tends toward becoming
pure group therapy. The leader's responses have tended to focus
attention upon these emotional aspects. If the leader structures the
initial session around the purposes of the course, that tends to be the
framework within which the group experience takes place, and most of the
feelings expressed have to do with the subject of the course. We have
discovered that a very minute amount of structuring has a decided effect
upon the nature of the group experience. Though the part played by the
leader appears quantitatively small, if judged, for example, from a
typescript of the class period, his behavior is highly important. The
group may have made decided progress in feeling itself responsible for
the course, but if the leader gives final answers to several questions
directed toward him he is likely to find that he is again in the
conventional role of the expert, and that the group is again dependent
upon him.

It has also come to be recognized that the leader role which is most
necessary and most effective in developing a permissive classroom
climate is not necessarily the role which the leader should play
throughout the course. Shedlin, from his experience, gives a good
account of this changing role.

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
At the formation and during the early stages of the group the activity
of the leader should be largely one of acceptance of his students and
understanding of their output. He should be nonjudgmental in his desire
not to intrude upon the value systems of his students. This may be
termed mood-setting action. It removes threat and consequent
defensiveness. He functions as an emotional and ideational sounding
board. His attitude is one of respect for and reliance upon the group
members to plan activities and derive satisfaction and growth according
to the needs and intents of each individual member. As the group
develops and the atmosphere is a known, consistent quantity
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_400}to the students, the actions of the leader
should subtly change to match the altered relationship. He is then in a
position to participate more freely on a "this is how I feel about it"
basis without preventing continuing analysis and exploration by the
members of the group. If he has been deeply sensitive to the changes in
"groupness," he should be able to do this successfully, with the
attitude that the students are perceptive enough of the classroom
atmosphere to freely accept or reject the leader's comments without
feeling their own values under attack. It should be emphasized that
throughout the entire group life, while there may be subtle changes in
methods or action, the attitude remains consistently one of democratic
unity.
:::
::::
:::::

Speaking of a particular course in which he was the instructor Shedlin
continues in the description of his approach.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
The instructor attempted to conduct all sessions of the course in a
consistently permissive, student-centered manner, allowing the
initiation and direction of the discussion to be determined by the
values and interests of the group. The role of the instructor may best
be described didactically in two separate areas, although practically it
is impossible to compartmentalize. The first is in terms of his activity
as an individual in the group, and the second, his operative position as
the leader of the group. The relationship which seemed to build as the
course progressed indicated almost complete acceptance of the instructor
by the group --- at least to the point that the students discarded all
former concepts of the authoritarian rule vested in a leader and found
no hesitancy in interrupting or disagreeing with the statements of the
leader. The activity of the leader developed in the direction of
sensitive recognition of the attitudes and ideas expressed by the
members of the group. This involved an understanding of the needs of the
members of the group, and a positive judgment to avoid participation
when the interaction between the group members was high. It also seemed
important that some distinction be made between highly emotionally
tinged statements and those of low attitudinal tone. The recognition and
verbalized understanding of the former by the leader seemed to promote a
deeper exploration of the problem and more insightful gains for the
group members, while acceptance and clarification of the latter type of
statement seemed more natural and acceptable to the speaker and other
members of the group. (186, pp. 8--10)
:::
::::
:::::

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_401}Outstanding in the experiences which have been
successful in this type of classroom leadership is the concept of
flexibility. If the leader is able to let himself be utilized by the
group in a variety of ways as their needs change, he will be more
successful in facilitating learning with a minimum of resistance. But
the question as to whether he can behave flexibly, in a way which is
determined by the desires of the group, is a very difficult one for most
teachers. To conduct a "controlled discussion" or to give lectures, or
to start each session with some key questions, or to permit completely
free and fluid discussion may all be demanded of the instructor at one
time or another by the group. When the leader can feel comfortable in
doing any one of these things because it is the desire of the group, he
has achieved a high level of genuine permissiveness. To know when he has
reached the limit of his own internal comfort, and to feel easy in
refusing to function in ways that are not comfortable for him, is
another aspect of the genuineness of his attitudes, If he behaves in
some way that is not natural for him, simply because he feels that he
should do so, this is quickly sensed by the group and damages the group
atmosphere.

We may state briefly our present concept of the role of the leader in an
educational situation when the aim is to center the process in the
developing aims of the students.

::::::::::: block
:::: block1
::: top
Initially the leader has much to do with setting the mood or climate of
the group experience by his own basic philosophy of trust in the group,
which is communicated in many subtle ways.
:::
::::

:::: block1
::: top
The leader helps to elicit and clarify the purposes of the members of
the class, accepting all aims.
:::
::::

:::: block1
::: top
He relies upon the student desire to implement these purposes as the
motivational force behind learning.
:::
::::

:::: block1
::: top
He endeavors to organize and make easily available all resources which
the students may wish to use for their own learning.
:::
::::
:::::::::::

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: top
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_402}He regards himself as a flexible resource to be
utilized by the group in the ways which seem most meaningful to them, in
so far as he can be comfortable operating in these ways.
:::
::::
:::::

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: top
In responding to expressions from the group, he accepts both the
intellectual content and the emotionalized attitudes, endeavoring to
give each aspect the approximate degree of emphasis which it has for the
individual and the group.
:::
::::
:::::

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: top
As the acceptant classroom climate becomes established, the leader is
able to change his role and become a participant, a member of the group,
expressing his views as those of one individual only.
:::
::::
:::::

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: top
He remains alert to expressions indicative of deep feeling and when
these are voiced, he endeavors to understand these from the speaker's
point of view, and to communicate this type of understanding.
:::
::::
:::::

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: top
Likewise when group interaction becomes charged with emotion, he tends
to maintain a neutral and understanding role, in order to give
acceptance to the varied feelings which exist.
:::
::::
:::::

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: top
He recognizes that the extent to which he can behave in these differing
fashions is limited by the genuineness of his own attitudes. To pretend
an acceptant understanding of a viewpoint when he does not feel this
acceptance, will not further, and will probably hinder, the dynamic
progress of the class.
:::
::::
:::::

*The Process of Learning in a Student-Centered Class*

The way in which students learn in such an experience is probably best
indicated by giving verbatim excerpts from class experience. These
excerpts will also serve to illustrate some of the points which have
been made regarding the leader's role. The first selections are taken
from a course in adjustment counseling, the type of course in which we
have had the most experience in implementing some of these educational
principles. The quoted portions are from a session including nineteen
members, a session []{#019_c9.html_lpn_403}taken from the middle portion
of the course. Each verbal contribution is numbered for easy reference
to the notes given here at the bottom of the page. The recording is
stenographic. Mr. B starts the hour with a question.

::::: block
:::: sl
::: top
*1. Mr. B* (*addressing the instructor directly*): How do you feel about
the division of responsibility between counselor and client in
client-centered counseling?

*2. Instructor:* There seem to be some differences of opinion, but in my
own thinking I tend to separate responsibility into two different areas.
First, the area revolving about the client's problem, and in that area I
see the responsibility resting pretty squarely upon him. The second area
is that of the relationship which builds up in counseling. In that case
my conception of the responsibility function is a fifty-fifty approach,
the counselor's responsibility being that of providing a sensitive,
permissive, understanding atmosphere, and the client's responsibility
being to use that climate as a ground for his problem solving activity.
I wonder if that in any way gets at what you mean, Mr. B?

*3*. *Mr. B:* Well, it seems to me that the counselor has even greater
responsibility. He has information that the client doesn't have. Isn't
it only fair that he give that information to the client? In some
respects the counseling situation seems to be a teacher-pupil
relationship and if that is so then the client is really being cheated.

*4. Inst:* You object to the fact that the counselor doesn't take more
responsibility for guiding the client.
:::
::::
:::::

![](html/docimages/line1.jpg){height="4" width="100%"}

:::: block
::: sl
*2.* Had this occurred early in the course the leader might have
preferred to reflect B's puzzlement or concern about this topic. At this
point, however, the leader tries to answer B's question directly,
stating his opinion as a personal opinion.

*3*. Evidently it would have made little difference whether the leader
reflected B's attitude or gave his own opinion, since B clearly wants to
express his own view in a somewhat challenging way. The fact that he is
willing to object to and contradict the instructor's opinion is one
measure of the climate which exists.

*4.* Here the leader must quickly and intuitively make a decision as to
the course he is to follow. As a participant, he could continue with the
opinion he has stated, trying to relate it to B's statement. But where a
contribution is clearly imbued with considerable personal
:::
::::

:::: block
::: sl
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_404}*5*. *Mr. B:* Yes, it seems that way to me. As a
matter of fact, all the examples of directive counseling given in
Rogers' book seem extreme --- they're not instances of good directive
counseling. There are very few traditional counselors who give a lot of
advice and reassurance, or take over the life of the client.

*6. Inst:* Your feeling then is that Rogers has been extremely unfair in
the selection of the examples.

*7. Miss C:* I would agree with Mr. B in some respects. I was reading
Alexander and French (*Psychoanalytic Therapy*) the other night ---
They're psychoanalysts, supposedly "middle of the road" in the
directive-nondirective continuum, yet in many instances they were
certainly nondirective in their approach.

*8. Inst:* It's pretty confusing sometimes when we're forced to label
things, isn't it?

*9. Miss C:* It certainly is. You hardly know where you should stand in
regard to the different techniques and points of view in psychotherapy.

*10. Mr. B:* That's right. In talking to analysts you get a different
impression than when you read what they write. When they speak about
their methods you get the impression that they're using nondirective
methods pretty heavily.

*11*. *Mr. R:* I've watched analysts work, too; they seem quite
permissive and accepting, very much client-centered at the beginning,
but later they interpret quite sharply and summarize quite a bit.

*12. Mr. K:* They can't be nondirective if they draw conclusions for
their clients. That seems to vitiate the philosophical basis for the
whole

![](html/docimages/line1.jpg){height="4" width="100%"}

meaning, it is far more important that Mr. B experience understanding
and acceptance of his objecting and challenging attitude. The instructor
tries to convey this in this response, and in number 6. These responses
tend to reinforce the permissiveness of the classroom climate, since it
is obviously safe to differ.

*7.* Encouraged by this acceptance, Miss C explores her milder
objection, and something of her puzzlement.

*8.* This response is attitudinally accepting. In terms of content it
seems somewhat overgeneralized. A more specific response might have been
preferable. "You thought they were supposed to be 'middle-of-the-road'
and yet you feel that actually they are more nondirective."

*9.* This perplexity is an attitude to which the instructor might well
have responded, but perhaps he was not given the opportunity.

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_405}

point of view, because in effect it is saying, "Mr. Client, you really
don't have the capacity to proceed on your own, so I'll give you some
clues," or something to that effect.

*13*. *Mr. R:* Well, that's true, but I didn't mean that they drew
conclusions, they just summarized what the client had said, picking out
the high spots and more or less emphasized them.

*14. Mr. B:* It seems like we could use both nondirective and directive
therapy successively on the same client if we did it carefully enough,
and get better results than if we used one or the other. That way I'd
feel better because I wouldn't be tied down to one set of criteria; I'd
be more comfortable in the situation that way. Then I'd never get the
feeling that I'd be pinned against the wall and have no "counseling
ammunition" left.

*15*. *Inst:* If you could use the best methods of both viewpoints you'd
feel a lot safer all around, is that what you mean?
:::
::::

![](html/docimages/line1.jpg){height="4" width="100%"}

::::: block
:::: top
::: sl
*10 through 13.* Here is the type of interchange of which there is a
great deal in any student-centered class. To the reader it may not seem
too outstanding, unless he notes these characteristics. Differences of
opinion exist, but they do not tend to be pure argument for argument's
sake (this in fact rarely seems to occur in a group once an acceptant
atmosphere is established). These differences are expressed as each
individual is trying to formulate his own evaluation of the subject
under consideration. There is no appeal to the authority of the
instructor or any other authority, but each is trying to define more
sharply his own current judgment. These comments would apply not only to
this interchange but to most of the quoted material.

*14.* Mr. B continues the discussion but turns it in the direction of
his own very personal feelings. This is a good example of the way in
which the type of thinking in a student-centered class tends to differ
from that in the more conventional course. In a situation in which there
was more of an element of threat, Mr. B would in all likelihood have
stood for the same point of view --- the same abstractions. But it is
quite unlikely that he would have seen the basis of these ideas as
residing in his own need for security. Such personal feelings tend not
to be seen or to be expressed in the ordinary class.

*15*. The leader wisely endeavors to understand the attitude Mr. B has
expressed.

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_406}*16. Mr. B:* That's right. I guess a lot of my
intellectualization is based on attitudes of my own that I really don't
want to recognize. (186, pp.11--14)

At this point the subject of discussion changes, and the group explores
other issues. Since it is not feasible to give the content of the whole
hour, we shall select another portion of the interchange which occurred
somewhat later. Discussion had ceased on one topic, and a pause of one
full minute ensued. Then Miss E spoke up.

*32. Miss E:* If understanding the client is the important thing then
what does a counselor do with a really dependent client who wants to
lean on him --- not for understanding, but because he can't seem to
function efficiently by himself. He's indecisive, fearful, and needs
support. In fact he oftentimes comes to the counseling situation *just
for* support. We get a lot of them in our agency and I think we have to
give them more than acceptance and a good atmosphere. They just seem
completely bogged down by their environmental situations sometimes.

*33*. *Mr. J:* Miss E, it seems that in all our discussions you seem to
feel pressed to manipulate the counseling situation. You really resist
the point of view that so many of us have that the client really has the
capacity to work out his own problems, and that he is entitled to
respect for that ability.
:::
::::
:::::

![](html/docimages/line1.jpg){height="4" width="100%"}

:::: block
::: sl
*16.* Evidently real learning, comparable to that which goes on in
therapy, has occurred here. While Mr. B does not seem to have verbalized
fully the insight he has achieved, it appears clear that the experience
has been a meaningful one for him.

*32.* Before commenting on Miss E's contribution, it may be mentioned in
passing that a silence of sixty seconds or more is somewhat difficult
for the leader or the group to endure at first. The conventional
instructor is so used to seeing to it that every moment of the hour is
filled with some type of verbalization, that it is difficult for him to
recognize that constructive thought may be going on in the group during
a silence. Here Miss E has evidently been using the time to formulate an
issue which has real significance for her, and which grows out of
personal experience.

*33.* The expression of real feeling which is encouraged by a permissive
situation, leads not infrequently to expression of feeling toward other
members of the group. This has constructive potentialities, provided the
leader recognizes that his role of acceptance of all attitudes becomes
of even greater importance at these points, and that the voicing of such
acceptance is rather necessary.

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_407}*34*. *Miss E: No, I don't!* It's just that I
feel like I'm not helping a client unless I can do something to make it
easier for him. I'm terribly in sympathy with people who are in trouble.

*35*. *Inst:* It's awfully difficult for you not to become emotionally
involved with people who are in distress.

*36. Miss E:* That's quite true. And in view of the fact that I've had a
lot of personal difficulty I can readily understand why I'm that way.

*37. Miss T:* It seems to me that your situation is quite similar to one
that was brought up before, with the exception that you recognize an
attitude that you're bringing to the counseling situation and yet you
are inflicting that attitude upon the client. That would tend to prevent
you from really understanding him from his own point of view. It would
be a sort of rejecting thing to do.

*38. Miss W:* I think you may be a bit hard on Miss E because she may
not be fully aware of the implications of her sympathy for her clients.
Perhaps she conceives of the counseling relationship in different terms
than we do.
:::
::::

![](html/docimages/line1.jpg){height="4" width="100%"}

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
*34*. Mr. J's challenge brings an immediate and defensive response. Miss
E relates her point of view to her feelings. In her last sentence there
may also be the implication, "but you are not in sympathy with people."

*35*. Is this response slightly interpretative? It would seem so. Would
another response have been more helpful? It is difficult to say. An
alternative might have been along these lines. "You are emotionally
involved when people are in distress, and feel you *must* make things
easier for them."

*36.* Here again, as in numbers 14 and 16, we find the student relating
her intellectual beliefs to her more basic emotional feelings. Certainly
her future behavior is likely to be more soundly realistic if she
recognizes that her views are not only intellectualizations containing
possible truth, but that they grow out of personal need as well.

*37*. Here again Miss E is challenged by an interpretation of her
behavior. Yet this does not appear to be so much of a personal attack as
an attempt by Miss T to think with Miss E about herself.

*38.* Miss W comes to Miss E's defense, albeit in a way which is
somewhat patronizing, indicating that Miss E may not be capable of
understanding the implications of her own reactions.

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_408}*39. Miss E:* No, I'm glad she said that because
I wasn't *truly* aware of the fact that I was so completely identifying
with my clients even when I practically said as much before. I've got to
give this a lot more thought.

*40*. *Mr. Y:* It's funny, but all this gives me a new slant on some of
the methods I've been using. I've sure been taking the responsibility
away from my clients. I've been spoon-feeding some of them without
realizing it. All along I've injected, or projected or both. That is,
I've projected my own feelings of dependence out on my clients. I guess
I've got to talk this thing over carefully with someone and work through
these problems more fully. (186, pp. 16--18)
:::
::::
:::::

::: top
These excerpts are rather typical of the personalized problem-solving
type of learning which goes on in a student-centered course. If they
also help to suggest the minimal but highly significant behavior of the
leader, then they will have conveyed a description of the experience as
we have come to understand it.
:::

To one who is used to highly organized classroom presentations, the
discussion may seem loose, may appear to jump from topic to topic. This
is certainly true, but it is probable that this fluid, exploratory, even
confused type of advance is more deeply characteristic of learning as it
occurs, than the dead systematization of learning after the fact. One of
the things we have learned as instructors is that if the leader is
uncomfortable at leaving issues

![](html/docimages/line1.jpg){height="4" width="100%"}

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
*39.* Here, as for Mr. B in number 16, Miss E is working ahead on the
problem of understanding herself, particularly herself in relation to
her ideas about counseling. She rejects the protection offered by Miss
W, and moves ahead to develop a somewhat painful insight. Clearly this
is only the start of the learning she will achieve from this situation.

*40.* This is the first contribution of Mr. Y during this hour, but it
illustrates a process we have learned to expect. The person who is not
verbally expressing himself in a class situation may nevertheless be
participating at a deep and significant level. Sometimes this becomes
evident in the course, through remarks like that of Mr. Y. Sometimes it
may only come out in a paper at the end of the course, or the instructor
may not learn the meaning it has had for the individual until long after
the course is over.
:::
::::
:::::

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_409}"up in the air" and tries to achieve closure by
some type of summary and conclusion at the end of discussion, this
provides some relief for the group, but effectively stops any need for
further thinking about the subject. If, however, the leader can tolerate
the uncertainty, the divided views, the unresolved issues which the
group has brought out, and if the class hour (and indeed the course) is
ended without any attempt to bring an artificial closure, then the
individual members of the group carry on very vital thinking outside of
the class hours. The issues have been raised, some of their former
conceptions and gestalts have been unsettled, they need to find some
resolution of the situation, they recognize that the teacher will not
give an authoritative answer to the problem, and hence there is only one
alternative --- to learn and learn and learn, until they have reached at
least a temporary solution for themselves. And because they have
achieved it for themselves, and recognize all too clearly the imperfect
steps by which it was achieved, this temporary solution can never have
the fixity that it would have had if it had been authoritatively
pronounced by a professor. Therefore, instead of becoming a fixed point,
a barrier to future learning, it is instead merely a step, a way-station
on the road to further learning. This aspect is keenly experienced by
the students in such courses. One student stated, at the end of such a
course: "All my life I've made a ceremony of burning my notes at the end
of a course, to show I was finished with it; in this course I have a
totally different feeling, that I have just begun to learn, and that I
want to go on."

*Further Illustrations of Process*

To some it will seem unfortunate that the foregoing illustration is from
a course in which counseling is the subject and the concepts of
client-centered therapy a frequent topic of discussion. The question may
be raised as to whether these concepts influenced the process of
learning. The same methods have been used in a variety of other courses
including statistics and mathematics, but the verbatim accounts of
classroom behavior are few. Perhaps the question may be answered to some
extent by taking a verbatim portion from a Great Books course, also
conducted by Shedlin.

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_410}In this group the books were prescribed, the
reading to be done for each session was prescribed --- even the leader
is described as a questioner. Hence this is one situation in which, if
the leader is to conduct the course in a student-centered fashion, he
must create an acceptant climate within a rather rigid imposed
framework. A stenographic record of the sixth session was made, and the
following portion is from the first of the hour. The assignment had been
Aristotle's Ethics, Book I. The group consisted of nineteen adults. Mr.
C, who opens the hour, is a printer. The instructor's comments are given
as footnotes.

::::: block
:::: sl
::: top
*1. Mr. C:* There are many things about this reading that I know I don't
understand, but as is my usual procedure, I'd like to attack something
right at the start. (*General laughter.*) In the very first sentence he
says, (*gets book open*) "Every art and every inquiry, and similarly
every action and pursuit, is thought to aim at some good; and for this
reason the good has rightly been declared that at which all things aim."
Well, it seems to me that Aristotle is tentative at one point --- where
he says, "is thought to aim at some good," and quite dogmatic when he
says, "has *rightly* been declared," etc. He doesn't seem to be
consistent.

*2. Inst:* You resent the fact that you have to accept reasoning which
seems to be built on clay, is that it?

*3*. *Mr. C:* Sure, this man is supposed to be an authority, yet he
seems to be mixed up right at the beginning. I don't like to swallow
stuff like that. He talks as if everything he says is true, yet he is
quite uncertain at times.
:::
::::
:::::

![](html/docimages/line1.jpg){height="4" width="100%"}

::::: block
:::: sl
::: top
*1*. During the first five sessions Mr. C was an energetic participant,
and to characterize his part in the group best might be to say that "he
is the man who sticks his neck out." The group members accept him in a
half-facetious light, but seem inclined to have a healthy respect for
his contributions. His remark is addressed to the group.

*2.* In this instance the instructor responded after allowing time for
one of the group members to pick up the remark. The response was an
attempt to understand Mr. C's feeling about his interpretation of
Aristotle at this point. It seems that any attempt to challenge his
thinking here would be premature, might arouse hostility and would
probably deter him from further self-examination.

*3.* He continues his attack, expressing resentment more specifically.

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_411}*4*. *Inst:* You feel that if a man gives you
the impression that he knows everything, then he should know everything,

*5*. *Mr. C:* Well, no man can know everything, but ------

*6. Mr. R* (*interrupts*): Of course no one knows everything. And after
all, how can you write if you don't believe you are right. I don't think
he's so dogmatic; he says later on that the truth can be stated only in
terms of the exactness of the subjects and premises.

*7. Mrs. H:* I agree with you on that, Mr. R, and I think I know where
he says that. (*Reads*) "it is evidently equally foolish to accept
probable reasoning from a mathematician and to demand from a rhetorician
scientific proofs."

*8. Mr. R:* Yeah.

*9. Inst:* Then you two feel that he is rather clear in his limitations
and quite humble in his presentation.

*10. Mr. J:* I'd like to say something to Mr. C on that, too. Sometimes
he \[Aristotle\] sounds as if he was being dogmatic, but if you follow
him you find out that he is following out a scheme of argument.

*11. Inst:* You think he's *reasoning* rather than just *stating*, is
that what you mean?

*12. Mr. J:* Yes. But you've got to watch the introductory words he
uses.

*13. Mrs. S:* That sure is true. I've marked some of them in places. For
example, right here in section 1094b and 1095a in my reprint, I've
underlined them. His first sentence starts with "Now," the second says,
"and further."
:::
::::
:::::

![](html/docimages/line1.jpg){height="4" width="100%"}

::::: sl
:::: block
::: top
*4*. This remark was designed to understand the feeling and to clarify
the idea expressed by Mr. C in such a way that he realized it was his
personal impression he was advancing. Unfortunately it goes beyond what
has been expressed by Mr. C, and hence is perceived as somewhat
threatening.

*5*. Mr. C feels the pressure of the attempted clarification.

*6*, *7*, *8.* Mr. R and Mrs. H seem anxious to pound some insight into
Mr. C and at the same time defend Aristotle.

*10.* It is interesting to note a subtle group mood being expressed
here. Since Mr. C's last remark, it seems fairly obvious that even while
the others are making their own points, they are at the same time
attempting to aid Mr. C in working through his original attitude.

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_412}*14. Inst:* Mrs. S, do you mean that what sound
like positive statements are really progressive steps in reasoning?

*15*. *Mrs. S:* That's right. He makes his premises and then forms his
conclusions.

*16. Mr. C:* Perhaps I was a bit hasty in judging this man. I've been
known to do that. (*Laughter.*) I have to read this again anyway, so
I'll watch my step next time. I always seem to get a lesson when I open
my mouth.

*17. Inst:* And so he left, clutching his book and dragging his sword
behind him. (*General laughter.*)

*18. Mr. C:* How is it you know just how I feel all the time?
(*Laughter.*)

*19. Mr. S:* I'd like to raise a question about Aristotle's knowledge of
human nature. (*Looks about.*) At one point he mentions that there are
three main types of life. Pleasure seeking, political, and
contemplative. (*Pauses and looks around.*)

*20. Inst:* Yes.

*21. Mr. S:* Perhaps I misunderstand, but it seems to me that most of us
engage in *all* those activities during our lifetimes.

*22. Inst:* You're objecting to the labeling of --- That is, you object
to dividing all life into only three types.
:::
::::
:::::

![](html/docimages/line1.jpg){height="4" width="100%"}

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
*14.* In retrospect, this response seems completely unnecessary and
certainly redundant.

*16.* Here it appears that the group activity has been exerting its
effect upon Mr. C in spite of his silence. He verbalizes an insight, and
at the same time seems to be saying a left-handed "thanks" to the group.

*17*. It is difficult to assay what the purpose of this remark may have
been at the time. A rationalization which would be kind to the
instructor might be that he carried along with the generally humorous
group tone at the time.

*18.* Is there a hint of resentment here? Perhaps the instructor's
attempt at humor has backfired.

*19.* I believe it is worthy of mention that Mr. S surveyed the group
rather intently as he spoke. It seemed to me that he was actively
looking for acceptance from the group. Implicit in this is the idea that
he felt the responsibility involved in his interpersonal relations in
the class.

*20.* The instructor's simple acceptance of Mr. S allowed him to
immediately communicate how he felt about what he read.

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_413}*23. Mr. S:* Yes, suppose you just look at a
single day and try to interpret your motives. It's far more complicated
than the way I'll describe it, but it's good enough to explain what I
mean. You get up and eat. You could say that was pleasure-seeking. You
read the paper. That could be for pleasure or for political thought or
other things. You might go to church; that would be spiritual
contemplation, or it may be fear, or something else. You see what I
mean?

*24. Mr. N:* Don't you mean that life is not something you can
generalize about?

*25. Mr. S:* In a way, yes.

*26. Mr. N:* But didn't Aristotle mean more than motives? Didn't he mean
the general tone of a person's existence?

*27. Miss W:* Not only that, but he was writing about a time in history
which is much different than what exists now.

*28. Inst:* You believe that human nature is different because of
different environments, is that right?

*29. Miss W:* Well, yes. If cultural settings are very complex, people
are bound to react in more complicated ways. In simple settings they
don't need to be complicated in their adjustment.

*30. Miss B:* But if happiness is the goal of human beings, what
difference does it make how simple or complicated your surroundings are?
You still will be living for happiness.

*31. Miss W:* What is happiness?

*32. Inst:* Miss W asks the \$64 question. (*Laughter.*)
:::
::::
:::::

![](html/docimages/line1.jpg){height="4" width="100%"}

:::: block
::: sl
*24.* Mr. N responded understandingly to Mr. S's puzzlement as to the
effectiveness of his communication.

*26.* It is noteworthy that Mr. N responded as above even though he had
reservations as to the validity of Mr. S's statement. This has a great
deal of significance as an example of group atmosphere. In terms of
discussion techniques alone, doesn't this imply that a democratic
atmosphere fosters the acceptance of responsibility by the participants?
As the group members feel free of threat, they not only can accomplish
their own ideational integration but can accept a clarifying role in
their interaction with others.

*28.* This was an attempt to get at the essence of Miss W's thinking.

*32.* Here the instructor was grossly insensitive to the intent of Miss
W's question. Perhaps a simple acceptance would have allowed her the
expression she needed. My interpretation of the dynamics at this point
is that if the classroom mood was not a generally permissive one, such a
remark on the instructor's part might have effectively forestalled
further participation by Miss W.

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_414}*33*. *Miss W:* No, this is serious. Aren't
there as many ideas of happiness as there are people? Isn't happiness a
personal thing?

*34. Inst:* You're pretty certain that happiness is more than something
about which people can agree. You feel it comes from within, is that it?

*35. Miss W:* Sure. My happiness comes from my doing and thinking what
*I* believe is right. And it also depends upon what *I* want in life.

*36. Mrs. S:* So far so good. But *where* do you get your values and
beliefs? Don't you get them from your environment?

*37. Miss W:* Perhaps so, but as you get them, you get them as a person.
What I mean is, you have to interpret what you get from your environment
in light of what you are. This is very hard to explain.

*38. Inst:* It's frustrating to know what you mean and find it so
difficult to express it clearly.

*39. Miss W:* It sure is.

*40*. *Mrs. D:* I think I see what she means. For example, if two people
see an event, they're going to see it in terms of what it means to each,
because of how each views it. And each views it differently because of
what each is. Is that what you were trying to say?

*41. Miss W:* Yes, that's just about what I mean. (186, pp. 26--30)
:::
::::

::: top
Though the subject matter under discussion is much different, the
description of the process as a personalized problem-solving would still
seem to hold. As far as we have been able to observe, the content of the
course seems to have relatively little influence upon the type of
learning process we have been describing.
:::

*The Problem of Evaluation*

How shall we solve the problem of grades, of passing of courses and
examinations, when this approach is used in the classroom situation? How
is the student to be evaluated?

There seems to be only one answer to this question which is thoroughly
consistent with the approach itself. If the purposes of the individual
and the group are the organizing core of the course; if the purposes of
the individual are met if he finds significant

![](html/docimages/line1.jpg){height="4" width="100%"}

:::: block
::: sl
*33*. Instead she continues, indicating her feeling about the subject.

*41.* Throughout the last few exchanges Mrs. S, Mrs. D, and the
instructor seem to be aiding Miss W in the understanding of her
thinking.
:::
::::

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_415}learnings, resulting in self-enhancement, in the
course; if the instructor's function is to facilitate such learnings;
then there is but one person who is in a position to evaluate the degree
to which the goal has been achieved, and that is the student himself.
Self-evaluation appears to be the logical procedure for discovering
those ways in which the experience has been a failure and those respects
in which it has been meaningful and fruitful. This is, indeed, the
fitting climax of an "education for rulers." Who is to say whether the
student has put forth his best effort? What weaknesses and gaps there
are in his learnings? What has been the quality of his thinking as he
has wrestled with the problems which his own purposes have posed? The
person most competent to perform this task would appear to be the
responsible individual who has experienced the purposes, who has
observed intimately his efforts to achieve them --- the learner who has
been in the center of the process. Here again is evidence of the
revolutionary character of this approach to education, since the very
heart of all our educational program is the rigorous (one might almost
say ruthless) evaluation of the student, whether by the instructor, or
by a standardized and impersonal test.

Our experience has corroborated the theoretical principle that
self-evaluation is the most desirable mode of appraisal in a
student-centered course. The greater the freedom to use self-evaluation
in such a situation, the more obviously favorable have been the results.
Students experience the task of self-appraisal as one more opportunity
for growth. They experience with wonderment the fact that no one is
going to utilize an external locus of evaluation. They do not need to
tremble for fear they will be "failed"; nor can they look with childish
anticipation for approval. The question for each student is --- What is
my honest appraisal of what I have done, as it relates to my own
purposes? There is not even any gain to come from inflating the
self-appraisal. As one student writes, "I started to make this pretty
rosy, but who would I be kidding, and why should I kid myself?" To carry
through a self-evaluation is often a most difficult task. It means that
the student must formulate his criteria of evaluation, must decide on
the standards that he has for himself. It means
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_416}experiencing to the full the implications of
discovering that, in the long run, the locus of evaluation lies in one's
self. Something of the flavor of this experience will be conveyed in the
next section, where quotations will be given from documents concerned
with self-evaluation.

Let us now turn, however, to another phase of this problem of
evaluation. Most instructors are working in institutional frameworks in
which the operational philosophy is almost directly opposed to that
which we have been presenting. The student must be "motivated" to work;
the only proof that he has been motivated is through examinations;
external evaluation is the primary function of education; grades are the
balance sheet of such evaluation; and throughout the whole process the
instructor must not trust the student. Is it, then, impossible for a
teacher to handle his class in a student-centered fashion in such a
framework? We have not found it so, though admittedly there must be some
compromises, if we are to advance by evolutionary rather than
revolutionary means.

Again, the problems lose their overwhelming character if the instructor
is clear in his own philosophical approach to the situation. Grades and
evaluation simply become one more limitation imposed by the environment,
one more problem which the students and the instructor must solve. The
instructor poses his dilemma to the group. "The university demands that
I sign my name to the grades given to all the members of the class,
indicating that they have performed at a certain level. How do you wish
to meet that problem?" Operating in such a framework, any solution is
less than perfect, but various classes have arrived at working solutions
which have made for far more growth than the conventional approach. Some
of these may be listed.

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: top
In some courses students have formulated the examination by submitting
questions and have participated in its evaluation.
:::
::::
:::::

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: top
In one small class where the students were acquainted with each other's
work, they decided to arrive at grades in an open class discussion at
the end of the course. Each student stated the grade he felt he had
earned, and gave his reasons.
:::
::::
:::::

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: top
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_417}The group and instructor entered into the
discussion and each grade was arrived at by a general concurrence of
opinion.
:::
::::
:::::

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: top
In some universities a grade of Pass or Fail can be turned in. Utilizing
this, classes have accepted a P grade, permitting self-evaluation to be
the real judgment on their work.
:::
::::
:::::

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
In some courses each student has written out a self-evaluation including
his judgment as to an appropriate letter grade for himself. The
understanding is that the instructor will turn in this grade unless he
feels that he cannot agree with it, in which case the grade will be
arrived at in conference between student and teacher.
:::
::::
:::::

These represent a few of the many compromise approaches which have been
made. Even the most faulty ones have these advantages. They emphasize
that evaluation of the student by the student deserves much weight in
the evaluational process. The basis for grades inevitably comes into
sharp focus, and students come to realize that they are often (if not
always) antithetical to growth in terms of personal purposes. The
student becomes quite fully aware of the fact that a grade is a highly
artificial thing, based upon very human and fallible methods, and that
his own judgment of his achievement is at least as valid for him as a
judgment from an external locus of evaluation.

As we have struggled with this problem of grades and academic
bookkeeping, and have contrasted it with those experiences in which
students are free to evaluate themselves, we have reached a conclusion
which to some will seem radical indeed. It is that personal growth is
hindered and hampered, rather than enhanced, by external evaluation.
Whether that evaluation is favorable or unfavorable, it does not seem to
make for the development of a more mature, responsible, or socialized
self, but indeed tends to work in an opposite direction.

This is not to say that we would do away with all evaluation. If I am
hiring one person from among ten applicants, I evaluate them all. If a
man is going out as a physician, a psychologist, a lawyer, or an
architect, then perhaps the welfare of society may
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_418}demand that he be evaluated in terms of certain
publicly available criteria, so that society may know whether or not he
is competent for his task. But let it be recognized that such
evaluations are made on behalf of the welfare of the organization, or
the welfare of society. They do not, as far as we can determine, promote
the growth or welfare of the individual.

Such a radical hypothesis deserves intensive investigation. Thus far the
writer knows of only one study bearing on the point. Beier (21) studied
the effect of a Rorschach evaluation upon reasoning, problem-solving,
and motor skills.^[38](#025_endnotes.html_e38){#019_c9.html_f38}^
Sixty-two graduate students were given a Rorschach test and tests of
abstract reasoning and problem-solving. They were then divided into an
experimental and control group, matched for age, intelligence, ability
in abstract reasoning, and degree of adjustment as measured by the
Rorschach. The members of the experimental group were then given a
structured interpretation of their Rorschach results. They were exposed,
in other words to an evaluation (which they would be likely to regard as
authoritative) made from an external frame of reference. Both groups
were then retested for abstract reasoning, card-sorting, and
mirror-drawing ability. The experimental group showed more anxiety, more
rigidity, and a greater degree of disorganization than the control
group. They seemed less able to respond flexibly and intelligently to
the demands of the situation. The difference between the groups was
statistically significant. Although this study approaches only one phase
of the problem and needs much further supplementation, its findings are
in accord with our own experience in indicating that when the student
experiences the locus of evaluation as residing outside himself,
personality organization and development are hindered; that when he
experiences the locus of evaluation as being within himself, personal
growth is fostered.

*Outcomes of Student-Centered Teaching*

It has been our frequent practice to ask students to turn in at the end
of the course some sort of personal document --- a
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_419}self-evaluation, or a reaction to the experience
of the course. One of the impressive learnings which result from
perusing these documents is the sharp realization that each student
attended a different course. That is, the experiential field of each
person is so different that at times it is very difficult to believe
that the papers turned in were written about what was, from an external
point of view, the same objective experience, namely a certain course
with a certain instructor. To read such a group of papers thoughtfully
is to give up forever the notion that a course will mean to all students
a certain degree of "coverage" of topics A, B, and C. Each person's
experience of the course is highly unique, and intimately related to his
own past and to his current desires and purposes.

In spite of this uniqueness there are certain general trends often
noticeable in such reports. The first is the feeling of puzzlement, a
feeling which may range from amused perplexity to real confusion and a
sense of profound frustration. The student reacts with some emotion to
the experience of being put on his own. A brief statement of this
reaction, which would be typical of many, may be taken from a student
self-evaluation.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
At first I had a feeling that we were not going anywhere. Then gradually
I began to feel that we were going somewhere, but couldn't determine
just where. Finally, I came to the conclusion that where we were going
depended upon each individual. (186, p. 8)
:::
::::
:::::

Another general trend is that most students tend to work harder, and at
a deeper level, than in the conventional course. That this may be true
in spite of a considerable feeling of frustration is indicated in the
following excerpt from a statement turned in by a graduate student at
the conclusion of a course.

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
I might say that I have not been entirely satisfied with this course in
Adjustment Counseling. I have the feeling that some direction is not
only necessary but even desirable and expected in the learning
situation. However, it may be that what I objected to was not the
nondirective factor as such but rather what I defined as the lack of
organization or direction of the class. Or was it that the class did not
do what I wanted to do? However, I'm not so sure that things didn't
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_420}turn out for the best (certainly satisfactorily)
notwithstanding my dissatisfaction with the group.

I soon decided that if I were going to get anything out of the course I
would have to do it for myself, and this was good, though I'm still
convinced that there is another and more enjoyable method of
accomplishing the same thing. Not only did I liberally sample the
client-centered literature but I felt I should know more about the other
schools of therapy and thus I was forced to study more about them. I
also appreciated for the first time how inadequate was my understanding
and comprehension of many of the psychological methods and techniques,
so I was forced to investigate them more thoroughly and as a result I am
going to sit in on a few extra courses in the coming quarters. . . .
Therefore I took a couple of the play therapy sessions and quite a few
of the recorded interviews which I found to be most helpful. In
addition, I got together with another student on Saturday afternoons and
we would counsel one another with the aid of a wire recorder and would
then analyze, discuss, and criticize our efforts. As a result, I got a
better understanding of the nature of the therapeutic process and gained
a better insight into my own activities as well!
:::
::::
:::::

Another trend to which we have become accustomed is the pervasiveness of
the learning which takes place in a student-centered class. It makes a
difference in the *life* of the individual, not simply in the
intellectual symbols which he manipulates. This is very evident in the
reactions of our students, and in the student reports given by Cantor
(39). An example may be taken from a self-evaluation turned in by
another student. One may say that the concepts in the course, as well as
the manner of teaching, accounted for the results. However, a lecture
course in client-centered therapy is quite unlikely to have the type of
result described. After discussing something of the reading he did for
the course, and his reaction to the class sessions, this student turns
to some of the broader implications the course has had for him in terms
of his professional preparation, his interpersonal relationships, and
his basic philosophy.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Only recently have I been aware of how necessary and desirable it is for
me to actively participate in the evaluation of my efforts in
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_421}courses taken at the university, and how
strongly I feel called upon to discuss this point with the several
instructors involved. These endeavors, in both classroom and private
consultation, have not met with unalloyed success (due, in part, no
doubt, to my inept handling of the situation), but they have resulted in
the conviction that I am correct in taking this stand. I have come to
realize that my being graduated from the university is not to be viewed
as a competition in which a degree may be won by concealing my felt
inadequacies while presenting a façade of competence which I dread will
be exposed. I can now think more constructively about these deficiencies
and formulate plans for eliminating them, and furthermore, I feel more
freedom to discuss these problems with faculty members whom I feared
would "find me out." Of late, more "soul-searching" has taken place as I
examine how I became interested in clinical psychology and how my
personality will affect the persons with whom I have professional
contact. This is being reflected in my work as a psychologist at ---
Prison, and though I feel that I have made a good beginning in this
area, I am equally certain that I must continue to take such steps in
self-examination for quite some time to come --- in fact, why not
throughout the rest of my life?

A most noticeable change, so far as I can determine, has been in the
manner in which I have been trying to form and conduct relationships
with other persons --- friends, relatives, business associates,
strangers. For example, I no longer seek to persuade my wife, as much as
I used to at any rate, to do things "my way," regardless of their
inconsequential nature. True, I still become a little concerned when she
"fouls up" the budget accounts or crosses the busiest of streets in the
middle of the block, but I no longer attempt to convert her to my way of
thinking on the spot, with no "if," "and," or "but" about it. I am
getting more accustomed to the idea of letting her be a person in her
own way, making decisions and taking responsibility for them, and
expressing herself spontaneously in her own inimitable way. I am
likewise making progress in letting my friends lead their own lives,
trying to think *with* them about their problems rather than thinking
*for* them and handing out solutions for the problems which always seem
to come up when we talk together. And with people about whom I know
little --- clerks, streetcar conductors, casual acquaintances --- I feel
myself better able to try to see things as they appear to them, though
it can hardly be termed adopting their "frame of reference" as there is
little communication in these instances. It does
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_422}help to understand how they can become irritable
and offensive as well as be pleasant and likable, and it makes it easier
for me to react to them in a manner calculated to make our relationship
a satisfactory one. This is not to say that I never drop the role of
clinical psychologist, but I do try to utilize what I have learned in my
studying to conduct the affairs of the day, trivial though they seem to
be at times. I believe such a practice makes for better integration of
my personality, but it does not eliminate the necessity for recognizing
and coping with attitudes which I have formerly repressed as undesirable
and detrimental in a psychologist. The conscious manipulation of such
feelings will probably do much to make me more comfortable personally
and more effective professionally.

A more comprehensive understanding of client-centered therapy has
altered my general philosophy of life as well as the above-mentioned
aspects of my personality. I have come to see that there may be a
scientifically demonstrable basis for belief in the democratic way of
life. Previously, I rather half-believed or maybe hoped that the people
possessed the wisdom and ability necessary for governing themselves, but
there was an almost equally strong belief that suggested that there were
some people whose grasp of things was such that they should have more to
say about affairs than the majority. I thought that perhaps government
by the few might be superior to that by the many, and I consequently
felt some guilt about holding such a belief, though I knew that many
persons believe thusly while proclaiming the virtues of democracy,
apparently without sensing any incongruity or discomfort. I cannot
honestly say that I am now unalterably convinced of the infallibility of
the democratic process, but I am encouraged and inclined to align myself
with those who hold that each individual has within himself the capacity
for self-direction and self-responsibility, hoping that the beginnings
of research in areas such as client-centered therapy will lead to the
unquestionable conclusion that the democratic way of life is most in
harmony with the nature of man.

When I first began thinking about this self-evaluation, I thought I
might ask for a letter grade of "B" since I had submitted no term paper
or project. But now I believe that the insights which I have achieved
and the knowledge which I have been able to assimilate as the result of
reading, listening, and thinking during the past three months have been
of far more significance than those resulting from writing any term
paper which I have completed. My reading has
[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_423}been more extensive than in any previous course,
even though I knew that I would not be tested on the material covered in
this course. I read because I was sincerely interested in the ideas
which had stimulated my thinking and was desirous of learning more about
them; I expect to continue these activities with the intention of
gaining further knowledge and insight concerning the dynamics of human
adjustment and the client-centered approach to psychotherapy. In view of
the fact that I believe this past course-period has been one of the most
significant in my life at the university or elsewhere, I am requesting
that I be given the letter grade "A."
:::
::::
:::::

Not every student responds favorably to a student-centered approach.
Usually all but a small minority have attitudes more favorable than
unfavorable. There are often, however, some who feel the course has not
been of benefit to them. Sometimes even this negative reaction appears
significant of progress. One student writes at some length his
criticisms of the course, and states that since no reading was required,
he did almost no reading. He concludes, however, that if, when given an
opportunity to read as he wished, he did almost no reading in a field he
had thought of as part of his professional life work, perhaps he is in
the wrong profession.

As an instance of a persistently negative attitude, the following may
serve.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
The lack of orientation which has predominated most of the classroom
discussion is perhaps the major criticism which I have to apply.
Frequently what I would term a major issue turns up; one or perhaps two
people will contribute toward its clarification or solution; a third
individual will digress to some noncorrelative issue, and the original
problem will have been forgotten.

While I do fully realize the impossible situation we would find
ourselves in if we attempted to exhaust the potentialities of each issue
raised, nevertheless it does seem practical to consider at least some
more concise order of clarifying the questions raised.

The class, as a whole, has improved considerably since the first two or
three weeks of the quarter, but the situation still remains with us.
Even the most democratic of organizations, governed by a majority, must
maintain organizational structure in order to attain any prescribed
goals.

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_424}I would suggest that some definite goal be set
in advance of any particular meeting of the class, so that the class
will know beforehand its agenda, whether it be counselor-client
role-taking, a *lecture by yourself*, a question and answer series on a
stated problem, or merely round-the-class open discussion of a stated
problem.
:::
::::
:::::

Research investigations of the outcomes of student-centered teaching are
in their infancy, but the findings thus far seem to corroborate the
observations of teachers and students. Gross (73) who has worked with
Cantor, studied the development of self-understanding in a conventional
as compared with a non-directive course. He used a partially
standardized scale for measuring self-insight, the essential principle
of which was that most of the statements were extreme, and the person
with self-understanding could not agree to them without modification. On
this scale two classes which were approximately equivalent in age,
education, and socio-economic status made roughly equivalent scores
prior to beginning their respective courses. The group which was
conventionally taught showed only a slight increase in self-insight.
When Cantor's group was retested at the end of the course, the
self-insight score had increased markedly. Of Cantor's class, 62 per
cent of the group had score increases of 13 or more, while only 10 per
cent of "Doe's" class showed such an increase. In Cantor's class,
however, there is a minority group which showed no increases, or even
decreases. Gross concludes "that Cantor's method does encourage the
development of self-insight on the part of a majority of students,
though it may fail to reach a certain minority of every class." The
author stresses the point that his is a preliminary study, and should be
regarded as such. It needs to be repeated under more rigorously
controlled conditions.

In another preliminary study Schwebel and Asch (178) have used a
nondirective approach in teaching three classes and have found that
students who are relatively well adjusted approve the method, and
utilize the experience, doing more than an ordinary amount of reading
for the course. The more poorly adjusted students tend to prefer a class
in which the instructor gives the direction.

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_425}Still another study related to our interest is
one conducted by Smith and Dunbar (193). It is primarily a study of
student participation, not a study of the effect of a student-centered
climate. The major finding is that participating students show very
little difference, in achievement or adjustment, from the
nonparticipants. The authors also state that students who participate
consistently tend to be nonconformists, though the evidence is slight.
The general conclusion is that participants gain little if any more from
a "free-discussion" course than nonparticipants. The extent to which the
classroom atmosphere was student-centered, as this term has been used in
this chapter, is not made clear. From the description given, one would
judge that such a climate had been approximated only to a small degree.

Faw (55) has carried out the best study to date, using classes in
general psychology. He taught one class in student-centered fashion, a
second in conventional fashion, and in the third he alternated
approaches at every class meeting. The most serious flaw in his study is
this role-taking by the instructor. It seems very likely that the role
closest to his own beliefs and convictions would be most adequately
implemented. Subject to this limitation, his findings are illuminating.
In intellectual gains as measured by objective tests, the
student-centered class showed equal or slightly better learning than the
instructor-centered class. Students who had been exposed at all to the
student-centered approach (the first and third group) felt that they
received more social and emotional value from this approach, and that
interest and enjoyment were much greater. Students felt, however, that
they gained more information and knowledge in the conventional approach.
A characteristic student opinion was, "The free-discussion class teaches
me less in the way of actual facts, but it helps me to feel free and at
ease with myself and with other people." Actually this feeling of having
gained less factual knowledge is not borne out by the test results. Faw
points out that the basis for the feeling is probably the lack of any
authority upon which to depend. As one student says, "Whatever the
conclusions were, they were student deductions and not backed by the
instructor's experience or information; as a consequence I have retained
many []{#019_c9.html_lpn_426}of these decisions as fact when I have no
definite basis for believing so." Whether these more tentatively held
conclusions are desirable or undesirable depends, of course, upon one's
educational philosophy.

It should be stressed, in considering these initial studies that
"student-centered" or "nondirective" teaching is by no means defined in
identical fashion by each investigator. In some instances the class is
quite rigidly structured, in others not. Varying degrees of student
freedom were permitted. The behavior of the instructors varied. Perhaps
the only possible generalized description is that, as compared with the
conventional college-level lecture course, there was much greater
permissiveness and freedom, and much more reliance upon the ability of
the student to take responsibility for himself. As further studies are
carried on, the objective description of the classroom climate and of
the instructor's behavior seems a necessary starting point for any
investigation.^[39](#025_endnotes.html_e39){#019_c9.html_f39}^

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_427}*A Concluding Discussion*

Much of present education appears to be operationally based on the
assumption, "You can't trust the student." Acting on this assumption,
the teacher must supply motivation, information, organization of the
material, and must use examinations - quizzes, recitations, oral exams,
course examinations, standardized achievement tests --- at every turn to
coerce the student into the desired activities.

The approach we have been discussing is based on an assumption
diametrically opposed, that "You can trust the student." You can trust
him to desire to learn in every way which will maintain or enhance self;
you can trust him to make use of resources which will serve this end;
you can trust him to evaluate himself in ways which will make for
self-progress; you can trust him to grow, provided the atmosphere for
growth is available to him.

If the instructor accepts this assumption or is willing to adopt it as a
very tentative hypothesis, then certain behaviors follow. He creates a
classroom climate which respects the integrity of the student, which
accepts all aims, opinions, and attitudes as being legitimate
expressions of the student's internal frame of reference at that time.
He accepts the feelings and emotionalized attitudes which surround any
educational or group experience. He accepts himself as being a member of
a learning group, rather than an authority. He makes learning resources
available, confident that if they meet the needs of the group they will
be used. He relies upon the capacity of the individual to sort out truth
from untruth, upon the basis of continuing experience. He recognizes
that his course, if successful, is a beginning in learning, not the end
of learning. He relies upon the capacity of the student to assess his
progress in terms of the purposes which he has at this time. He has
confidence in the fact that, in this atmosphere which he has helped to
create, a type of learning takes place which is personally meaningful
and which feeds the total self-development of the individual as well as
improves his acquaintance with a given field of knowledge.

[]{#019_c9.html_lpn_428}SUGGESTED READINGS

::: sl
A comprehensive overview of the relation between psychotherapy and
education is given in the article by Symonds (208). It contains a
thoughtful analysis of the two fields and their basic similarities and
basic differences, as seen by a writer with experience in both fields.
It also contains an excellent bibliography of references pertinent to
this chapter.

For the reader who wishes to gain acquaintance with recent presentations
regarding education which are similar to the client-centered point of
view, Cantor (39) and Kelley (100) are good references.

For presentations of the client-centered point of view in education by
other writers, see Snygg and Combs (200, chapters 10 and 11), and Axline
(14, chapters 16 and 18). Both these studies are focused primarily on
education below the university level, with Axline's discussion bearing
primarily upon the child's first years in school. She also discusses the
application to school administration.

For acquaintance with the limited research in this area, the study by
Faw (55), which has been mentioned, seems to be the most adequate to
date.
:::

[]{#020_c10.html}

<div>

 []{#020_c10.html_c10}

</div>

# []{#020_c10.html_lpn_429}*Chapter*[10]{.chapnum}• The Training of Counselors and Therapists {.chaptitle}

![](html/docimages/line.jpg){height="10" width="100%"}

From what we know of the extent of personal distress and maladjustment,
and the social demand for assistance along these lines, we must judge
the problem of professional training for counselors and therapists to be
an urgent one indeed. Yet little has been written, and even less
research done, on the issues which are involved in setting up and
carrying through such a program of professional education. This dearth
of data is not due to any lack of recognition of the importance of the
field. The American Psychological Association, for example, has given
its approval to a "Recommended Graduate Training Program in Clinical
Psychology," in which it is stated, "It is our thesis that no clinical
psychologist can be considered adequately trained unless he has had
sound training in psychotherapy" (160, p. 548). Similar attitudes
prevail in other professional fields. As yet, however, experience in
this realm is limited, and discussions are few.

As a consequence of this situation, the present chapter will be written,
without apology, around an account of the development of the writer's
own experience in carrying responsibility for the training of
therapists. Perhaps a frank look at some specific methods which have
been used, with their strong and weak points, will lead to similar
presentations by others.

A[N]{.sc}E[ARLY]{.sc}E[XPERIENCE
IN]{.sc}T[RAINING]{.sc}C[OUNCELORS]{.sc}

At Ohio State University, from 1940 to 1944, the writer was in charge of
a practicum course at the advanced graduate level,
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_430}whose purpose was to give training in
counseling and psychotherapy. Several of its features were not unusual.
Individuals were admitted to the course who had both training and
experience in clinical psychology or student counseling. Wide reading
was encouraged in a variety of therapeutic viewpoints. A more novel
feature, for that time, was that the course was built around cases
handled by the students. As soon as a student felt that he was ready to
handle a case, a client was assigned to him from among the individuals
coming to the Psychological Clinic. The student-counselor took full
notes on his interview (or occasionally was able to record some of the
interviews) and the nearly verbatim account of at least one interview
was mimeographed and distributed to members of the practicum for
discussion, while the case was still in progress. This gave the course
the maximum of live interest, and was intended to be of help to the
counselor while he was still dealing with his client. Counselors were
encouraged to request early consideration of their cases if difficulties
were developing, or if they felt unsure and in need of help. In addition
to this class discussion, many individual conferences were held with
students in regard to the clients they were handling.

In retrospect, the course seems so full of flaws that its constructive
outcomes appear astonishing. The course was very short, with 20 to 25
hours of class time. It could be repeated once, giving a maximum
training of about 45 hours. There were usually 15 to 30 members of the
group, with one instructor. The teaching methods were, by present
standards, decidedly inadequate. In general they consisted of approval
and disapproval of specific ways of carrying on counseling, as
exemplified in the interview at hand. While the instructor endeavored to
keep the pressure of disapproval from being too great, and to balance it
with approval, the individual student frequently felt very much "on the
spot."

Some of the poor results of the course, as seen in retrospect, or dimly
perceived at the time, are these. Due to the method of teaching, the
student was very likely to acquire guilt feelings in regard to his work.
There grew up unintentionally a notion of orthodoxy, so that the
student-counselor felt that he was either "right" or "wrong" in what he
was doing, or that he was properly []{#020_c10.html_lpn_431}nondirective
or improperly directive. Since too little attention was paid to basic
attitudes, a student not infrequently felt that his own sincere desire
was to do one thing, while a vague concept of orthodoxy in counseling
compelled him to do another. Thus it was sometimes true that the
counselor tried hard to behave in ways which were not genuine for him
--- a most damaging start for a therapist. Obviously, the whole
situation involved an overemphasis on technique, which was not good.

To some extent this deficiency was recognized, but the controls seemed
necessary at the time to prevent definite harm being done to clients.
The writer believed that if student-counselors, full of many notions of
psychodynamics, were permitted to work with clients in any way they saw
fit, real harm might result. It was hoped that by emphasizing the
techniques of a relatively safe approach, the student could be initiated
into counseling work, and could then slowly find the ways of working
which were real for him. At the time it was the only way which could be
seen of meeting the double demands of safety for the client and learning
for the counselor.

In spite of the many deficiencies of the course, a very considerable
number of excellent therapists emerged from these groups. Why? In the
first place, many of these students were highly promising persons, well
selected. In the second place, for those who already had to some degree
the philosophical orientation outlined in the second chapter of this
book, the emphasis on techniques was often helpful rather than
stultifying. It provided a way of working which was in line with their
attitudes, and helped to give them a consistent framework for all their
therapeutic effort. Another reason for the success of the training was
that at a very early stage the student was given responsibility for
dealing with a real person in difficulty, and thus felt impelled to
learn as rapidly and as deeply as he could the dynamics of a helping
relationship. Finally, the use of electrically recorded interviews
became a stimulating and highly profitable basis for learning on the
part of the therapists. As described at the time (173) it gave
counselors an opportunity to see what methods they were actually using,
in contrast to those they thought they were using. It gave
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_432}an opportunity to discern the process of
therapy, particularly in its minute and detailed aspects. Perhaps most
important of all, it helped counselors to recognize that interviews were
not just talk, but highly sensitive indicators of cause and effect in
human relationships. A casual interpretive remark by the counselor might
be demonstrated to have an effect in blocking communication, not only at
the time, but two or three interviews later. Thus counselors learned
significantly from their own experience, often in spite of, rather than
because of, the teaching methods of the course.

S[OME]{.sc}S[IGNIFICANT]{.sc}T[RENDS
IN]{.sc}T[RAINING]{.sc}T[HERAPISTS]{.sc}

In the years that have elapsed since the course just described, the
writer has been aware of certain directions which have been important in
the training programs which have evolved out of this early effort. These
trends may be summarized here. Their detailed implementation will be
evident in a later section of the chapter.

1\. There has been a steady trend away from technique, a trend which
focuses upon the attitudinal orientation of the counselor. It has become
apparent that the most important goal to be achieved is that the student
should clarify and understand his own basic relationship to people, and
the attitudinal and philosophical concomitants of that relationship.
Therefore the first step in training client-centered therapists has been
to drop all concern as to the orientation with which the student will
emerge. The basic attitude must be genuine. If his genuine attitudes
lead him in the direction of some other orientation, well and good. The
purpose of training is increasingly to train therapists, not a
particular brand of therapists. To put it in another way, the present
point of view is that no student can or should be trained to become a
client-centered therapist. If the attitudes he discovers within himself,
if the hypotheses which in his experience are effective in dealing with
people, happen to coincide in important ways with the client-centered
orientation, then that is an interesting indication of the generality of
those experiences, but no more. It is far []{#020_c10.html_lpn_433}more
important that he be true to his own experience than that he should
coincide with any known therapeutic orientation. The basic reliance is
upon the capacity of the student-counselor to develop himself into an
effective therapist.

2\. A second trend is to place stress upon techniques specifically as an
implementation of attitudes. Once the student has clarified his own
attitudes toward people, then a detailed consideration of the ways in
which he and others operate in the therapeutic interview is highly
fruitful. New light is thrown on his attitudes by observing the
operations he uses in therapy, and new ways of behaving are perceived as
he thinks more deeply about his attitudes.

3\. Another trend is to give the student an experience of therapy within
himself. This can be done in part through the way in which courses are
taught and in part through the way the student is given supervisory help
on his cases. The most direct route, of course, is for the student to
undergo therapy himself, and a steadily increasing proportion of student
counselors have been availing themselves of this opportunity. The
purpose of this therapeutic experience is perceived a little differently
than in other orientations. It is not expected that personal therapy
will permanently remove all likelihood of conflict in the therapist. Nor
is it felt that therapy will permanently rule out the possibility that
his own personal needs may interfere with his work as a therapist. He
may later need and desire further personal help in relation to some case
with which he is dealing. But personal therapy may be counted upon to
sensitize him to the kind of attitudes and feelings the client is
experiencing, and may make him empathic at a deeper and more significant
level.

4\. A fourth trend is merely a confirmation and extension of the
thinking which has dominated from the first. It is that the practice of
therapy should be a part of the training experience from the earliest
practicable moment. Much ingenuity has gone into the planning of ways in
which the trainee can enter into the experience of providing a helping
relationship for another, early in his professional education.

[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_434}W[HO]{.sc}S[HOULD]{.sc}B[E]{.sc}S[ELECTED
FOR]{.sc}T[RAINING]{.sc}?

The problem of selecting candidates for training as therapists is a
perplexing one indeed. It is doubtful if any therapeutic orientation has
satisfactorily resolved the issue. In our own experience it would seem
that while a beginning selection may be made upon certain minimal
factors, a considerable amount of self-selection is desirable once
training has begun. If a group is reasonably well selected at the
outset, and if the training program is free and permissive, some will
discover that therapy is not their special forte and will drop out.
Others realize that the attitudes involved make too heavy a personal
demand upon them. Such self-selection does not seem necessarily
wasteful.

As to the basis for minimal selection, we have found in our experience
that we have tended to use much the same criteria as those which have
been adopted by the American Psychological Association for the selection
of clinical psychologists in general. These criteria are rather vague,
to be sure, but they represent the present stage of our knowledge of
what is required as a basis for becoming a therapist. As stated by the
committee of the APA, the characteristics which it is desirable that a
person possess are as follows:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
1\. Superior intellectual ability and judgment.

2\. Originality, resourcefulness, and versatility.

3\. "Fresh and insatiable" curiosity; "self-learner."

4\. Interest in persons as individuals rather than as material for
manipulation --- a regard for the integrity of other persons.

5\. Insight into own personality characteristics; sense of humor.

6\. Sensitivity to the complexities of motivation.

7\. Tolerance: "unarrogance."

8\. Ability to adopt a "therapeutic" attitude; ability to establish warm
and effective relationships with others.

9\. Industry; methodical work habits; ability to tolerate pressure.

10\. Acceptance of responsibility.

11\. Tact and cooperativeness.

12\. Integrity, self-control, and stability.

13\. Discriminating sense of ethical values.

14\. Breadth of cultural background --- "educated man."

[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_435}15. Deep interest in psychology, especially in
its clinical aspects. (160, p. 541)
:::
::::
:::::

It may at some point be possible to base the selection of potential
therapists upon criteria established by research. There is at the
present time one study in progress in which an extensive battery of
personality tests were given to a group of VA Personal Counselors prior
to their intensive training in therapy, and ratings later obtained as to
the subjects' effectiveness as therapists. It was the hope that certain
personality configurations might be found which would be indicators of
high potentiality as therapists. At present writing this hope does not
seem to be supported by the evidence. It is a field in which we may
expect research to progress, though present subjective judgment would be
that the training received is at least as important as the original
personality configuration in determining whether an individual will
become a good therapist. Perhaps the next step in research will be to
investigate the organization of attitudes toward others, rather than
personality structure, as a possible predictive tool.

P[REPARATION FOR]{.sc}T[RAINING IN]{.sc}T[HERAPY]{.sc}

What background knowledge or experience is necessary or desirable for
the person who is to be trained as a therapist? This is a question about
which there have been sharp differences of opinion. The simplest answer
seems to be the requirement of a background of conventional training in
the whole field of psychology. That this is a *necessary* prerequisite
to therapeutic training is disproved by the facts. Many psychiatrists
become good therapists with almost no background in the general field of
psychology. In our own courses we have had students from the fields of
education, theology, industrial relations, nursing, and students with
interdisciplinary
training.^[40](#025_endnotes.html_e40){#020_c10.html_f40}^ It has been
quite impossible to see any significant differences in the rate at which
such students []{#020_c10.html_lpn_436}become therapists. It would seem
that the orientation to personal relationships with which they enter a
training program is more important than the specific course work they
have had or the scientific knowledge they possess. We have not had
opportunity, except very occasionally, to accept individuals for
training whose background is in literature or drama or the arts. Such
experience as we have had, however, would lead us to believe that when
such individuals are motivated to become therapists, they can achieve
this goal as rapidly as the person whose training is in psychology.
Sometimes, indeed, it appears that previous training in psychology has
so indoctrinated the student with the concept of the individual as an
object to be dissected and manipulated, that he has more difficulty in
becoming a therapist than the student from another field.

Several elements in our experience may distort our perceptions. The
student who is not in psychology does not take courses in therapy unless
he has sufficient motivation to undertake the "irregular" thing. The
student in clinical psychology, however, may feel that he should be a
therapist, and take courses for which he has no strong personal desire.
It will take time, observation, and research to determine whether any of
the present professional programs make likely a more rapid learning of
therapy.

One difference has been noted. For the person who is to do research in
therapy, a background in psychology, in which there has been stress upon
experimental design and the methodology of psychological science, is
clearly of benefit.

*A Desirable Preparatory Background*

The preceding paragraphs may be interpreted as meaning that no
preparation is of any significant help to the person who desires to
become a skilled counselor or therapist. This meaning is not intended.
It is believed that there are areas of learning and experience which are
definitely useful to the would-be therapist. Unfortunately, conventional
courses, based largely upon factual content, rarely provide these
learnings.

What would be desirable preparation for the person who is to receive
training as a therapist? The following suggestions are given very
tentatively. The order has little significance.

[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_437}1. It seems desirable that the student should
have a broad experiential knowledge of the human being in his cultural
setting. This may be given, to some extent, by reading or course work in
cultural anthropology or sociology. Such knowledge needs to be
supplemented by experiences of living with or dealing with individuals
who have been the product of cultural influences very different from
those which have molded the student. Such experience and knowledge often
seem necessary to make possible the deep understanding of another.

2\. If the student is to become a therapist, the more he has been able
to achieve of empathic experiencing with other individuals, the better
will his preparation be. There are undoubtedly countless avenues to this
end. It can come through literature, which can provide an entrance to
the inner worlds of other persons. Perhaps it might come especially
through the role-taking which goes with dramatic productions, though so
few therapists have such a background that it is difficult to judge. It
may come from psychology courses in which the approach is dynamically
phenomenological. It can come simply through the process of living, when
a sensitive person desires to understand the viewpoint and attitudes of
another. It is a way of perceiving which can be learned in courses, as
some of our staff have demonstrated in teaching beginning graduate
courses.

3\. In our judgment another valuable phase of student preparation is the
opportunity to consider and formulate one's own basic philosophy. The
person who is to carry on therapy needs security within himself, and
this may come in part from having thought through some of the basic
questions regarding human life, and having formulated tentative but
personally meaningful answers. Security in one's self is certainly not
gained through courses *about* philosophy, but may come through courses
in philosophy, education, or religion in which the effort is made to
face up to the deep questions of existence, and the opportunity given to
the student to clarify his own thinking.

4\. The experience of personal therapy is, as has been mentioned, a
valuable experience for the student. Whether it should precede formal
training in therapy, or be concomitant with it,
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_438}seems to be a matter of little consequence. In
the writer's opinion, the time when it comes should rest upon the needs
of the student. It does not seem consistent with the whole viewpoint of
client-centered therapy to require individual therapy of the trainee.
Rather, opportunities for personal therapy should be available, to be
utilized when the student feels the need. When he makes further steps in
his own experience in providing therapy for others, it is quite possible
that he may wish further help for himself.

5\. It is certainly desirable that the student should have a deep
knowledge of the dynamics of personality, and should have thought
significantly about problems in this field. If his knowledge is simply a
matter of labels and abstractions which may be applied to individual
behavior, it will have little value. Again it is the empathic and
experiential aspect which is important. Such knowledge is perhaps best
gained in clinical work in which there is a desire to understand and
learn from each client. Through such work a more and more meaningful
grasp of personality dynamics is internalized. It may also be gained
through courses or through books. While many of the latter convey only
intellectualized and sterile abstractions regarding human behavior, some
are more or less successful in serving as a medium by which the
motivations and behavior of one person can be empathically
re-experienced by another. At a simple and popular level this is
achieved by Travis and Baruch's book, *Personal Problems of Everyday
Living* (219). At quite another level it seems to be achieved by Reik's
*Listening with the Third Ear* (161). The net effect of presentations
such as these is not to give the student a catalogue *knowledge* of
repression, neurotic behaviors, conflict, regression, and the like, but
to give him a more sensitized *feeling* for these behaviors in himself
and in others. It is this sort of understanding of personality dynamics
which is a valuable preparation for training in therapy.

6\. If the student expects to contribute to the advancement of the field
of therapy as well as to practice psychotherapy, then a knowledge of
research design, of scientific methodology, and of psychological theory
is valuable. As we try to view the situation
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_439}objectively, it does not seem possible to say
that such training makes it easier to become a therapist, or makes the
individual a more effective therapist. It does appear, however, that
such background is useful in the testing of hypotheses which are
implicit in therapy, in the creative and productive formulation of new
directions and hypotheses in the field, and in the construction of
theories of therapy. Perhaps the most significant effect of learning in
these fields is the basic security which it gives to the therapist in
the relinquishment of doctrines he has thought true. It has been very
noticeable in certain individuals and professional groups that outworn
therapeutic dogmas are not given up. One of the reasons appears to be
the lack of security as to what will take their place. If a dogma
received from his teacher is questioned or there is evidence that it may
be untrue, what is a therapist to do? It is here that a thoroughgoing
experience with scientific method is of value. For the person who has
experienced a scientific approach to problems, the loss of some part of
what he has regarded as the truth is not a catastrophe, since he has the
tools for discovering new and more significant truth. It is as this
attitude becomes thoroughly internalized in therapists that important
advances will be made.

7\. In this list there are two significant omissions which perhaps
deserve special comment. The first is the lack of any stress upon
biological knowledge of the individual. Since the human being functions
as a total biological organism, it would appear entirely logical that
the person with thorough knowledge of the physiological functioning of
the organism would have a better basis for becoming a therapist. It
would be comfortable and satisfying to report that this was true. Yet as
the writer considers the therapists he has known, there appears to be no
correlation between successful achievement as therapist and background
in biological knowledge. Some of the best therapists have been well
equipped with biological knowledge, but others equally outstanding have
been remarkably innocent of training in this field. Likewise among the
least successful therapists the same statement could be made.
Furthermore, it appears that the most successful therapists, from Freud
on, even when equipped with biological and
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_440}physiological training, make no more than
infinitesimal use of it in their practice of psychotherapy. Many follow
the definite policy that any organic problem, or the possibility of any
organic problem, should be investigated and dealt with by someone who is
not the therapist. Thus, present experience would seem to indicate that
biological knowledge has no special value for the background training of
the would-be therapist. Like English literature or history or genetics
or organic chemistry or art, it does have value in broadening the
outlook and understanding of the therapist, and giving him a wider
knowledge of life and of the incredible intricacies of the life process.

The second omission is that of personality theory, in so far as that may
be separated from personality dynamics. It is the writer's conviction
that theory, to be profitable, must follow experience, not precede it.
To train a student, prematurely, in a theory of personality, or even in
a variety of such theories, results all too often in a dogmatic and
closed-minded approach to experience. This is as true of theory
developed from a client-centered approach as of theory developed from
any other orientation. The chapter on personality theory in this book is
included with many reservations. To the person with therapeutic
experience it may be constructive, since it offers him a formulation
which he can test against his own experience and revise or discard
accordingly. By the uninitiated student, on the other hand, it may all
too readily be interpreted as the truth, or as dogma --- a rigid vessel
into which experience must be warped, even if it does not fit. It is for
such reasons as these that no special stress has been placed on theory
of personality as an element in the student's preparation for training
in therapy.

It should be amply evident, from the various points which have been
listed, that if we were willing to sweep aside all the conventional
notions of pre-therapy education and the vested interests which are
associated with them, and were to start with a fresh consideration of
those elements of preparation which experience has shown to have a
definite relationship to effectiveness in therapy, we should doubtless
emerge with a preparatory curriculum of experience vastly different from
that usually required.

[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_441}H[OW]{.sc}L[ONG A]{.sc}P[ERIOD
OF]{.sc}T[RAINING]{.sc}?

There have been many discussions, often fruitless, of the length of time
which it takes to train a therapist. Our experience would indicate that
this question, as stated, can never be satisfactorily answered. Learning
the attitudes and skills which are effective in therapy is working on a
continuum. An intensive two-day institute may help a group of
psychologists, industrial counselors, or guidance workers to be
perceptibly more effective, more therapeutic, in their work. On the
other hand, five years of intensive training and experience is perhaps
too little to bring a therapist to the peak of his effectiveness.
Whether a training program is to be two days or more than five years in
length depends upon our goals and upon what is socially and
educationally practicable. If the therapeutic orientation is permissive
and nonprobing, if the instructional approach is nonauthoritative and
encourages the student to go at his own pace, then we do not need to
fear that "a little learning is a dangerous thing." There are various
degrees of therapeutic training which can be effectively used.

Another issue which has been frequently raised, especially in recent
years, is the placement of training in therapy --- whether at the
pre-doctoral or post-doctoral level. Our experience would indicate very
clearly that excellent therapists can be trained at the doctoral level,
without any significant sacrifice of breadth in their training. The
reasons given for postponing to the post-doctoral level are usually
these: (*a*) There should be thorough training in psychological
diagnosis prior to training in therapy; (*b*) psychotherapy is such an
intricate and delicate skill that one should not attempt to learn it
until he has reached full professional maturity; (*c*) it has been
customary in medicine to postpone such training to the post-doctoral
level.

From the experience we have had in client-centered therapy, it would
seem possible to counter each of these arguments with opposing
considerations. In regard to (*a*), the principle has already been
advanced that diagnosis does not need to precede therapy (see Chapter
5), and there seems no adequate basis for
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_442}believing that training in diagnosis should
precede training in therapy. As to (*b*) it is probable that skilful
psychotherapy is no more demanding or delicate a function than skilful
psychodiagnosis. Each makes its demands, and the attitudes and knowledge
required are very different. There is, however, no reason to suppose
that they exist as a hierarchy. It is possible that, because
psychologists feel secure in regard to their work in diagnosis, and
somewhat insecure in the newer field of therapy, they tend to postpone
its consideration. As to the third reason, (*c*), most psychiatrists
regard it as extremely unfortunate that the medical student receives so
little training in understanding or handling emotional problems prior to
his medical degree. It seems unnecessary for psychology and related
professional groups to copy the mistakes of medical education.

The whole point of view which has been expressed on these issues may be
summarized in a few sentences. Training in psychotherapy exists in
varying degrees. If the orientation is in the direction of a permissive
and noncoercive therapy, then some training is better than none, more
training is better than some. As to the time when such training might be
given, some of its basic principles, as they apply to human
relationships in general, might be taught at the high school or college
level. For the person who is acquiring therapeutic skills as a part of
his professional training, there seems every reason to provide this
training as a part of his graduate education prior to his doctoral
degree.

In an effort to make this picture more specific, a brief account will be
given of two brief training programs in psychotherapy and one longer and
more comprehensive program. We are fortunate in having a research
analysis of one of the brief programs.

B[RIEF]{.sc}T[RAINING IN]{.sc}P[SYCHOTHERAPY]{.sc}

*A Program for Physicians*

There are published accounts of two ventures in which the modest aim was
to facilitate the maximal learning of therapeutic skills in a short
period of time. The first is a medical venture,
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_443}well described by Smith (226, pp. 1--26). This
was an attempt by a group of well-known psychiatrists to provide
training in therapy for physicians who were, for the most part, general
practitioners. While the orientation was eclectic rather than
client-centered, it is brought in for consideration because it is so
similar to several institutes carried on from a client-centered point of
view.

There were twenty-five physicians in the group, and the course lasted
for two intensive weeks. It was held at the University of Minnesota in
April, 1946. The general purpose and orientation of the teachers was to
give the physician a deeper understanding of psychological problems in
his patients, to encourage more listening and a more empathic attitude
on the part of the physicians, and to give training in procedures which
could be used therapeutically by the physician in his general practice.
The major elements of the course which seem to have furthered these aims
are as follows.

1\. Lectures by various psychiatrists on different phases of therapy and
related problems. The topics were selected and planned by the leaders.

2\. An immediate introduction to the therapeutic handling of cases. On
the first day the physicians were given a lecture in the morning, and in
the afternoon a number of them were holding interviews with patients who
had been assigned to them because of presumed psychological
maladjustment. The aim was to have one of the psychiatrists in on at
least some part of this interview.

This policy of contact with cases was maintained so that most of the
physicians managed to have several interviews with these patients during
the two weeks' course. The contacts were then closed or the patient
transferred to some other member of the hospital staff.

3\. Discussion of these cases, accompanied by supervisory teaching, was
another major element in the course. Every effort was made to get group
consideration of the cases being handled. The physician-trainee
presented his case, which was then discussed by the group and by some of
the psychiatrists in charge.

[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_444}4. The group lived and ate together in a
dormitory setting, and the informality of the group and the
self-education which went on in the continuing informal discussions was
regarded by all as a very significant part of the curriculum.

This short institute was regarded as definitely successful both by those
who planned and conducted it and by those who participated in it. It
would seem to indicate that even a two weeks' training program may be
effective in reaching realistic goals.

*A Brief Program for Personal Counselors*

In 1946 the Counseling Center at the University of Chicago was invited
by the Veterans Administration to provide a short training course for
Personal Counselors. (The "Personal Counselor" was a position which the
VA was then in the process of creating for dealing with individual
veterans and their postwar problems of adjustment.) After consideration
of the many factors requiring urgency, a six weeks' training course was
decided upon, since the candidates were all mature psychologists and
counselors with considerable training and experience. E. H. Porter,
Douglas Blocksma, and Thomas Gordon were the members of the Center staff
who were responsible for this project, in cooperation with the writer,
though all members of the staff became involved in the program in one
way or another. Blocksma and Porter (34) have published a description of
the course, only the major features of which will be reported here.
Although there was no communication between those responsible for this
course and those responsible for the psychiatric venture described
above, the similarity in some of the procedures is striking.

Approximately one hundred of the Personal Counselors received training.
They came in seven groups, each group remaining six weeks. There were
from ten to twenty-five in each group. The thirty-seven members of
Groups II and III, who were studied most closely, and were
representative of the total, were found to have a mean age of
thirty-three years, to have completed 2.3 years of graduate training,
and to have had 3.4 years of clinical and/or counseling experience. They
were thus a mature and experienced group.

[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_445}It was decided at the outset that in so far as
possible the atmosphere of the course would be the atmosphere of
client-centered therapy, and that we would endeavor to facilitate
learning that was self-motivated. Blocksma puts it in these terms:

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
The Center staff believed that learning of the client-centered viewpoint
would best occur under conditions similar to client-centered counseling
conditions. The trainee should experience in all aspects of the training
program the quality of social-emotional climate that he is expected to
create in counseling his clients. This included equality of opportunity
for participation in each activity, and the freedom to discuss and
differ in teaching situations. A client-centered climate demands of the
teacher a sensitivity to the values, feelings, and ideas of students; it
also demands a nondefensiveness on the part of the teacher so that
students can deal with deeper feelings aroused by new learnings. It was
assumed that, as a student's emotionalized viewpoint is understood by an
accepting teacher, it becomes possible for the student to learn the
teacher's viewpoint and independently establish his own altered
viewpoint.

It was believed by the training staff that, in such a learner-centered
climate, a person would be able to come to see himself and his own
attitudes, values, and methods of handling people. This climate would be
implemented through several channels. In essence, these channels would
involve a combination of ego-involving, self-directed, socially enforced
experiences which would combine elements of previous learnings with new
learnings. (33, pp. 66--67)
:::
::::
:::::

The outstanding elements of the course seemed to be these:

1\. *The presentation period.* This occupied the first hour and a half
in the morning. Various staff members and some outsiders were utilized.
The first presentations to each group were decided upon in advance by
those responsible for the program, but later presentations were governed
to a considerable extent by the wishes or special interests of the
group. These presentations covered a wide range of topics, from "the
course of therapy in client-centered therapy" and "group therapy," to
"the industrial use of nondirective counseling" and "personality theory
implicit in a nondirective approach."

2\. *Group and subgroup discussion periods.* Following the
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_446}presentation there was nearly always time for
some discussion, but the major discussion period was in the afternoon in
what came to be known as the "subgroup." Each group was subdivided so
that there were no more than eight trainees with a discussion leader.
This group remained constant throughout the six weeks. The topics for
discussion developed out of the interchange within the group. The
meetings were a blend of discussion and group therapy, and it was found
that in general the group went through a sequence quite comparable to
that found in the counseling process. Initially there were many negative
reactions and negative feelings in regard to the course and the ideas
being presented. As these were accepted, more positive feelings were in
evidence. Throughout this period there were insightful learnings which
often struck the group member with the full force of a therapeutic
insight; for example, one member brought out the fact that "one reason I
couldn't trust clients more in the past was the fact that I didn't fully
trust myself." As the group discussions continued, many members came to
a decision-making and planning phase as they worked out the ways in
which they would utilize their learnings in their work in their own
community.

3\. *Opportunity for first-hand experience.* It had been recognized that
the most significant gains would accrue only if the trainees had the
opportunity to put their attitudes and skills into practice. It was very
difficult, however, to supply clients in sufficient quantity; moreover,
those responsible for the program felt a concern as to whether a trainee
should start working with a client if the maximum time available was two
or three weeks. In spite of these obstacles, a number of members of each
group carried counseling cases, and others engaged people in casual
interviews in which they had some opportunity to test out some of the
ideas they were acquiring. The groups felt that this first-hand
experience in carrying on at least a rudimentary counseling was one of
the most valuable portions of the training and wished there might have
been more of it.

Since it was possible to make recordings of some of the cases handled by
trainees, the whole group became identified with the situation as they
listened to the recorded interviews, learning a
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_447}great deal both from the weaknesses and
strengths, the mistakes and successes of their fellow trainees.

4\. *The case analysis period.* One period each day was set aside for
case analysis. Interviews from a great variety of cases were presented
in recorded form for listening and discussion, or in mimeographed form
for detailed analysis of counselor techniques and client process. Some
of these were cases handled by staff members; some, as indicated above,
were cases currently being handled by trainees; some were cases handled
by therapists of other orientations. In spite of the fact that listening
to recordings is a most demanding task, since the recordings are seldom
easily audible, this case analysis portion of the course was rated
fourth among eleven activities in which the group engaged (33, pp.
74--75) and was a most significant learning experience.

5\. *The opportunity for personal therapy.* In the first group which
came for training, the availability of personal counseling help for
those who desired it was explained early in the course. Only a few took
advantage of this opportunity, but they were emphatic in their feeling
that personal counseling was one of their most meaningful experiences,
and made the strong recommendation that this opportunity should be given
more stress in later groups. Their recommendation was passed on to
succeeding groups, with the result that in some classes 80 per cent of
the members sought personal help for themselves. Throughout the
successive groups this was regarded as a part of the training which was
of markedly significant benefit.

6\. *The impact of concentrated intimate informal association.* One
phase of the training program proved to have much more importance than
had been foreseen by the staff. The men were together for a minimum of
eight hours a day, as a whole group, in subgroups, and in groups of two,
three, or four for coffee or lunch or dinner. Since most of them stayed
at nearby hotels, the discussion and interaction not infrequently
continued until the small hours of the morning in heated "bull sessions"
in which the trainees reviewed and reconsidered from every angle the
issues of the course and the effects these ideas were having upon their
own personal integration and philosophy. In these ways, which had not
been []{#020_c10.html_lpn_448}adequately foreseen, the training course
had a deep total impact. A considerable proportion of each group, when
it came time to leave, felt that the total training program experience
had been one of the high points of learning in their whole lives. When
one considers that this was not an adolescent group but a group in their
thirties, this enthusiasm seems to have significance. It appears rather
clear that if one were planning such a program for its maximum impact,
the trainees and faculty might do well to live together as well as work
together, to the full degree that this is practicable, since the
informal association appears to have an important influence upon the
assimilation of new concepts and ways of behaving.

*A Trainee's Reactions*

Before proceeding to a research analysis of the outcomes of this
training course, it may be possible to suggest something of its effect
upon the lives and attitudes of the participants through some brief
excerpts from interviews. In several instances trainees who requested
personal therapy for themselves permitted the interviews to be recorded.
Brief portions of one of these cases are illustrative. In the following
excerpt the trainee has just described some previous therapy he has had,
in which he feels the relationship was a very dependent one. He
continues:

:::: topbot
::: sl
*S113:* My self was abdicated to accept values and a way of life and a
lot of other things, which was not basic to me, and I am convinced Karen
Horney's book brings it out well. The defining of the self and the
development of it is what's important. (*C:* M-hm. You feel that . . .)
Well, this approach helps. Uh, I also want to add, when you have ---
there's a --- almost might put it, a faith-concept here. That in itself
produces a different mental set. (*C:* M-hm.) Uh, the, the --- you find
that not only in this session, but in, uh, the whole approach that we
work out in our work periods, and in all the other work we're doing
here, there's this faith that this person could do it himself. (*C:*
M-hm.) Uh, well, that's a different --- that results in a different
mental set. (*C:* M-hm.) So much that I find it hard to believe.

*C113:* You find a change in focus, or a change in basic faith as to
what can go on from the self outward, or inward, but I mean, depending
on []{#020_c10.html_lpn_449}the self itself, how it moves, or changes,
or thinks. It really revitalizes the whole total experience.

*S114:* For myself, in other words, the approach used on others, if I
follow that, results in a certain reorganization in myself. Even the
acceptance philosophy sort of clashes a little bit with the
hypercritical, interpretative philosophy, where you sit, as I always
feel, with your little spear, ready to jab the truth (*laughs*) (*C:*
M-hm.) in an interpretative way, and uh, you're so conditioned that when
people make statements, you're interpreting. It's, uh, sort of, uh ---
I've seen that so much in others and in myself. It results in a
different type of social relationship.
:::
::::

In a later session he also indicates the close interweaving of his past
experience, the challenge of the present learnings, and the persistent
patterns which must be altered if he is to function in the new way.

:::: topbot
::: sl
*S351:* I think one of my problems has been this hypercritical self ---
hypercritical towards others and towards self, using the same standards
of perfection. A lot of moral compulsion in me that I applied to myself
and applied to others with a certain contempt of weakness. That's the
Napoleon statue again. A contempt of weakness in other people.

*C352:* You feel that you demand the same high standards, but question
whether or not it is a too high standard or too great a demand.

*S352:* I *did* demand. I think that's one of the things I have worked
through, so please use it in the past tense! (*Laughs heartily*.)

*C353:* Then you feel, I take it, that that *is* past tense?

*S353:* No. It's uh --- that's the reflection that hit me so hard. The
overemphasis of the negative and then the next stage was to tie up the
hypercritical and the negative. How in the dickens can a person get
freedom if he is always emphasizing the negative? Why, freedom means the
freedom to make mistakes. And that's what tied up, well, the accepting
concept and its basic philosophy ties in too. What I mentioned in class,
to Dr. Rogers this morning --- "Is accepting a histrionic gesture?"

*C354:* What?

*S354:* "Is it a histrionic gesture?" One puts on an act of accepting,
and is the client not going to see through it eventually? So in order to
be really accepting I think all of us here at the course all have to
undergo terrific reorganization of self, to a greater or lesser degree.
Of course, Dr. Rogers thinks almost anybody can counsel with more or
less some []{#020_c10.html_lpn_450}degree of effectiveness. I don't
know. But that's the way I see it as far as I am concerned, that I will
find a certain growth, that in the accepting of behavior of others I am
also learning, or making it easier to accept myself. And that of course
should reduce the pressure in my marital situation. I'll have to accept
certain of my wife's weaknesses more. I don't know yet whether it was a
good marriage or not, but at least my role hasn't been a very free or
mature one. And I at least can improve my role, whether the improving of
my role will be --- will result in a positive solution, I'm not sure. I
don't know. I do know I can't sit here and debate about it. The first
thing I'll do is try to behave in a more mature and independent fashion.
Maybe my wife will grow more independent.
:::
::::

Something of the way in which the thinking and the attitude of the
course become involved in the working through of his own problems is
indicated by this portion from the seventh interview.

:::: topbot
::: sl
*S381:* I don't have this feeling I'm going to go sailing along. I have
this feeling this is the best way for me to work out my own salvation
and my own adjustment. The rest is up to me. (*Pause*.)

*C382:* The effort that might be needed is going to have to be yours.
(*Pause*.)

*S382:* Problems here are relatively simply in this school situation.
The very approach used here doesn't put any pressure on us. It's a sort
of, as I put it once before, it's sort of a nurturing situation. Dr.
Rogers and the rest of you are nurturing along our growth. (*Laughs*.)
(*C:* M-hm.) Well, I suppose to a certain extent, things pop up in a
greenhouse where the environment is optimum for growth.

*C383:* You feel new sprouts every now and then, coming out of it.

*S383:* Yes, but it is still a nurturing situation. A lot of acceptance
here. It's relatively not a difficult situation to handle. It's going to
be a little bit different when we get back to our jobs where we bump
into the problems of life. This approach does not eliminate those
problems. It helps people handle them. Well, I'm hoping to handle mine
better. I've got myself involved with people, and compete unconsciously.
If I'm not accepted completely, a certain disappointment sets in. All
these things have brushed through my mind. They tie up with dependency,
the need to be accepted. Karen Horney does a beautiful job of that. I've
had a lot of that. Often wondered why my chasing after women --- how
much of it is related to that. I was trying to work through that last
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_451}night. Am I not exaggerating the worth of these
marvelous creatures? (*Laughs*.)

*C384:* Whether they in themselves are worth what value you give them,
or whether they are meeting a need ---

*S384:* --- that is in me. A sort of need to be accepted. My own value
becomes reflected in their acceptance.

*C385:* M-hm. You find a very satisfying kind of --- I don't know quite
what word to use --- re-emphasis, or a kind of reassurance to you.

*S385:* I suspect that, as I analyze it because I must --- there has
been a drive there. The old man told me even after marriage I'd find
that a difficult problem. I think he was correct. And I'm trying to
analyze that drive. I would like to be one of these men that wasn't so
interested in the females who are clicking down the sidewalk. I wish my
marriage brought me enough satisfaction that I wouldn't have this
wanderlust. So I'm trying to analyze it. What is there in me that drives
me so to these mother-bosoms?

*C386:* M-hm. You feel that there must be something pretty significant
that operates when you do seek more and more relationships with women?
Or the maternal kind of relationship?

*S386:* Oh, not maternal. That's the analytic interpretation, that the
maternal must be there, that it is my mother image. I just throw that in
because I sometimes take a whimsical attitude towards myself and these
problems. But it is one of the things I'm trying to work through, and
hoping that, as I --- become more independent, which we know I am, that
the dependency needs decrease. The need for acceptance, which is one of
the things I've worked on hard now for a couple of years. This almost
prostituting yourself to be accepted. The fear of being rejected, which
--- I think Karen Horney's got something --- is related to a good deal
of anxiety, that if a person remains his self, the other person won't
accept him.

*C387:* So that you've had too much at stake, perhaps, in being accepted
by others to be able to be your own real self. Is that it?

*S387:* Definitely.
:::
::::

Perhaps these excerpts illustrate something of the unity of the learning
which occurred in this course --- a unity which is possibly
characteristic of all significant learning. This trainee is learning
that if he is to be a certain type of counselor, he must alter his
relationship with his wife, with other people, and most deeply of all,
his relationship with himself.

[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_452}*Objective Evaluation of Learning Outcomes*

We are indebted to Blocksma (33) for a study of some of the outcomes of
this training program. It is believed that this is the first time any
attempt has been made to measure objectively the learning of therapeutic
skills and attitudes.

Thirty-seven personal counselors in the second and third classes were
the subjects of this study. The purpose of the investigation was (1) to
measure the extent to which client-centered procedures were learned, and
(2) to measure the extent to which these learnings were related to later
success on the job.

In attempting to measure the degree of learning, two procedures were
employed as pre- and post-tests. The first was a paper and pencil test
devised by Porter and Axline (148, pp. 10--25) to measure the extent to
which a person tends towards each of five different purposes in his
counseling responses. The five tendencies are: *moralization*, in which
the counselor tends to pass some type of evaluative judgment upon the
client; *diagnosis*, in which the counselor is endeavoring to gain the
information upon which he can formulate his own understanding of the
person; *interpretation*, in which he tends to explain the client to
himself; *support*, in which he provides some type of emotional
encouragement; and *reflection*, in which he is trying to understand
from the client's point of view and to communicate that understanding.

The second method of measuring was one devised by Blocksma. Taking a
recorded first interview with one of his own clients, he shortened it by
editing out some of the amplifying material, and thus produced a brief
standard interview. He then took the part of this client, "Robert
Doakes," in a role-taking interview with each trainee, playing the role
as much like the client as possible. The task had much reality for these
personal counselors, since the problem presented by the "client" was a
vocational one, with many emotional concomitants and indications of
personal maladjustment. The client material was always the same with
only those minimal adjustments following the counselor's responses which
might be necessary to give a conversational continuity to the interview.
The interview was held privately with each of the thirty-seven trainees
in turn, and was in each case recorded. []{#020_c10.html_lpn_453}The
trainee was requested not to discuss the experience with his fellows. At
the end of the six weeks' training the same interview was repeated with
each trainee. As an additional measure, each trainee conducted an
interview with another role-playing staff member, who took the part of
another client "John Jones." This second interview presented very much
the same basic problem and attitudes, but in an entirely different
contextual setting. The results on these two post-training interviews
were so similar that they will be treated as one in describing the
outcomes of the study.

The counselor responses in these interviews were analyzed in two ways.
The first was a technique analysis, to determine the type of counseling
procedures utilized. The second was a locus of evaluation analysis, in
which a rating was given to each response on a five-point scale to
indicate whether the counselor was (1) thinking and communicating
completely *with* the expressed attitudes of the client, (2) thinking
*about* and *with* the client, (3) thinking *about* the client,
balancing the locus of evaluation inside and outside the client, (4)
thinking and communicating *about* and *for* the client, (5) thinking
*for* the client.

Both these measures proved to have adequate reliability, other judges
showing complete agreement with the investigator in 83 per cent of the
items of the technique analysis and 66 per cent of the items of the
locus-of-evaluation rating.

*Specific Outcomes.* What were the outcomes of the six weeks' training
course as measured by these procedures? It was found that the group had
from their previous reading a fairly high verbal knowledge of
nondirective counseling when they entered the course. Thus on the
paper-and-pencil test of tendencies they used reflection 49 per cent of
the time at the beginning of the course, diagnostic responses 19 per
cent of the time, interpretation 18 per cent, and support and
moralization least. At the end of the six weeks' period they used
reflection 85 per cent, interpretation 12 per cent; diagnostic intent
appeared in but 3 per cent of their responses, and moralization and
support not at all.

The comparison between this verbal knowledge on a paper-and-pencil test
and the actual functioning of the trainees in an
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_454}interview situation is of the greatest
interest. While using 49 per cent reflection on the paper-and-pencil
test, they used only 11 per cent reflection in the interview, and only a
fraction of those responses were real responses to the emotionalized
attitude. The rest were clarification of the intellectual idea or
repetition of the content. The summarized analysis of their
pre-training-performance in the interviews showed 84 per cent directive
responses, 11 per cent nondirective, and 5 per cent innocuous, falling
in neither group. The locus-of-evaluation measure showed 16 per cent of
the responses in the first two categories, indicating an effort to think
with the client and to place the locus of evaluation with him, while 60
per cent of the responses involved thinking about and for the client.

At the end of the training period, the picture has changed rather
sharply. Reflection is used as a technique nearly 60 per cent of the
time. The summarized analysis shows 30 per cent directive responses, 59
per cent nondirective, and 11 per cent innocuous. Perhaps most important
of all, at the end of training this interview test showed that in 60 per
cent of the responses the counselor was thinking with the client and
placing the locus of evaluation within him. Tables III and IV will
indicate some of these changes.

The evidence given seems to justify the statement that in this six
weeks' course:

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
1\) The procedures of client-centered counseling were learned to a
marked degree;

2\) This learning was evident in a paper-and-pencil test in which
verbalized knowledge was tested;

3\) The learning was even more evident in a measure of functional
techniques in an actual interview situation;

4\) The learning was equally or more marked in a measure of the locus of
evaluation in an actual interview situation. This rating served as an
indirect measure of the counselor's empathic attitude, and the degree to
which he held the orientation of placing reliance upon the capacity of
the client.
:::
::::
:::::

:::: block1
<div>

[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_455}Table[III]{style="font-size: 120%"}• Per Cent
Frequencies of Techniques Before and After
Training^[41](#025_endnotes.html_e41){#020_c10.html_f41}^

</div>
::::

::: topbot
![](html/docimages/image8.jpg){height="288" width="500"}
:::

:::: block1
<div>

Table[IV]{style="font-size: 120%"}• Per Cent Frequencies of Locus of
Evaluation Scores Before and After
Training^[42](#025_endnotes.html_e42){#020_c10.html_f42}^

</div>
::::

::: topbot
![](html/docimages/image9.jpg){height="209" width="500"}
:::

[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_456}*Relation to Job Success.* The objective
measures, then, appear to make it amply evident that significant
learning of a client-centered orientation took place in the course, and
that this was much more than a superficial or intellectualized learning.
But still unanswered is the important question: Will this learning make
these men any more effective or adequate as counselors on the job?
Blocksma attempts to throw light on this question, too, though his
validation criteria are, as is so often true, rather crude and
unsatisfactory.

He uses as criteria three items which proved to be useful. They are:

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: topbot
1\) The pooled rating of the instructors at the time the trainee left
the course, as to his probable functioning as a counselor.

2\) The rating of the supervisor (not a client-centered therapist), one
year after the completion of the program, as to the counselor's
effectiveness on the job. (The investigator gave some aid in making this
rating by gathering some of the information upon which it was based.)

3\) The number of contacts per closed case during the counselor's first
year of service. This is a crude indication of effectiveness, since our
experience has shown that with the poor counselor many clients leave
dissatisfied after one or two interviews, and few continue for a
sufficient number of interviews to work through serious problems. It is
admittedly an inadequate measure of effectiveness since many other
factors might also influence this figure.
:::
::::
:::::

It was found that the paper-and-pencil test did not, to any significant
degree, predict later success as a counselor. This was true whether the
measure used was the pre-test score, the post-test score, or the
discrepancy between the two. It was also found that the technique
analysis of the interview pre-test did not significantly predict
success. The other measures of the interview test, however, were
associated with later success. The use of client-centered techniques in
the post-training interviews showed a significant relation to success.
Even more marked was the tendency for a client-centered locus of
evaluation to be associated with the criteria for success. The best
predictor of all was the second, equated interview (the interview with
"John Jones") held at the conclusion of training. Here, obviously, was a
situation most like that which the counselor would face on the job --- a
client unknown to the counselor, presenting a variety of problems and
personal conflicts. If the trainee, in this situation, displayed a
client-centered attitude as measured by the locus-of-evaluation scale,
and utilized client-centered procedures as measured by the technique
analysis, then he was likely to be highly rated by the supervisor at the
end of his first year, and this rating showed less than one chance in a
hundred of being due to chance factors. He was also likely to be
carrying his counseling cases beyond a few interviews. Table V indicates
some of the relationships found to exist, as tested by chi square.

:::: block1
::: topbot
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_457}Table[V]{style="font-size: 120%"}•
Relationships between Test Scores and Criteria, as Indicated by Chi
Square^[43](#025_endnotes.html_e43){#020_c10.html_f43}^
:::
::::

::: sl
(Only relationships significant at .10 or below are shown)
:::

::: topbot
![](html/docimages/image10.jpg){height="329" width="500"}
:::

Examination of this table and of additional aspects of Blocksma's
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_458}data accentuate the place which the degree of
assimilation of client-centeredness had in predicting success on the
job. Since the group was highly heterogeneous in its counseling
abilities at the outset, it would seem entirely logical to suppose that
the final effectiveness on the job would be primarily predicted by the
pre-tests, which would discriminate between the better and poorer
counselors. Any effect of the course learning might be expected to be a
slight modification of these basic predictions. But such is not the
case. The pre-tests do not predict success to any very significant
degree. But the extent to which the trainee has assimilated a
client-centered approach, whether this involved a great or small amount
of learning for him, appears to be the most adequate predictor of the
effectiveness with which he will counsel clients in his own office, on
his own responsibility, a year later.

In general, then, Blocksma's study shows that learning of a
client-centered approach occurred during this six weeks' course, and
that those who showed the deepest assimilation of attitudes and
procedures were the ones most likely to be regarded as effective on the
job one year later. Furthermore, there is a suggestion that it is this
degree of assimilation, rather than the initial quality of the person's
counseling, which best predicts his success. A study of the overall
effectiveness of the work of the Personal Counselors has already been
presented in Chapter 4, pp. 185--186.

*Criticisms of the Program*

These decidedly positive research findings might be taken to mean that
the training course had no important defects. This assumption would be
most misleading. As a course it received, and deserved, many criticisms.
Many of these came from individuals who had no contact with the course,
and whose sources of information were remote. It is of doubtful profit
to consider these objections. The criticisms made by the members of the
course themselves are perhaps more fruitful to consider. On the basis of
a questionnaire at the conclusion of training and extensive
correspondence since, Blocksma has endeavored to collect
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_459}and consider the most serious weaknesses of the
course. These may be summarized in several major categories.

1\. There was too much of an effort to get across a client-centered
point of view, at the expense of a process helping the trainee to become
a therapist in his own terms. Partly because the staff had not
sufficiently recognized the implications of a client-centered point of
view for teaching, and partly because the urgency of a six weeks' time
limit interferes with sound judgment, the group members were immediately
exposed to a client-centered point of view and encouraged to consider it
as a possible point of view for themselves. As Blocksma points out,

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
A more efficacious method might be to spend considerable time and effort
at the outset getting each trainee to know how he "naturally" counsels
clients. If many standard or real or role-played pre-tests of the sort
employed in this research could have been recorded, transcribed, and
analyzed by each trainee on himself, then he would have had a picture of
his own methods and attitudes and empirical counseling philosophy. Once
he sees himself, and compares himself to others, and to client-centered
counselors, then he is better able to decide how and why he wishes to
change his counseling methods. In the writer's experience, a slower
start, with emphasis on self-analysis, makes the presentation of the
client-centered viewpoint more objective and learnable. (33, p. 146)
:::
::::
:::::

Such an approach would have enabled the group to arrive, deductively,
through discussion and practice, at those attitudes and procedures which
experience showed to be more effective in their own job. These attitudes
and procedures would have been client-centered to the extent, and only
to the extent, that such an orientation proved more effective than other
approaches.

Dealing with the group in this fashion would have eliminated the
"oughtness" which still tended to creep into the teaching. It would also
have eliminated the slight feelings of guilt and rebelliousness which
the personal counselors tended to feel as they developed the procedures
which were individually most effective. The net reaction to the course,
as expressed by many counselors throughout the subsequent year, might
almost be rephrased as follows: "It was a fine program. It helped me
greatly in starting []{#020_c10.html_lpn_460}on my work. I have met many
unexpected problems. I am gradually learning to be much more effective
in my work, thanks in considerable measure to the six weeks at Chicago.
I am not as client-centered in my work as I should be." Had the program
been better handled, this last sentence would have been meaningless and
unnecessary.

2\. A second criticism is closely related. It is that the course was not
sufficiently learner-centered. Although a real effort had been made to
approximate the atmosphere of the counseling relationship, this did not
go far enough. There was still insufficient willingness to rely, freely
and actively, upon the members of the group. If they had been given the
responsibility for the planning, operation, and evaluation of the
course; if the curriculum had been more fully of their own choosing; if
the intelligence and ingenuity of the staff had been devoted more
completely to providing those opportunities and resources which would
have enabled the members to learn what they wished to learn --- then the
program would almost certainly have been even more deeply effective.
Indeed, learner-centering would have taken care of all the other
criticisms of the course.

3\. The training experience would have been improved if there had been
more contact with clients, and if such contact had begun earlier in the
program. At the time no way could be seen of bringing this about, but
had use been made of multiple therapy, and of trainees working in
multiple therapy with one another, as will be described later (see pages
471--473), this end could have been achieved.

4\. Provision should have been made for a follow-up institute, at least
one week in length, after the counselor had had several months of
experience. Lack of follow-up was recognized as a serious flaw in the
program, but with the counselors scattered from Seattle to Puerto Rico
it proved impossible to obtain the necessary financial support. A
follow-up program would have helped greatly to enhance and deepen the
learning which took place during the course. More adequate on-the-job
supervision by experienced counselors would also have helped toward this
goal.

[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_461}Perhaps this whole section may best be
concluded by a letter from one of the counselors one year after the
program was completed. This letter gives one some glimpse of the
positive meaning the course had for the group, though it also hints at
some of the weaknesses which have been included under points 1, 3, and
4, above.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
Dear D------

What I wouldn't give to be able to meet-in our work group again for
about 10 hours. Now that I have some experience under my belt I'm loaded
with questions. I'm enjoying my work more than I ever thought could be
possible. Each counseling session is a new and exhilarating and
satisfying experience. Of course we get a little more satisfaction from
our successful cases. About 6 of my cases are cooking nicely. 6 to 8
counseling contacts with each, and I get a tremendous kick out of the
way they work through their situations. No two are alike. One of them,
an Engineer, amazes me. At times he sounds like a textbook on
psychiatry.

D------, believe it or not, I'm getting a clearer picture of dynamics
than any interpretative approach could hope to yield. ND
\[non-directive\] teaches one the art of keeping quiet and observing.
Remember, I'm the guy who tended to play the active role.

Some of the questions that I would like to have answered are: In your
experience did you find that different clients have to be handled
differently? One client starts digging immediately, another has
difficulty in getting started. Do you have faith in the latter's getting
started if the counselor uses ND properly? You know, between the
client's not having a problem and the counselor's not reflecting and
accepting properly, ND has a hand tailored explanation for any
unsuccessful case. I realize the dangers of the counselor's
inconsistency, but at the same time I wonder if there is no need for
further experimentation. To be more specific, I have complete faith in
ND once the client has accepted the counseling situation --- once he
starts exploring his own attitudes and difficulties but I am not
completely convinced that every client with a problem will open up in
the counseling situation. In other words, I have a hunch that more than
the counselor's role is involved in some of our unsuccessful cases. If
so, isn't there a need for experimenting with modified variations of
what other schools have learned about human behavior. Perhaps I am
merely expressing my own limitations as an ND therapist.

[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_462}The other night I reviewed some of my notes of
my initial counseling cases and I am amazed at the difference in the
quality and frequency of reflections. Too many of my reflections at the
beginning contained content material and as we *both expected* I was
reflecting too often.

I have had considerable success with some of my experimenting, but I do
not have sufficient evidence to draw any conclusions.

What I wouldn't give to be able to listen to some of the recorded case
material that is available at the Center. When I was there I didn't know
what to look for. Now that I have some background in ND the material is
not available.

My present job is so satisfying, in spite of no privacy and no recorder,
because for the first time in my life I am doing the work that I've
always wanted. I don't know if I ever told you about my disappointment
as a psychologist when I learned that I could either give tests, develop
tests, or become a statistician. It was a new experience for me as a
psychologist when I hit the Center and found that you and the rest of
the staff shared my interest in therapy. I don't think I have to tell
you how stimulating I found my contacts with you and the rest of the
staff. (33, pp. 151--152)
:::
::::
:::::

A C[URRENT]{.sc}P[ROGRAM OF]{.sc}T[RAINING IN]{.sc}P[SYCHOTHERAPY]{.sc}

Considering the dearth of detailed descriptions of programs of training
in therapy, it may be worth while to present the sequence of experiences
which at the present time constitute therapeutic training at the
University of Chicago.^[44](#025_endnotes.html_e44){#020_c10.html_f44}^
Several qualifying comments should be made at the outset. The program is
continually fluctuating, developing, changing, so that by the time this
appears in print it will probably not be accurate. In describing the
program, effort will be made to mention those elements in it which we
regard as best --- and of course this selection and emphasis may have a
tendency to give a glorified picture of the situation.
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_463}Probably no student has experienced all the
best features which will be mentioned. We do not routinely achieve this
"best" in carrying on the sequence.

*Entrance into the Program*

The curriculum of experiences which we shall describe is carried on
primarily under the Department of Psychology, though the first course is
also listed as a course in Education. In practice, not only students in
psychology, human development, and education are admitted, but students
from other departments as well, providing they have the qualifications.

The sequence cannot ordinarily be entered until the student is in his
second year of graduate work. The reasons for this are based to some
extent upon expediency as well as policy. Selection is easier after the
student has had a year of graduate work, and he is likely to have a
broader background. Furthermore, this policy simply evades the difficult
and controversial question as to whether students should be given
training in therapy as part of a master's degree program. Without taking
sides on this issue, it appears to the faculty involved in this program
that it is more crucial at the present time to educate therapists at the
doctoral level.

There are usually more students who apply for entrance into the sequence
than can be accepted. The applicants fill out a rather extensive blank
which helps in making the choice. Weight is given to such factors as the
following:

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: top
Evidence of breadth of background, including not only psychology but
sociology, cultural anthropology, philosophy, and like subjects.
:::
::::
:::::

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: top
Evidence of ample preparation in the field of personality dynamics, in
which there has been stress upon acquaintance with clinical case
material. Emphasis upon a phenomenological or empathic understanding of
these dynamics is desirable.
:::
::::
:::::

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: top
Evidence that the student has worked out something of a
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_464}philosophy of living, or at least has an
awareness of some of the deep issues of human existence. (Such evidence
is not easy to obtain, and our present method is not very adequate.)
:::
::::
:::::

::::: block1
:::: block1
::: top
Evidence that the student has training in some other specialized
function outside of therapy. The reason for this item is expediency. We
prefer to have students who have training in psychometrics, vocational
guidance, teaching, religious work, or some other function aside from
counseling, since it improves the possibility of placement. For the
nonmedical therapist today, most positions demand a double type of
functioning --- testing and counseling, teaching and therapy, and the
like. Also, this requirement tends to reduce the number of applicants
who wish to enter the sequence primarily because they see it as a way of
gaining help with their own problems.
:::
::::
:::::

*The First Course*

The first course has been called "Principles of Adjustment Counseling."
We have come more and more to look upon this course as an opportunity
for the student to formulate the basic issues and basic attitudes upon
which he will build his own therapeutic work. At its best it is not an
attempt to indoctrinate in any particular therapeutic orientation, and
it is certainly not aimed at a mere intellectual comprehension of the
facts or principles of therapy. It is intended rather as an experience
which moves one toward a deeper integration in regard to therapy.

To this end, the course is handled in the learner-centered fashion
described in the previous chapter. The student is given the experience
of responsibility for himself, and the experience of being understood
and accepted as he reacts both negatively and positively to this new
type of course. Gradually the instructional staff has learned (for any
worth-while teaching is largely learning for the instructor) that it is
safe to rely upon the group, and that the members are capable of taking
responsibility.

One of the basic problems of the instructor is to make resources
available --- not only in the physical sense, but psychologically
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_465}available. As one resource, we have found
indispensable a shelf of reading materials --- books on all viewpoints
in therapy, journals, bibliographies on therapy and related topics,
reprints, recent studies (especially those as yet unpublished),
significant papers turned in by members of previous classes or of this
class, verbatim transcribed cases and interviews from our own and other
orientations. To have such material readily within reach makes it
possible for the student to pursue even a fleeting interest in a
specific topic with a maximum of ease. The unpublished studies and
tentative drafts of manuscripts for publication help to give him a sense
of knowledge in the making, of being a part of a cutting edge which
extends into the future.

Another resource is the opportunity for listening to recordings. Some of
this can be done in class, but there should be ample opportunity
outside. To listen thoughtfully to the ways in which different
therapists handle problems in the interview, to recognize how clearly
the therapist's basic attitudes show through his words --- these are
significant means of learning.

Still another resource is the opportunity for ample contact with staff
members carrying on therapy. The chance to gain personal therapy is one
such opportunity, and is made as psychologically available as possible.
It is frankly available as help, not simply as a didactic experience.
There is also the attempt to let it be known that staff members are
willing to consult with students about practical, theoretical, or
research issues which the student is meeting.

Observation is an exceedingly important resource. Sometimes it is
possible to obtain a client's permission so that one or more interviews
may be observed by a group. This occurs rarely, but provides a very
valuable experience for students. Usually a member of the group is
willing to discuss with a counselor some adjustment problem of his own,
as the group looks on. While such a discussion illustrates only the very
beginning of a therapeutic relationship, it often is a highly
significant and real experience. Observation of play-therapy contacts
can usually be arranged, and the ethical problems involved are somewhat
less complex. And since we have a one-way vision observation room next
to []{#020_c10.html_lpn_466}the playroom, the physical problem is a very
simple one. This observation of the dynamics of therapy in its most
nonverbal form is almost invariably a vivid and meaningful experience.

In addition to this function of providing resources, the instructor
endeavors to fit flexibly into the desires of the group for
presentations of views. In a recent quarter the group wished
presentations on these topics, and they were arranged. A number of
faculty members and staff members were utilized in these presentations.

::::: block
:::: block1
::: topbot
The Process of Client-Centered Therapy

A Demonstration of a Therapeutic Interview

The Problem of Transference

The Emotional Relationship in Therapy

The Meaning of the Internal Frame of Reference

The Relationship of Diagnosis to Therapy

The Development and Present Formulation of the Hypotheses of
Client-Centered Therapy

The Criteria of Progress and Success in Therapy

Multiple Therapy

Panel Discussion of Criticisms of Client-Centered Therapy

The Personality Theory Implicit in Client-Centered Therapy
:::
::::
:::::

Usually, in this first course, the heart of the learning experience lies
in the discussions which occupy half to two-thirds of the formal class
meetings, and which often continue in informal groups outside. Since
discussion is so important, the aim of the faculty has been to subdivide
a class if it is a large one, so that discussion can take place
preferably in a group not larger than
fifteen.^[45](#025_endnotes.html_e45){#020_c10.html_f45}^ It is in these
discussions that the student really comes to grips with his own attitude
toward people. Often the most minute practical issue may raise profound
personal and philosophical issues. A consideration of what the student,
as counselor, would respond to the client's opening statement of his
problem, may launch the group into the deepest consideration of what is
the []{#020_c10.html_lpn_467}counselor's purpose in counseling, how much
reliance can be placed on any individual, and whether the forces of the
universe are basically constructive, destructive, or neutral.

It would be fruitless to list all the questions which are thus
considered in the course, since they come into focus as the result of a
fluid process and are different for each group. One issue, however,
presents itself so very frequently that it deserves mention. It is the
question, To what extent can you basically trust the individual and the
forces within him? Individuals and groups work out very different
answers. Some feel that you can rely on the capacities of the individual
in simple personal problems, but not when problems are severe; or in the
realm of personal problems, but not in politics; or that perhaps you can
trust such a capacity in individual therapy, but as one individual said,
"to trust the individual or the group in education, or in problems of
labor-management or racial discord, is dangerous." In any event, this
issue is faced and considered, and the student tends to formulate some
working hypotheses for himself.

Thus in this first course, at its best, the student acquires some type
of first-hand experience of therapy, a wide acquaintance with various
viewpoints in the field, and a tentative formulation of the way he
wishes to work with people. This last is arrived at freely and
tentatively, because it is accepted. The student does not have to form
his own views *against* some opposing influence (as was sometimes true
in our earlier teaching).

*Practicum Courses*

Following this first course there are two courses in the sequence known
as Practicum I and Practicum II in client-centered therapy. Their
purpose is to give the student opportunity to use, in increasingly
responsible ways, the attitudes and skills which he is acquiring. In
addition, it is the aim to have available supervision by experienced
individuals at any point where the student desires it. These courses
also give the student the chance to look at his own counseling and that
carried on by others, as if through a microscope, thanks to the
advantages given by electrical recording.

[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_468}*General Purpose.* Put somewhat more
specifically, it is the purpose of the first practicum to give the
student as wide a variety of experience as possible in the establishment
and maintenance of a therapeutic relationship with clients, short of
assuming the full professional responsibility for therapy. The general
purpose of the second practicum, which may be repeated for still another
quarter of experience, is to give the opportunity for the student to
take full responsibility for carrying on therapy with a few individuals,
with adequate supervisory assistance always available to him.

Because the supervisory process has been recognized as being of crucial
importance in these courses, the numbers in the courses have been
steadily decreased. At one time twenty-five to thirty were accepted in
each group. This number has been cut to twenty, to fifteen, to ten, and
there is at present sentiment among the faculty for making it almost an
apprentice type of training in which one staff member might work with
three to five students intensively over a two-quarter period.

In these practicum courses as carried on at present, there is a roughly
graded series of available experiences which are described below.
Probably no one student has utilized every one of these experiences, but
he may engage in as many as are feasible for him. There is no sharp
division between the two courses and a student is permitted to move
forward as rapidly as he is able. Hence he may carry full responsibility
for a therapeutic case in his first practicum course if he is ready,
though this is intended as an opportunity primarily available in the
second practicum. Because of this fluidity, and because there is overlap
in the opportunities available, the whole range of experiences is
described below in sequence. It should be understood that those given
first are more likely to be a part of the first practicum, while the
later elements tend to come in the second.

*Role-taking and Simple Interviewing.* Role-taking has been found to be
a very useful elementary procedure. Students are encouraged to take the
role of someone whom they know well, and talk out some of the problems
of this person, with another student acting as counselor. As described,
this device may seem artificial, but []{#020_c10.html_lpn_469}it
develops a surprising amount of reality and at times can become just as
real for the counselor as actual therapy. The most significant
utilization of this procedure has been for the instructor to play the
role of a client --- often some client with whom he is currently
working, so that he can take the role vividly --- while a student acts
as counselor. This "counseling" may be carried on either in front of the
group, in order to provide material for discussion, or with the
individual student in private. It has proved to have a great deal of
value to the student, and has also helped the instructor to gauge the
progress of the student. It is a particularly good basis for observing
and experiencing the student's attitudes as they operate in therapy.
When the "instructor-client" says to the student, "I felt as though you
were thinking so hard about what you were doing that you weren't too
much interested in me," or "I felt as if you were telling me what my
attitudes were rather than trying to get into this thing with me," such
expressions of feeling have real impact. The student is able to learn
how he is perceived and experienced by the client, and this learning is
a valuable one. From the role-taking experience he can gain almost all
the learnings which would come from dealing with an actual client,
without, however, being burdened by a feeling of heavy responsibility
which might create anxiety.

Another way in which role-taking may profitably be used is in relation
to problems of professional relationships. How is the student going to
handle problems such as these when he has completed his training and is
functioning as a therapist; a situation in which a school administrator
wants information about one of the counselor's student clients; the
relationship with a superior who has a very different orientation toward
counseling; the relationship with a social worker who wants him to put
pressure on a client to get a job; the interpretation of what he is
doing to other professional people who know little about therapy? These
and other real professional situations may be brought to life through
role-playing, thus giving the student an opportunity to think through
his handling of them before he actually meets them. The device has the
particular advantage of enabling him to see that his therapeutic
orientation has something to contribute to his
[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_470}handling of professional relations. It also
helps him to see that, in situations in which he is ego-involved, the
expression of his own attitudes is what frees him to be understanding of
the attitudes of the other person, a point which otherwise he may miss
if he thinks only about problems of therapy.

Another way in which attitudes and techniques may be put into action,
without overweighting the student with responsibility, is through casual
interviews. This is a procedure not without certain disadvantages and
risks, but cautiously used it may have value. For example, students have
been encouraged to visit patients at an institution for incurables. The
visit may be in part simply a friendly chat, yet when emotionalized
attitudes are expressed, the student's endeavor to understand deeply and
with empathy may permit a constructive and cathartic release. The
gravity of the total situation makes it unlikely that the student will
be tempted to use his skills as "tricks of interviewing," an outcome
which otherwise is possible, and which constitutes, in our opinion,
training away from therapy rather than for therapy.

*Counseling of Each Other.* One of the most useful early training
experiences has been for students to counsel with each other. The
student is encouraged to select from the group someone with whom he will
be comfortable, and to pair up with him for counseling experience. While
one member of the pair becomes a client and talks out some problem,
often a minor one, the other member of the pair is counselor. They may
at another time reverse the situation, or a student may choose to be a
client with one fellow student, a counselor with another. Recording
equipment is available so that these interviews can be recorded,
listened to, and discussed.

Even when this counseling remains at a superficial level it is a most
useful experience because it gives the student the opportunity to learn,
in the discussion after the interview, how he is experienced when he is
endeavoring to be a therapist. Sometimes both members of the pair are
willing to have a third person present as observer, and in this instance
the counselor is able to learn how his functioning seems to a neutral
party. Since all the comments and reactions can be understood even more
deeply by []{#020_c10.html_lpn_471}listening to the recording, the
relationship is indeed viewed under a complex type of social microscope.

As might be expected, such mutual counseling frequently goes beyond a
superficial level. One member or the other may feel enough confidence in
the relationship to use it for personal therapy, sometimes at a deep
level. Here the student who is functioning as counselor can carry on
with comfort, since it has been understood in advance that either the
client or the counselor may withdraw from the situation if he finds that
he is uncomfortable. Thus if the student-counselor finds that the
student-client is going beyond what he feels competent to handle, he may
transfer his client to one of the staff counselors. Often, however, he
carries through, thus obtaining his first complete experience of
therapeutic responsibility.

The supervision of the counseling in these student pairs constitutes an
important part of the practicum experience. What is involved in the
supervision depends upon the needs and desires of the individual. In
some instances the student-counselor may feel concerned about various
aspects of what he is doing, and the relationship with the instructor is
essentially a therapeutic one, in which he talks out his concerns and
reorients his attitudes toward the task. At a later time, or with
another student who feels more secure, the instructor may raise
questions to bring crucial issues to light, or may tell how other
counselors have handled certain situations, in order to broaden the
scope of the student's thinking. In some instances the student may want
to have specific criticisms, and if so, the instructor analyzes the
interview critically, from his own point of view. The general aim of the
supervision is to respect the degree of confidence and skill which
exists at this point in the student, to help him clarify his own
attitudes, to help him see other ways of thinking and doing, provided
that all these helps still leave him free to do as he feels is right.

*Multiple Therapy.* Within the past year, to further enrich the
practicum experience, we have been experimenting with multiple therapy
as it has been developed by Whitaker and Warkentin (220. 221). Haigh and
Kell (77) have described the use which []{#020_c10.html_lpn_472}has been
made of it in our own Center. We regard the development of this new
procedure, and its adaptation to the training function by Whitaker and
his colleagues, as one of the most important social inventions of recent
years in this field.

Without attempting a discussion of multiple therapy, it may be said that
it is the discovery that if two or even more than two therapists begin
with the client, the relationship is formed to both of them, and therapy
proceeds just as meaningfully as it would with one therapist, though
perhaps a little differently. With some clients it may even facilitate
therapy. From the point of view of our immediate interest in training,
however, it means that two therapists have lived through, emotionally,
the same therapeutic relationship. The discussions of the process in the
client and of the feelings that each therapist has toward the
functioning of the other, have a vividness and reality achievable in no
other way.

The specific manner in which we are using multiple therapy in the
practicum training involves every student in two ways. Each student is
given the opportunity to become a co-therapist with an experienced staff
member in handling a client. The client is one of the other students in
the group. The student who is co-therapist in this experience is given
the opportunity to be a client in another multiple therapy relationship,
and the client in this first trio is given the opportunity to become a
co-therapist in another relationship. Thus each student may act as
co-therapist in one situation with a staff member, and as client in
another situation, in a relationship with a staff member and a
fellow-student as co-therapists.

This arrangement has an astonishing number of advantages. The student
can begin to function as therapist earlier, because the staff member can
carry the major burden of therapy, with the student entering in only to
the degree that he feels comfortable and confident. The student can
gradually feel the responsibility for the delicate handling of a real
life --- a responsibility more keenly felt because this is a
fellow-student, and because, as client in another relationship, he
experiences the importance of that delicate handling in himself. The
importance of holding []{#020_c10.html_lpn_473}all interview material in
absolute confidence, for example, is experienced simultaneously from the
client's and therapist's point of view. In his two situations he has the
opportunity to see and intimately experience the mode of working of
three other therapists --- an experience which cuts much deeper than can
even a recording. In his discussions with his co-therapist following the
interviews, there is the opportunity for genuine expression of feeling
on both sides, and in this way still another significant experiencing of
a relationship is provided. Listening to the recording of the interview
gives still another means of objectifying and considering how one is
using one's self. In addition to all these advantages, this plan of
using multiple therapy provides the opportunity for personal therapy for
each student, with no additional investment of staff time beyond what
would be needed for training alone.

Whitaker gives a good description of the way in which multiple therapy
subtly yet fully introduces the student to the therapeutic situation.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
I fear that if one utilizes "noes" as one is inclined to when he works
in conjunction with someone who is not a trained therapist, he will
frequently alienate the student. He feels so inadequate when he comes
into the situation that even a very quiet "no" makes him feel hopelessly
inadequate and afraid to continue. This method amounts to teaching by
emulation. He begins to see you; not the things you say, not the things
you do, but he sees you and the patient reacting to each other. For two
or three sessions he may not say anything or perhaps only a few words.
He will, however, reverberate in his thinking and feeling to this joint
experience, since he brings not only his intellect but his whole
personality. (220, p. 903)
:::
::::
:::::

There are of course certain cautions, and as we continue to use this
procedure real disadvantages may emerge. There is the question whether
as client the student will reveal himself as deeply to another student
as if he were alone with the experienced therapist. There is the
question whether, since each student is both client and therapist, the
whole training atmosphere may become too introspective, too much of a
collective looking within. []{#020_c10.html_lpn_474}Thus far these
possible disadvantages have not presented serious problems.

*Independent Handling of Cases.* The goal of the practicum courses is to
give the student experience in the handling of individuals in a
therapeutic relationship, and as soon as he feels he is ready to do so,
he engages in this responsible practice of his profession.

As the situation has developed, most of this beginning counseling is
carried on in cooperating agencies. At any one time there are several
organizations in which counseling may be done. During one period or
another we have had such arrangements with a number of public grammar
schools, high schools, and junior colleges; with the Y.M.C.A. hotel,
with night schools, with social welfare agencies and institutions.
Through this ramified experience we have learned that it is most
effective if a staff member first makes the contact with the agency, and
if help is desired, as is usually the case, begins to render that
service himself. As he carries on part-time counseling or play therapy
within the cooperating agency, he can bring in students, one by one, who
also take cases and expand the service. Even if their handling of
clients is not too expert at first, the staff member's work provides a
solid core of satisfactory service and the opportunity for supervisory
help if the student wishes it. In addition, the staff member can
communicate with the agency staff on the problems and questions which
they feel about this service work. Teachers and principals may be
concerned that the counselor does not tell them what the child says.
Perhaps the child is talking about them in ways which are not entirely
true. Sometimes they feel that the child is growing worse rather than
better (which may of course happen). These or similar questions arise in
cooperating with any agency, and the staff member facilitates open
expression of feeling, and states his own feelings as well. Through this
type of interchange, difficulties are kept on a realistic level and
channels of free communication are kept open.

As a student-therapist handles cases in such a setting he develops in
therapeutic ability, in sense of professional responsibility, in ability
to adapt his basic principles to new situations. He may record some of
his contacts for further detailed analysis []{#020_c10.html_lpn_475}of
the sort which is only possible through recording. He may broaden the
implementation of his therapeutic views by undertaking play therapy with
children, if previously he has engaged only in therapy with adults. He
may, in some of the institutional resources, have the opportunity of
conducting group therapy with children, adolescents, or adults. He can
develop the scope of his professional functioning.

Throughout this experience supervision remains available, as always. It
has not been in accord with the views of the faculty to impose
supervision at any point. In fact, probably some term other than
"supervision" would be preferable to convey the notion of a resource
person, available for consultation, whose function is to assist the
student to discover more clearly the issues and problems and flaws in
his work, a person who will serve as an interested but noncoercive and
nonjudgmental source of stimulation and clarification.

*Internship or Courtesy Appointment*

From the group of graduate students who have completed two or more
quarters of the practicum courses, applications are accepted for
positions on the staff of the Counseling Center. The usual term for the
position would be an internship, since it is in most instances an unpaid
position which the student desires in order to round out further his own
professional training. But because there is some connotation of an
underling in the term "intern," we have usually described the position
as a courtesy appointment to the staff of the Center. This name seems
better to fit the actual functioning of these individuals.

From the applicants, those persons are selected who seem to show the
most professional ability and promise. To some degree, self-selection
has been used, and has significant advantages. However, a staff
committee has also served a selective function. In recent years the
Center has had fifteen to twenty of these courtesy appointees at any one
time. This number may be considered in relation to the fact that there
are ten or twelve paid staff members, almost all of them giving only
part time to the Center.

[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_476}These courtesy staff members function in every
way as full staff members. They have responsibility for their cases,
take part in decisions on policy and other matters in staff meeting,
serve on staff committees, and in all ways regard themselves as having a
responsible share in the whole venture. Both in the professional and in
the administrative realm they function in the ways in which they feel
they are able to contribute. Since all committees are self-appointed, we
have even had the interesting phenomenon of an unpaid courtesy appointee
serving on the budget committee, planning such matters as salary rates,
allocation of funds, and the like. This situation caused no comment
whatsoever in the staff when it occurred, and it was only when the
writer considered how this would appear to those accustomed to more
conventional organizational procedures that he felt it worthy of
mention.

The administrative side of staff experience as it relates to the
courtesy appointee is stressed here only to indicate that the experience
of internship involves a still further broadening of his appreciation of
how applicable are the principles of human relationships which he finds
effective in therapy. It is living evidence that, though staff
relationships are not always smooth, nevertheless he can trust himself
to participate as freely as he dares, he can express real attitudes, he
can accept the attitudes of others, he can rely upon the basic
tendencies of the group, and he can thus learn more deeply the
hypothesis of all his work.

When the courtesy appointee joins the staff he is encouraged to choose
one or more staff members, with whom he feels comfortable, to use as
resource persons in his cases. On first joining the staff, he is apt to
avail himself of the opportunity for consultation and supervision to a
considerable degree, but gradually he feels less need to do so. As time
goes on, the major part of his professional training comes from two
sources --- his continuous learning from the clients with whom he is
working, and the give and take of discussion with other staff members,
in both large and small groups. In other words, he has become a
full-fledged member of his profession, being self-responsible for his
work, but turning freely to his colleagues for help whenever he needs
it.

[]{#020_c10.html_lpn_477}*Research in Therapy*

During the period of practicum or internship, the advanced student is
also likely to be thinking about research. Many of these students are
about to undertake the research for their doctoral dissertations. It is
natural that some aspect of therapy should challenge them --- some
measure of outcomes, some study of the therapeutic process or the
therapist-client relationship, some phase of basic personality dynamics
as seen in therapy. A great deal of the research in therapy cited
earlier in this book has been done by students who have reached this
stage of their training. In carrying on the basic theoretical thinking
necessary for his research, and in clarifying the concepts with which he
is to work, each student finds that he is enriching his professional
function by his scholarly and critical research interests, and that his
research, on the other hand, is greatly deepened in its significance by
the continuing contact with personal dynamics in therapy.

*Outcomes*

It has been our experience that any student who has completed the
sequence of training experiences outlined, imperfect though they may be
in their detailed implementation, is ready to begin functioning as a
therapist, and is open to new learning in this field. He is effective as
a therapist, able to deal with a rather wide range of individuals. He is
sufficiently secure within himself to be able to adapt his therapeutic
functioning to new situations and new problems of relationships. He has
a security in the methodology of finding new truth, so that he is able
to tolerate a lack of finality in his thinking. He has the basis for
growing and developing within himself, and for making a contribution to
his profession and to scientific knowledge.

Thus though we are all too aware of our shortcomings in the way in which
we carry through the parts of this training sequence, we find it quite
unnecessary to apologize for the products of that sequence. We are well
aware that the program will change in the future as it has in the past.
One basic principle seems to persist --- that we endeavor increasingly
to supply the []{#020_c10.html_lpn_478}student with rich and responsible
opportunities for learning, but that we rely upon him for the sensitive,
selective, constructive use of these opportunities.

SUGGESTED READINGS

::: sl
There are relatively few published references which relate to training
in therapy. For a formal but comprehensive statement of a training
program for the clinical psychologist, including a program in therapy,
see the report of the American Psychological Association Committee on
Graduate Training (160). The Conference on Training in Clinical
Psychology sponsored by the Macy Foundation (80) presents a series of
papers on this topic, mostly psychoanalytically and medically oriented.
The views are at some variance with the first reference and with the
point of view of this chapter. An eclectic type of training is proposed
by Luchins (120). A stimulating paper on the training of the non-medical
therapist and his place in the clinical field, together with a proposed
curriculum, is presented by Brody and Grey (36).

A short training program in therapy, planned for physicians, is
described in *Teaching Psychotherapeutic Medicine* (226, especially pp.
1--26). The brief program for training VA Personal Counselors is
described by Blocksma and Porter (34). The only research evaluation of
any training program is that of Blocksma (33), which is not yet
published.

The concept of multiple therapy as it is used in training is presented
in three papers, two by Whitaker and colleagues (220, 221) and one by
Haigh and Kell (77).
:::

[]{#021_p3.html}

<div>

[]{#021_p3.html_p3}

</div>

# [PART]{.sc} [III]{.partnum} *Implications for Psychological Theory* {.parttitle}

[]{#022_c11.html}

<div>

[]{#022_c11.html_c11}

</div>

# []{#022_c11.html_lpn_481}*Chapter* [11]{.chapnum} • A Theory of Personality and Behavior {.chaptitle}

![](html/docimages/line.jpg){height="10" width="100%"}

As clinical and research evidence accumulates, it is inevitable that
those interested in client-centered therapy should try to formulate
theories which would contain and explain the observed facts, and which
would point out profitable directions for further research. This chapter
attempts to report the present stage of our thinking in this matter of
constructing a more generalized statement of personality dynamics and
behavior. In considerable degree, the task is simply that of pulling
together the theoretical formulations which have been explicit or
implicit in all our discussions of therapy and of its effect upon
personality. It is hoped, however, that a focus upon, and a
summarization of, the basic conceptual elements will prove useful.

The process of theory-building in regard to personality has gone on
apace in recent years in psychology, and a number of contributions have
enriched our thinking. To mention (in order of publication) some which
have been presented in the decade 1940--50, Goldstein (69), Angyal (9),
Maslow (127, 128), Mowrer and Kluckhohn (137), Lecky (109), Sullivan
(205), Masserman (129), Murphy (141), Cameron (38), Murray and Kluckhohn
(104), White (222), Snygg and Combs (200), and Burrow (37) have all
presented, either explicitly or implicitly, statements of a new or
revised theory of personality. Each of these authors has contributed
significantly to thinking about personality dynamics and to a deeper
consideration of theory.

With this burgeoning of theoretical formulation it may seem presumptuous
to offer still another conceptual framework for the regarding of
personality. On the other hand, it appears probable
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_482}that out of this wealth of concept-building,
with each researcher offering the formulation which from his own
experience appears best to contain the facts, new strides in research
and in understanding can grow. It is in this spirit that the present
chapter is written. Obviously, it would not be included if the writer
did not feel that previous theories do not adequately account for all
the facts. On the other hand, it is not presented in a critical frame of
mind, since much has been gained by a study of these other
contributions, and both in ways that are known and doubtless in ways
that are unknown, they have influenced the present author.

Just as each one of the other writers is influenced by his professional
experience, so has the statement which follows been molded by a score of
years of first-hand contact with clinical problems, and more
particularly and more deeply by the decade of struggle to formulate an
effective and consistent psychotherapy, the process of that effort being
the changing formulations of the client-centered approach. The increased
entrance into the thinking and feeling of the other person,
characteristic of client-centered therapy, has necessitated profound
changes in the author's whole theoretical ideation. Like Maslow, the
writer would confess that in the early portion of his professional life
he held a theoretical view opposed at almost every point to the view he
has gradually come to adopt as a result of clinical experience and
clinically oriented research.

In order to present the thinking as clearly as possible, and also in
order to make possible the detection of flaws or inconsistencies, the
material which follows is offered as a series of propositions, with a
brief explanation and exposition of each proposition. Since the theory
is regarded as tentative, questions are raised in regard to various
propositions, particularly where it seems uncertain that they adequately
account for all the phenomena. Some of these propositions must be
regarded as assumptions, while the majority may be regarded as
hypotheses subject to proof or disproof. Taken as a whole, the series of
propositions presents a theory of behavior which attempts to account for
the phenomena previously known, and also for the facts regarding
personality and behavior which have more recently been observed in
therapy. []{#022_c11.html_lpn_483}In many ways the propositions
presented draw upon previous formulations, and in many ways they differ.
There will be no attempt to point out these similarities and
differences, since that would detract from a straightforward and
systematic presentation. The reader is referred to the references given
for the recent theoretical formulations by other psychologists.

T[HE]{.sc} P[ROPOSITIONS]{.sc}

I\) *Every individual exists in a continually changing world of
experience of which he is the center.*

This private world may be called the phenomenal field, the experiential
field, or described in other terms. It includes all that is experienced
by the organism, whether or not these experiences are consciously
perceived. Thus the pressure of the chair seat against my buttocks is
something I have been experiencing for an hour, but only as I think and
write about it does the symbolization of that experience become present
in consciousness. It seems likely that Angyal is correct in stating that
consciousness consists of the symbolization of some of our experiences.

It should be recognized that in this private world of experience of the
individual, only a portion of that experience, and probably a very small
portion, is *consciously* experienced. Many of our sensory and visceral
sensations are not symbolized. It is also true, however, that a large
portion of this world of experience is *available* to consciousness, and
may become conscious if the need of the individual causes certain
sensations to come into focus because they are associated with the
satisfaction of a need. In other words, most of the individual's
experiences constitute the ground of the perceptual field, but they can
easily become figure, while other experiences slip back into ground. We
shall deal later with some aspects of experience which the individual
*prevents* from coming into figure.

An important truth in regard to this private world of the individual is
that it can only be known, in any genuine or complete sense, to the
individual himself. No matter how adequately we attempt to measure the
stimulus --- whether it be a beam of light, []{#022_c11.html_lpn_484}a
pinprick, a failure on an examination, or some more complex situation
--- and no matter how much we attempt to measure the perceiving organism
--- whether by psychometric tests or physiological calibrations --- it
is still true that the individual is the only one who can know how the
experience was perceived. I can never know with vividness or
completeness how a pinprick or a failure on an examination is
experienced by you. The world of experience is for each individual, in a
very significant sense, a private world.

This complete and first-hand acquaintance with the world of his total
experience is, however, only potential; it does not hold true of the
individual's general functioning. There are many of the impulses which I
feel, or the sensations which I experience, which I can permit into
consciousness only under certain conditions. Hence my actual awareness
of and knowledge of my total phenomenal field is limited. It is still
true, however, that potentially I am the only one who can know it in its
completeness. Another can never know it as fully as I.

II\) *The organism reacts to the field as it is experienced and
perceived. This perceptual field is, for the individual, "reality."*

::: top
This is a simple proposition, one of which we are all aware in our own
experience, yet it is a point which is often overlooked. I do not react
to some absolute reality, but to my perception of this reality. It is
this perception which for me *is* reality. Snygg and Combs give the
example of two men driving at night on a western road. An object looms
up in the middle of the road ahead. One of the men sees a large boulder,
and reacts with fright. The other, a native of the country, sees a
tumbleweed and reacts with nonchalance. Each reacts to the reality as
perceived.
:::

This proposition could be illustrated from the daily experience of
everyone. Two individuals listen to a radio speech made by a political
candidate about whom they have no previous knowledge. They are both
subjected to the same auditory stimulation. Yet one perceives the
candidate as a demagogue, a trickster, a false prophet, and reacts
accordingly. The other perceives him as a
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_485}leader of the people, a person of high aims and
purposes. Each is reacting to the reality as he has perceived it. In the
same way, two young parents each perceive differently the behavior of
their offspring. The son and daughter have differing perceptions of
their parents. And the behavior in all these instances is appropriate to
the reality-as-perceived. This same proposition is exemplified in
so-called abnormal conditions as well. The psychotic who perceives that
his food is poisoned, or that some malevolent group is out to "get" him,
reacts to his reality-as-perceived in much the same fashion that you or
I would respond if we (more "realistically") perceived our food as
contaminated, or our enemies as plotting against us.

To understand this concept that reality is, for the individual, his
perceptions, we may find it helpful to borrow a phrase from the
semanticists. They have pointed out that words and symbols bear to the
world of reality the same relationship as a map to the territory which
it represents. This relationship also applies to perception and reality.
We live by a perceptual "map" which is never reality itself. This is a
useful concept to keep in mind, for it may help to convey the nature of
the world in which the individual lives.

To the present writer it seems unnecessary to posit or try to explain
any concept of "true" reality. For purposes of understanding
psychological phenomena, reality is, for the individual, his
perceptions. Unless we wish to involve ourselves in philosophical
questions, we do not need to attempt to solve the question as to what
*really* constitutes reality. For psychological purposes, reality is
basically the private world of individual perceptions, though for social
purposes reality consists of those perceptions which have a high degree
of commonality among various individuals. Thus this desk is "real"
because most people in our culture would have a perception of it which
is very similar to my own.

While it is not necessary for our purposes to define any absolute
concept of reality, it should be noted that we are continually checking
our perceptions against one another, or adding them one to another, so
that they become more reliable guides to
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_486}"reality." For example, I see some salt in a
dish. That, for me at that instant, is reality. If I taste it and it
tastes salty, my perception is further confirmed. But if it tastes
sweet, my whole interpretation of the situation is changed, and both in
seeing and tasting I perceive the material as sugar. Thus each
perception is essentially a hypothesis --- a hypothesis related to the
individual's need --- and many of these perceptions are tested and
re-tested by experience. As Burrow puts it, "Man's consistent
relationship to the outer world came about through the agreement of his
own sequence of sense-reactions with the sequence of reactions existing
outside him. . . . Only man's neural conformity to the observable
consistency of external phenomena has made possible the intelligent
consistency of his own behavior in respect to the outer world." (37, p.
101) Thus the world comes to be composed of a series of tested
hypotheses which provide much security. It acquires a certain
predictability upon which we depend. Yet mingled with these perceptions,
which have been confirmed by a variety of experiences, are perceptions
which remain completely unchecked. These untested perceptions are also a
part of our personal reality, and may have as much authority as those
which have been checked.

That the perceptual field is the reality to which the individual reacts
is often strikingly illustrated in therapy, where it is frequently
evident that when the perception changes, the reaction of the individual
changes. As long as a parent is perceived as a domineering individual,
that is the reality to which the individual reacts. When he is perceived
as a rather pathetic individual trying to maintain his status, then the
reaction to this new "reality" is quite different.

III\) *The organism reacts as an organized whole to this phenomenal
field.*

::: top
Although there are still some who are primarily concerned with the
segmental or atomistic type of organic reaction, there is increasing
acceptance of the fact that one of the most basic characteristics of
organic life is its tendency toward total, organized,
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_487}goal-directed responses. This is true of those
responses which are primarily physiological, as well as of those which
we think of as psychological. Take such a matter as the maintenance of
the water balance in the body. It has been shown that this is ordinarily
maintained by the activity of the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland,
which, when the body loses water, secretes more of an antidiuretic
hormone, thus reducing the secretion of water by the kidney. This
reaction would appear to be definitely of the atomistic type, reducible
in the last analysis to purely chemical factors. But where the posterior
lobe is experimentally removed, the animal drinks very large amounts of
water, and thus maintains a satisfactory water balance in spite of the
loss of the regulating mechanism (91, pp. 601--602). It is thus the
total, organized, goal-directed response which appears to be basic, as
evidenced by the fact that, when one avenue is blocked off, the animal
organizes to utilize another avenue to the same goal. The same would be
true of various compensatory physiological phenomena.
:::

In the psychological realm, any simple S--R type of explanation of
behavior seems almost impossible. A young woman talks for an hour about
her antagonism to her mother. She finds, following this, that a
persistent asthmatic condition, which she has not even mentioned to the
counselor, is greatly improved. On the other hand, a man who feels that
his security in his work is being seriously threatened, develops ulcers.
It is extremely cumbersome to try to account for such phenomena on the
basis of an atomistic chain of events. The outstanding fact which must
be taken into theoretical account is that the organism is at all times a
total organized system, in which alteration of any part may produce
changes in any other part. Our study of such part phenomena must start
from this central fact of consistent, goal-directed organization.

IV\) *The organism has one basic tendency and striving --- to actualize,
maintain, and enhance the experiencing organism.*

::: top
Rather than many needs and motives, it seems entirely possible
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_488}that all organic and psychological needs may be
described as partial aspects of this one fundamental need. It is
difficult to find satisfactory words for this proposition. The
particular phrasing is from Snygg and Combs. The words used are an
attempt to describe the observed directional force in organic life --- a
force which has been regarded as basic by many scientists, but which has
not been too well described in testable or operational terms.
:::

We are talking here about the tendency of the organism to maintain
itself --- to assimilate food, to behave defensively in the face of
threat, to achieve the goal of self-maintenance even when the usual
pathway to that goal is blocked. We are speaking of the tendency of the
organism to move in the direction of maturation, as maturation is
defined for each species. This involves self-actualization, though it
should be understood that this too is a directional term. The organism
does not develop to the full its capacity for suffering pain, nor does
the human individual develop or actualize his capacity for terror or, on
the physiological level, his capacity for vomiting. The organism
actualizes itself in the direction of greater differentiation of organs
and of function. It moves in the direction of limited expansion through
growth, expansion through extending itself by means of its tools, and
expansion through reproduction. It moves in the direction of greater
independence or self-responsibility. Its movement, as Angyal has pointed
out (9, pp. 32--50), is in the direction of an increasing
self-government, self-regulation, and autonomy, and away from
heteronymous control, or control by external forces. This is true
whether we are speaking of entirely unconscious organic processes, such
as the regulation of body heat, or such uniquely human and intellectual
functions as the choice of life goals. Finally, the self-actualization
of the organism appears to be in the direction of socialization, broadly
defined.

The directional trend we are endeavoring to describe is evident in the
life of the individual organism from conception to maturity, at whatever
level of organic complexity. It is also evident in the process of
evolution, the direction being defined by a comparison of life low on
the evolutionary scale with types of organisms which have developed
later, or are regarded as farther along in []{#022_c11.html_lpn_489}the
process of evolution. Thus the directional tendency which we are
discussing will be defined most adequately by comparing the undeveloped
with the developed organism, the simple organism with the complex, the
organism early or low on the evolutionary scale with the organism which
has developed later and is regarded as higher. Whatever generalized
differences are found constitute the direction of the basic tendency we
are postulating.

Ideas similar to this proposition are being increasingly advanced and
accepted by psychologists and others. The term "self-actualization" is
used by Goldstein (69) to describe this one basic striving. Mowrer and
Kluckhohn stress the "basic propensity of living things to function in
such a way as to preserve and increase integration" (137, p. 74). This
is a slightly different concept, but directional in nature. Sullivan
points out that "the basic direction of the organism is forward" (205,
p. 48). Horney gives a vivid description of this force as it is
experienced in therapy: "The ultimate driving force is the person's
unrelenting will to come to grips with himself, a wish to grow and to
leave nothing untouched that prevents growth" (90, p. 175). Angyal sums
up his thinking on this point in the following statement. "Life is an
autonomous dynamic event which takes place between the organism and the
environment. Life processes do not merely tend to preserve life but
transcend the momentary status quo of the organism, expanding itself
continually and imposing its autonomous determination upon an ever
increasing realm of events" (9, p. 48).

It is our experience in therapy which has brought us to the point of
giving this proposition a central place. The therapist becomes very much
aware that the forward-moving tendency of the human organism is the
basis upon which he relies most deeply and fundamentally. It is evident
not only in the general tendency of clients to move in the direction of
growth when the factors in the situation are clear, but is most
dramatically shown in very serious cases where the individual is on the
brink of psychosis or suicide. Here the therapist is very keenly aware
that the only force upon which he can basically rely is the organic
tendency []{#022_c11.html_lpn_490}toward ongoing growth and enhancement.
Something of our experience has been summarized by the writer in an
earlier paper.

::::: block
:::: topbot
::: sl
As I study, as deeply as I am able, the recorded clinical cases which
have been so revealing of personal dynamics, I find what seems to me to
be a very significant thing. I find that the urge for a greater degree
of independence, the desire for a self-determined integration, the
tendency to strive, even through much pain, toward a socialized
maturity, is as strong as --- no, is stronger than --- the desire for
comfortable dependence, the need to rely upon external authority for
assurance. . . . Clinically I find it to be true that though an
individual may remain dependent because he has always been so, or may
drift into dependence without realizing what he is doing, or may
temporarily wish to be dependent because his situation appears
desperate, I have yet to find the individual who, when he examines his
situation deeply, and feels that he perceives it clearly, deliberately
chooses dependence, deliberately chooses to have the integrated
direction of himself undertaken by another. When all the elements are
clearly perceived, the balance seems invariably in the direction of the
painful but ultimately rewarding path of self-actualization or growth.
(168, p. 218)
:::
::::
:::::

It would be grossly inaccurate to suppose that the organism operates
smoothly in the direction of self-enhancement and growth. It would be
perhaps more correct to say that the organism moves through struggle and
pain toward enhancement and growth. The whole process may be symbolized
and illustrated by the child's learning to walk. The first steps involve
struggle, and usually pain. Often it is true that the immediate reward
involved in taking a few steps is in no way commensurate with the pain
of falls and bumps. The child may, because of the pain, revert to
crawling for a time. Yet, in the overwhelming majority of individuals,
the forward direction of growth is more powerful than the satisfactions
of remaining infantile. The child will actualize himself, in spite of
the painful experiences in so doing. In the same way, he will become
independent, responsible, self-governing, socialized, in spite of the
pain which is often involved in these steps. Even where he does not,
because of a variety of circumstances, exhibit growth of these more
complex sons, one []{#022_c11.html_lpn_491}may still rely on the fact
that the tendency is present. Given the opportunity for clear-cut choice
between forward-moving and regressive behavior, the tendency will
operate.

One puzzle that is not adequately solved by this proposition is the
question, "Why must the factors of choice be clearly *perceived* in
order for this forward-moving tendency to operate?" It would seem that
unless experience is adequately symbolized, unless suitably accurate
differentiations are made, the individual mistakes regressive behavior
for self-enhancing behavior. This aspect will be more fully discussed in
Proposition XI and following.

V\) *Behavior is basically the goal-directed attempt of the organism to
satisfy its needs as experienced, in the field as perceived*.

::: top
This proposition becomes somewhat modified in the human organism, as we
shall see, by the development of the self. Let us first consider it as
it applies to organisms in general, and in the human infant before the
self comes to play an important role in the regulation of behavior.
:::

All needs have a basic relatedness, if we accept Proposition IV, in that
they all spring from and have reference to, the basic tendency to
maintain and enhance the organism. These needs occur as physiological
tensions which, when experienced, form the basis of behavior which
appears functionally (though not consciously) designed to reduce the
tension and to maintain and enhance the organism. The need itself is not
necessarily consciously experienced; there are seemingly different
levels of description. In hunger, for example, stomach contractions
occur which ordinarily are not directly experienced. The excitation
which is thus set up may be experienced vaguely and below the conscious
level, nevertheless bringing about behavior which is in the direction of
food, or it may be symbolized and perceived on the conscious level as
hunger.

The question arises, Do all needs have their origin in physiological
tensions? Are the needs for affection and achievement, for example,
which seems to be significantly related to the maintenance and
enhancement of the organism, biologically based?
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_492}We should gain by well-planned research on this
point. The work by Ribble (162) and others would seem to indicate that
the need for affection is a physiological need, and that the infant who
does not have adequate close physical contact with a mother-person is
left in a state of unsatisfied physiological tension. If this is true of
the infant, then it is easy to see how this need, like all the others,
becomes elaborated and channelized through cultural conditioning into
needs which are only remotely based upon the underlying physiological
tension. Much more work needs to be done in this area before we have any
deep understanding of this problem. The research to date is poorly
planned and poorly controlled.

It is noted that behavior is postulated as a reaction to the field as
perceived. This point, like some of the other propositions, is proved
every day in our experience, but is often overlooked. The reaction is
not to reality, but to the perception of reality. A horse, sensing
danger, will try to reach the safety and security which he perceives in
his stall, even though the barn may be in flames. A man in the desert
will struggle just as hard to reach the "lake" which he perceives in a
mirage, as to reach a real water hole. At a more complex level, a man
may strive for money because he perceives money as the source of
emotional security, even though in fact it may not satisfy his need.
Often, of course, the perception has a high degree of correspondence
with reality, but it is important to recognize that it is the
perception, not the reality, which is crucial in determining behavior.

It should also be mentioned that in this concept of motivation all the
effective elements exist in the present. Behavior is not "caused" by
something which occurred in the past. Present tensions and present needs
arc the only ones which the organism endeavors to reduce or satisfy.
While it is true that past experience has certainly served to modify the
meaning which will be perceived in present experiences, yet there is no
behavior except to meet a present need.

VI\) *Emotion accompanies and in general facilitates such goal-directed
behavior, the kind of emotion being related to the socking versus the
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_493}consummatory aspects of the behavior, and the
intensity of the emotion being related to the perceived significance of
the behavior for the maintenance and enhancement of the organism.*

::: top
In this goal-seeking effort which is termed behavior, what is the place
of emotion, feeling, emotionalized attitudes? Any brief answer is likely
to contain serious inadequacies, yet some framework for our thinking may
be supplied by Proposition VI. We may think of emotions as falling
primarily into two groups --- the unpleasant and/or excited feelings,
and the calm and/or satisfied emotions. The first group tends to
accompany the seeking effort of the organism, and the second to
accompany satisfaction of the need, the consummatory experience. The
first group appears to have the effect of integrating and concentrating
behavior upon the goal, rather than having the disintegrating effect
which some psychologists have pictured. Thus, in anything but excessive
degree, fear accelerates the organization of the individual in the
direction of escape from danger, and competitive jealousy concentrates
the efforts of the individual to surpass. Leeper (110) has formulated
this point of view more fully.
:::

The intensity of the emotional reaction appears to vary according to the
perceived relationship of the behavior to the maintenance and
enhancement of the organism. Thus if my leap to the curb to escape the
oncoming automobile is perceived as making the difference between life
and death, it will be accompanied by strong emotion. The reading of
another chapter tonight in a new psychology book, a behavior which is
seen as having a slight relationship to my development, will be
accompanied by a very mild emotion indeed.

Both these propositions have been worded and discussed as though
behavior always had to do with the maintenance and enhancement of the
*organism*. As we shall see in later propositions, the development of
the self may involve some modification of this, since behavior is then
often best described as meeting the needs of the self, sometimes as
against the needs of the organism, and emotional intensity becomes
gauged more by the degree of []{#022_c11.html_lpn_494}involvement of the
self than by the degree of involvement of the organism. As applied,
however, to the infra-human organism, or to the human infant,
Propositions V and VI appear to hold.

VII\) *The best vantage point for understanding behavior is from the
internal frame of reference of the individual himself.*

::: top
It was mentioned in Proposition I that the only person who could fully
know his field of experience was the individual himself. Behavior is a
reaction to the field as perceived. It would therefore appear that
behavior might be best understood by gaining, in so far as possible, the
internal frame of reference of the person himself, and seeing the world
of experience as nearly as possible through his eyes.
:::

What we have been doing for the most part in psychology may be likened
to the early studies of primitive societies. The observer reported that
these primitive peoples ate various ridiculous foods, held fantastic and
meaningless ceremonies, and behaved in ways that were a mixture of
virtue and depravity. The thing that he did not see was that he was
observing from his own frame of reference and placing his own values
upon their modes of behavior. We do the same thing in psychology when we
speak of "trial-and-error behavior," "delusions," "abnormal behavior,"
and so on. We fail to see that we are evaluating the person from our
own, or from some fairly general, frame of reference, but that the only
way to understand his behavior meaningfully is to understand it as he
perceives it himself, just as the only way to understand another culture
is to assume the frame of reference of that culture. When that is done,
the various meaningless and strange behaviors are seen to be part of a
meaningful and goal-directed activity. There is then no such thing as
random trial-and-error behavior, no such thing as a delusion, except as
the individual may apply these terms to his past behavior. In the
present, the behavior is always purposeful, and in response to reality
as it is perceived.

If we could empathically experience all the sensory and visceral
sensations of the individual, could experience his whole
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_495}phenomenal field including both the conscious
elements and also those experiences not brought to the conscious level,
we should have the perfect basis for understanding the meaningfulness of
his behavior and for predicting his future behavior. This is an
unattainable ideal. Because it is unattainable, one line of development
in psychology has been to understand and evaluate and predict the
person's behavior from an external frame of reference. This development
has not been too satisfactory, largely because such a high degree of
inference is involved. The interpretation of the meaning of a given bit
of behavior comes to depend upon whether the inferences are being made,
say, by a student of Clark Hull or a follower of Freud. For this and
other reasons, the possibility of utilizing the phenomenal field of the
individual as a significant basis for the science of psychology appears
promising. There can be agreement on the specific way in which the world
is experienced by the individual, and his behavior follows definitely
and clearly upon his perception. Consequently, with agreement possible
on the datum for a science, science can conceivably grow.

To point out the advantages of viewing behavior from the internal frame
of reference is not to say that this is the royal road to learning.
There are many drawbacks. For one thing, we are largely limited to
gaining an acquaintance with the phenomenal field as it is experienced
in consciousness. This means that the greater the area of experience not
in consciousness, the more incomplete will be the picture. The more we
try to infer what is present in the phenomenal field but not conscious
(as in interpreting projective techniques), the more complex grow the
inferences until the interpretation of the client's projections may
become merely an illustration of the clinician's projections.

Furthermore our knowledge of the person's frame of reference depends
primarily upon communication of one sort or another from the individual.
Communication is at all times faulty and imperfect. Hence only in
clouded fashion can we see the world of experience as it appears to this
individual.

We may state the whole situation logically thus:

:::: block
::: top
It is possible to achieve, to some extent, the other person's
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_496}frame of reference, because many of the
perceptual objects --- self, parents, teachers, employers, and so on ---
have counterparts in our own perceptual field, and practically all the
attitudes toward these perceptual objects --- such as fear, anger,
annoyance, love, jealousy, satisfaction --- have been present in our own
world of experience.
:::
::::

:::: block
::: top
Hence we can infer, quite directly, from the communication of the
individual, or less accurately from observation of his behavior, a
portion of his perceptual and experiential field.
:::
::::

:::: block
::: top
The more all his experiences are available to his consciousness, the
more is it possible for him to convey a total picture of his phenomenal
field.
:::
::::

:::: block
::: topbot
The more his communication is a free expression, unmodified by a need or
desire to be defensive, the more adequate will be the communication of
the field. (Thus a diary is apt to be a better communication of the
perceptual field than a court utterance where the individual is on
trial.)
:::
::::

It is probably for the reasons just stated that client-centered
counseling has proved to be such a valuable method for viewing behavior
from the person's frame of reference. The situation minimizes any need
of defensiveness. The counselor's behavior minimizes any prejudicial
influence on the attitudes expressed. The person is usually motivated to
some degree to communicate his own special world, and the procedures
used encourage him to do so. The increasing communication gradually
brings more of experience into the realm of awareness, and thus a more
accurate and total picture of this individual's world of experience is
conveyed. On this basis a much more understandable picture of behavior
emerges.

It should also be added that the dynamic results --- for the client and
for the learning of the therapist --- which are achieved in
client-centered therapy when even a portion of the perceptual field is
communicated, have led us to feel that here is a way of viewing
experience which is much closer to the basic laws of
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_497}personality process and behavior. Not only does
there result a more vivid understanding of the meaning of behavior, but
the opportunities for new learning are maximized when we approach the
individual without a preconceived set of categories which we expect him
to fit.

VIII\) *A portion of the total perceptual field gradually becomes
differentiated as the self.*

::: top
Mead, Cooley, Angyal, Lecky, and others have helped to advance our
knowledge of the development and functioning of the self. We shall have
much to say about various aspects of the operation of the self. For the
present the point is made that gradually, as the infant develops, a
portion of the total private world becomes recognized as "me," "I,"
"myself." There are many puzzling and unanswered questions in regard to
the dawning concept of the self. We shall try to point out some of
these.
:::

Is social interaction necessary in order for a self to develop? Would
the hypothetical person reared alone upon a desert island have a self?
Is the self primarily a product of the process of symbolization? Is it
the fact that experiences may be not only directly experienced, but
symbolized and manipulated in thought, that makes the self possible? Is
the self simply the symbolized portion of experience? These are some of
the questions which shrewd research may be able to answer.

Another point which needs to be made in regard to the development of a
conscious self is the fact that it is not necessarily coexistent with
the physical organism. Angyal points out that there is no possibility of
a sharp line between organism and environment, and that there is
likewise no sharp limit between the experience of the self and of the
outside world. Whether or not an object or an experience is regarded as
a part of the self depends to a considerable extent upon whether or not
it is perceived as within the control of the self. Those elements which
we control are regarded as a part of self, but when even such an object
as a part of our body is out of control, it is experienced as being less
a part of the self. The way in which, when a foot
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_498}"goes to sleep" from lack of circulation, it
becomes an object to us rather than a part of self, may be a sufficient
illustration. Perhaps it is this "gradient of autonomy" which first
gives the infant the awareness of self, as he is for the first time
aware of a feeling of control over some aspect of his world of
experience.

It should be clear from the foregoing that though some authors use the
term "self" as synonomous with "organism" it is here being used in a
more restricted sense, namely, the awareness of being, of functioning.

IX\) *As a result of interaction with the environment, and particularly
as a result of evaluational interaction with others, the structure of
self is formed --- an organized, fluid, but consistent conceptual
pattern of perceptions of characteristics and relationships of the "I"
or the "me," together with values attached to these concepts.*

X\) *The values attached to experiences, and the values which are a part
of the self structure, in some instances are values experienced directly
by the organism, and in some instances are values introjected or taken
over from others, but perceived in distorted fashion,* as if *they had
been experienced directly.*

::: top
It will probably be best to discuss these two important propositions
together. In the past few years they have been revised and reworded so
many different times by the author that it is quite certain the present
statement is inadequate also. Yet within the range of experience which
these propositions attempt to symbolize, there seem clearly to be some
highly important learnings for the personality theorist.
:::

As the infant interacts with his enviroment he gradually builds up
concepts about himself, about the environment, and about himself in
relation to the environment. While these concepts are nonverbal, and may
not be present in consciousness, this is no barrier to their functioning
as guiding principles, as Leeper (111) has shown. Intimately associated
with all these experiences is a direct organismic valuing which appears
highly important for understanding later development. The very young
infant has little uncertainty in valuing. At the same time that there is
the []{#022_c11.html_lpn_499}dawning awareness of "I experience," there
is also the awareness that "I like," "I dislike." "I am cold, and I
dislike it," "I am cuddled and I like it," "I can reach my toes and find
this enjoyable" --- these statements appear to be adequate descriptions
of the infant's experience, though he does not have the verbal symbols
which we have used. He appears to value those experiences which he
perceives as enhancing himself, and to place a negative value on those
experiences which seem to threaten himself or which do not maintain or
enhance himself.

There soon enters into this picture the evaluation of self by others.
"You're a good child," "You're a naughty boy" --- these and similar
evaluations of himself and of his behavior by his parents and others
come to form a large and significant part of the infant's perceptual
field. Social experiences, social evaluations by others, become a part
of his phenomenal field along with experiences not involving others ---
for example, that radiators are hot, stairs are dangerous, and candy
tastes good.

It is at this stage of development, it would seem, that there takes
place a type of distorted symbolization of experience, and a denial of
experience to awareness, which has much significance for the later
development of psychological maladjustment. Let us try to put this in
general and schematic terms.

One of the first and most important aspects of the self-experience of
the ordinary child is that he is loved by his parents. He perceives
himself as lovable, worthy of love, and his relationship to his parents
as one of affection. He experiences all this with satisfaction. This is
a significant and core element of the structure of self as it begins to
form.

At this same time he is experiencing positive sensory values, is
experiencing enhancement, in other ways. It is enjoyable to have a bowel
movement at any time or place that the physiological tension is
experienced. It is satisfying and enhancing to hit, or to try to do away
with, baby brother. As these things are initially experienced, they are
not necessarily inconsistent with the concept of self as a lovable
person.

But then to our schematic child comes a serious threat to self. He
experiences words and actions of his parents in regard to
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_500}these satisfying behaviors, and the words and
actions add up to the feeling "You are bad, the behavior is bad, and you
are not loved or lovable when you behave in this way." This constitutes
a deep threat to the nascent structure of self. The child's dilemma
might be schematized in these terms: "If I admit to awareness the
satisfactions of these behaviors and the values I apprehend in these
experiences, then this is inconsistent with my self as being loved or
lovable."

Certain results then follow in the development of the ordinary child.
One result is a denial in awareness of the satisfactions that were
experienced. The other is to distort the symbolization of the experience
of the parents. The accurate symbolization would be: "I perceive my
parents as experiencing this behavior as unsatisfying to them." The
distorted symbolization, distorted to preserve the threatened concept of
self, is: "*I* perceive this behavior as unsatisfying,"

It is in this way, it would seem, that parental attitudes are not only
introjected, but what is much more important, are experienced not as the
attitude of another, but in distorted fashion, *as if* based on the
evidence of one's own sensory and visceral equipment. Thus, through
distorted symbolization, expression of anger comes to be "experienced"
as bad, even though the more accurate symbolization would be that the
expression of anger is often experienced as satisfying or enhancing. The
more accurate representation is not, however, permitted to enter
awareness, or if it does enter, the child is anxious because of the
inconsistency he is entertaining within himself. Consequently, "I like
baby brother" remains as the pattern belonging in the concept of the
self, because it is the concept of the relationship which is introjected
from others through the distortion of symbolization, even when the
primary experience contains many gradations of value in the
relationship, from "I like baby brother" to "I hate him!" In this way
the values which the infant attaches to experience become divorced from
his own organismic functioning, and experience is valued in terms of the
attitudes held by his parents, or by others who are in intimate
association with him. These values come to be accepted as being just as
"real" as the []{#022_c11.html_lpn_501}values which are connected with
direct experience. The "self" which is formed on this basis of
distorting the sensory and visceral evidence to fit the already present
structure acquires an organization and integration which the individual
endeavors to preserve. Behavior is regarded as enhancing this self when
no such value is apprehended through sensory or visceral reactions;
behavior is regarded as opposed to the maintenance or enhancement of the
self when there is no negative sensory or visceral reaction. It is here,
it seems, that the individual begins on a pathway which he later
describes as "I don't really know myself." The primary sensory and
visceral reactions are ignored, or not permitted into consciousness,
except in distorted form. The values which might be built upon them
cannot be admitted to awareness. A concept of self based in part upon a
distorted symbolization has taken their place.

Out of these dual sources --- the direct experiencing by the individual,
and the distorted symbolization of sensory reactions resulting in the
introjection of values and concepts *as if* experienced --- there grows
the structure of the self. Drawing upon the evidence and upon clinical
experience, it would appear that the most useful definition of the
self-concept, or self-structure, would be along these lines. The
self-structure is an organized configuration of perceptions of the self
which are admissible to awareness. It is composed of such elements as
the perceptions of one's characteristics and abilities; the percepts and
concepts of the self in relation to others and to the environment; the
value qualities which are perceived as associated with experiences and
objects; and the goals and ideals which are perceived as having positive
or negative valence. It is, then, the organized picture, existing in
awareness either as figure or ground, of the self and the
self-in-relationship, together with the positive or negative values
which are associated with those qualities and relationships, as they are
perceived as existing in the past, present, or future.

It may be worth while to consider for a moment the way in which the
self-structure might be formed without the element of distortion and
denial of experience. Such a discussion is to some extent a digression,
and anticipates a number of the []{#022_c11.html_lpn_502}propositions
which follow, but it may also serve as an introduction to some of them.

If we ask ourselves how an infant might develop a self-structure which
did not have within it the seeds of later psychological difficulty, our
experience in client-centered therapy offers some fruitful ideas. Let us
consider, very briefly, and again in schematic form, the type of early
experience which would lay a basis for a psychologically healthy
development of the self. The beginning is the same as we have just
described. The child experiences, and values his experiences positively
or negatively. He begins to perceive himself as a psychological object,
and one of the most basic elements is the perception of himself as a
person who is loved. As in our first description he experiences
satisfaction in such behaviors as hitting baby brother. But at this
point there is a crucial difference. The parent who is able (1)
genuinely to accept these feelings of satisfaction experienced by the
child, and (2) fully to accept the child who experiences them, and (3)
at the same time to accept his or her own feeling that such behavior is
unacceptable in the family, creates a situation for the child very
different from the usual one. The child in this relationship experiences
no threat to his concept of himself as a loved person. He can experience
fully and accept within himself and as a part of himself his aggressive
feelings toward his baby brother. He can experience fully the perception
that his hitting behavior is not liked by the person who loves him. What
he then does depends upon his conscious balancing of the elements in the
situation --- the strength of his feeling of aggression, the
satisfactions he would gain from hitting the baby, the satisfactions he
would gain from pleasing his parent. The behavior which would result
would probably be at times social and at other times aggressive. It
would not necessarily conform entirely to the parent's wishes, nor would
it always be socially "good." It would be the adaptive behavior of a
separate, unique, self-governing individual. Its great advantage, as far
as psychological health is concerned, is that it would be realistic,
based upon an accurate symbolization of all the evidence given by the
child's sensory and visceral equipment in this situation. It may seem to
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_503}differ only very slightly from the description
given earlier, but the difference is an extremely important one. Because
the budding structure of the self is not threatened by loss of love,
because feelings are accepted by his parent, the child in this instance
does not need to deny to awareness the satisfactions which he is
experiencing, nor does he need to distort his experience of the parental
reaction and regard it as his own. He retains instead a secure self
which can serve to guide his behavior by freely admitting to awareness,
in accurately symbolized form, all the relevant evidence of his
experience in terms of its organismic satisfactions, both immediate and
longer range. He is thus developing a soundly structured self in which
there is neither denial nor distortion of experience.

Having thus endeavored to give a preview of healthy development as seen
from the general point of view of this theory, let us return to a more
generalized view of personality, considering the organization of
experience, the relation of behavior to the self, and other pertinent
topics.

XI\) *As experiences occur in the life of the individual, they are
either* (*a*) *symbolized, perceived, and organized into some
relationship to the self,* (*b*) *ignored because there is no perceived
relationship to the self-structure,* (*c*) *denied symbolization or
given a distorted symbolization because the experience is inconsistent
with the structure of the self.*

::: top
Let us look first at those experiences which are ignored because they
are irrelevant to the self-structure. There are various noises going on
at this moment, in the distance. Until they serve my intellectual need
of this moment for an example, I am relatively oblivious to them. They
exist in the ground of my phenomenal field, but they do not reinforce or
contradict my concept of self, they meet no need related to the self,
they are ignored. Often there might be doubt as to whether they existed
in the phenomenal field at all, were it not for the ability to focus on
those experiences when they might serve a need. I walk down a street a
dozen times, ignoring most of the sensations which I experience. Yet
today I have need of a hardware store. I recall that I have seen
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_504}a hardware store on the street, although I have
never "noticed" it. Now that this experience meets a need of the self it
can be drawn from ground into figure. It is undoubtedly true that the
great majority of our sensory experiences are thus ignored, never raised
to the level of conscious symbolization, and exist only as organic
sensations, without ever having been related in any way to the organized
concept of the self or to the concept of the self in relation to the
environment.
:::

A more important group of experiences are those which are accepted into
consciousness and organized into some relationship with the
self-structure either because they meet a need of the self or because
they are consistent with the self-structure and thus reinforce it. The
client who has a concept of self that "I just don't feel that I can take
my place in society like everybody else" perceives that she hasn't
learned from her schoolwork, that she fails when she attempts things,
that she does not react normally, and so on. She selects from her many
sensory experiences those which fit in with her concept of herself.
(Later, when her concept of self changes, she perceives that she has
successfully attempted new projects, that she is sufficiently normal to
get along.)

Likewise a great many experiences are symbolized because they are
related to the needs of the self. I notice a book because it is on a
topic I wish to learn about; I perceive neckties when I am preparing to
buy one for myself. The infantryman perceives spots of freshly turned
dirt in the road when these might indicate the existence of a land mine.

It is the third group of sensory and visceral experiences, those which
seem to be prevented from entering awareness, which demand our closest
attention, for it is in this realm that there lie many phenomena of
human behavior which psychologists have endeavored to explain. In some
instances the denial of the perception is something rather conscious.
The client cited above, whose self-concept was so negative, reports:
"When people tell me they think I'm intelligent, I just don't believe
it. I just --- I guess I don't want to believe it. I don't know why I
don't want to believe it --- I just don't want to. It should give me
confidence, []{#022_c11.html_lpn_505}but it doesn't. I think they just
really don't know." Here she can perceive and accept readily anyone's
depreciation of her, because this fits in with her self-concept.
Contradictory evaluations however are denied, by selecting and stressing
other perceptions, such as that others cannot really know her. This type
of more or less conscious denial of perception is certainly a frequent
occurrence with everyone.

There is, however, an even more significant type of denial which is the
phenomenon the Freudians have tried to explain by the concept of
repression. In this instance, it would appear that there is the organic
experience, but there is no symbolization of this experience, or only a
distorted symbolization, because an adequate conscious representation of
it would be entirely inconsistent with the concept of self. Thus, a
woman whose concept of self has been deeply influenced by a very
strictly moralistic and religious upbringing, experiences strong organic
cravings for sexual satisfaction. To symbolize these, to permit them to
appear in consciousness, would provide a traumatic contradiction to her
concept of self. The organic experience is something which occurs and is
an organic fact. But the symbolization of these desires, so that they
become part of conscious awareness, is something which the conscious
self can and does prevent. The adolescent who has been brought up in an
oversolicitous home, and whose concept of self is that of one who is
grateful to his parents, may feel intense anger at the subtle control
which is being exerted over him. Organically he experiences the
physiological changes which accompany anger, but his conscious self can
prevent these experiences from being symbolized and hence consciously
perceived. Or he can symbolize them in some distorted fashion which is
consistent with his structure of self, such as perceiving these organic
sensations as "a bad headache."

Thus the fluid but consistent organization which is the structure or
concept of self, does not permit the intrusion of a perception at
variance with it, except under certain conditions which we shall
consider later. For the most part, it reacts as does a piece of
protoplasm when a foreign body is intruded --- it endeavors to prevent
the entrance.

[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_506}It should be noted that perceptions are
excluded because they are contradictory, not because they are
derogatory. It seems nearly as difficult to accept a perception which
would alter the self-concept in an expanding or socially acceptable
direction as to accept an experience which would alter it in a
constricting or socially disapproved direction. The self-distrusting
client cited above has as much difficulty accepting her intelligence as
a person with a self-concept of superiority would have in accepting
experiences indicating mediocrity.

Many perplexing issues are connected with the question, How is the
denial effected? As we studied our clinical material and recorded cases,
some of us --- including the writer --- began to develop the theory that
in some way an experience could be recognized as threatening, and
prevented from entering awareness, without the person ever having been
conscious of it, even momentarily. To others of the group this seemed
like a most unreasonable explanation because it involved a process of
"knowing without knowing," of "perceiving without perceiving."

At this point a number of clarifying studies began to come from the
laboratory. Growing out of the work of Bruner and Postman on the
personal factors influencing perception came certain findings bearing
directly upon the problem we have just defined. It began to appear that
even in the tachistoscopic presentation of a word the subject "knows" or
"pre-perceives" or responds to the positive or negative value of the
word before the stimulus is recognized in consciousness. This aspect of
these perceptual studies may be reviewed in the references to Postman,
Bruner, and McGinnies (151), McGinnies (122), and McCleary and Lazarus
(121). With an increasing weight of evidence, based upon increasingly
crucial studies, it seems that the following conclusion is justified.
The individual appears to be able to discriminate between threatening
and nonthreatening stimuli, and to react accordingly, even though unable
consciously to recognize the stimulus to which he is reacting. McCleary
and Lazarus, whose study is much the most carefully controlled of those
made to date, coin the term "subception" to describe this process. The
individual "subceives" a word as threatening, as indicated
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_507}by his galvanic skin response, even when the
exposure time is too limited for him to *per*ceive it. Even though he
perceives the word wrongly in consciousness, his autonomic reaction
tends to be a response to a threatening situation, as revealed by the
GSR. The authors conclude that "Even when a subject is unable to report
a visual discrimination \[i.e., he reports incorrectly when forced to
make a choice\] he is still able to make a stimulus discrimination at
some level below that required for conscious recognition" (121, p. 178).

This type of finding appears to support our clinical and theoretical
hypothesis that the individual may deny experiences to awareness without
ever having been conscious of them. There is at least a process of
"subception," a discriminating evaluative physiological organismic
response to experience, which may precede the conscious perception of
such experience. This supplies a possible basic description of the way
in which accurate symbolization and awareness of experiences threatening
to the self may be prevented.

Here too we may have a basis for describing the anxiety which
accompanies so many psychological maladjustments. Anxiety may be the
tension exhibited by the organized concept of the self when these
"subceptions" indicate that the symbolization of certain experiences
would be destructive of the organization. If this experimental work is
confirmed by further research, it will supply a needed link in the
description of the way in which repression, or denial of experience to
awareness, occurs. Clinically it would appear that some such process as
indicated by the term "subception" is necessary to account for the
observed phenomena.

XII\) *Most of the ways of behaving which are adopted by the organism
are those which are consistent with the concept of self.*

::: top
Although there are some significant exceptions to this statement
(exceptions which will be discussed in the following proposition), it is
noteworthy that in most instances the form of the seeking effort is
dictated by the concept of self. As the organism strives
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_508}to meet its needs in the world as it is
experienced, the form which the striving takes must be a form consistent
with the concept of self. The man who has certain values attached to
honesty cannot strive for a sense of achievement through means which
seem to him dishonest. The person who regards himself as having no
aggressive feelings cannot satisfy a need for aggression in any direct
fashion. The only channels by which needs may be satisfied are those
which are consistent with the organized concept of self.
:::

In most instances this channelization does not involve any distortion of
the need which is being satisfied. Of the various ways of satisfying the
need for food or for affection, the individual selects only those which
are consistent with the concept which he has of himself. There are
times, however, when the denial of experience, spoken of above, plays a
part in this process. For example, a pilot who conceives of himself as a
brave and relatively fearless individual is assigned to a mission which
involves great risk. Physiologically he experiences fear and a need to
escape from this danger. These reactions cannot be symbolized into
consciousness, since they would be too contradictory to his concept of
self. The organic need, however, persists. He can perceive that "the
engine is not running quite properly," or that "I am ill and have an
upset digestive system," and on these grounds excuse himself from the
mission. In this example, as in many others which could be cited, the
organic needs exist but cannot be admitted into consciousness. The
behavior which is adopted is such that it satisfies the organic need,
but it takes channels which are consistent with the concept of self.
Most neurotic behavior is of this type. In the typical neurosis, the
organism is satisfying a need which is not recognized in consciousness,
by behavioral means which are consistent with the concept of self and
hence can be consciously accepted.

In much behavior of a relatively neutral sort, the regulation of the
form of behavior by the self-concept, as posited in this proposition, is
not noticeable, and might seem to be nonexistent. This control becomes
evident at once, however, when the behavior would be inconsistent with
the self. Thus, such behavior []{#022_c11.html_lpn_509}as sleep, arising
out of the need to reduce the muscular tensions connected with fatigue,
is in most instances neutral behavior as far as the self-concept is
concerned. Yet the mother who sees herself as responsible for her
adolescent daughter cannot go to sleep until the click of the door latch
and footsteps in the hall indicate that her daughter is home. It would
be inconsistent with her concept of self to fall asleep. Likewise, the
man who regards himself as a conscientious and responsible individual
wakens from sleep at an early hour when his responsibilities demand that
he do so, regardless of his organic need for sleep.

XIII\) *Behavior may, in some instances, be brought about by organic
experiences and needs which have not been symbolized. Such behavior may
be inconsistent with the structure of the self, but in such instances
the behavior is not "owned" by the individual.*

::: top
In moments of great danger or other emergency stress, the individual may
behave with efficiency and ingenuity to meet the needs for safety or
whatever other needs exist, but without ever bringing such situations,
or the behavior called forth, to conscious symbolization. In such
instances the individual feels "I didn't know what I was doing," "I
really wasn't responsible for what I was doing." The conscious self
feels no degree of government over the actions which took place. The
same statement might be made in regard to snoring or restless behavior
during sleep. The self is not in control, and the behavior is not
regarded as a part of self.
:::

Another example of this sort of behavior occurs when many of the
organically experienced needs are refused admittance to consciousness
because inconsistent with the concept of self. The pressure of the
organic need may become so great that the organism initiates its own
seeking behavior and hence brings about the satisfaction of the need,
without ever relating the seeking behavior to the concept of self. Thus,
a boy whose upbringing created a self-concept of purity and freedom from
"base" sexual impulses was arrested for lifting the skirts of two little
girls and examining them. He insisted that he could not have
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_510}performed this behavior, and when presented
with witnesses, was positive that "I was not myself." The developing
sexuality of an adolescent boy, and the accompanying curiosity,
constituted a strong organic need for which there seemed no channel of
satisfaction which was consistent with the concept of self. Eventually
the organism behaved in such a way as to gain satisfaction, but this
behavior was not felt to be, nor was it, a part of the self. It was
behavior which was dissociated from the concept of self, and over which
the boy exercised no conscious control. The organized character of the
behavior grows out of the fact that the organism on a physiological
basis can initiate and carry on complex behavior to meet its needs.

In a great many cases of psychological maladjustment, one of the causes
for concern on the part of the individual is that certain types of
behavior go on without his control or the possibility of his control. "I
don't know why I do it. I don't want to do it, but yet I do," is a
common enough type of statement. Also, the notion, "I'm just not myself
when I do those things," "I didn't know what I was doing," "I have no
control over those reactions." In each case the reference is to behavior
which is organically determined on the basis of experiences denied
accurate symbolization, and hence is carried through without having been
brought into any consistent relationship with the concept of self.

XIV\) *Psychological maladjustment exists when the organism denies to
awareness significant sensory and visceral experiences, which
consequently are not symbolized and organized into the gestalt of the
self-structure. When this situation exists, there is a basic or
potential psychological tension.*

::: top
The basis for this proposition has become evident in the preceding
statements. If we think of the structure of the self as being a symbolic
elaboration of a portion of the private experiential world of the
organism, we may realize that when much of this private world is denied
symbolization, certain basic tensions result. We find, then, that there
is a very real discrepancy between the experiencing organism as it
exists, and the concept of []{#022_c11.html_lpn_511}self which exerts
such a governing influence upon behavior. This self is now very
inadequately representative of the experience of the organism. Conscious
control becomes more difficult as the organism strives to satisfy needs
which are not consciously admitted, and to react to experiences which
are denied by the conscious self. Tension then exists, and if the
individual becomes to any degree aware of this tension or discrepancy,
he feels anxious, feels that he is not united or integrated, that he is
unsure of his direction. Such statements may not be the surface account
of the maladjustment, such surface account having more often to do with
the environmental difficulties being faced, but the feeling of inner
lack of integration is usually communicated as the individual feels free
to reveal more of the field of perception which is available to his
consciousness. Thus, such statements as "I don't know what I'm afraid
of," "I don't know what I want," "I can't decide on anything," "I don't
have any real goal" are very frequent in counseling cases and indicate
the lack of any integrated purposeful direction in which the individual
is moving.
:::

To illustrate briefly the nature of maladjustment, take the familiar
picture of a mother whom the diagnostician would term rejecting. She has
as part of her concept of self a whole constellation which may be summed
up by saying, "I am a good and loving mother." This conceptualization of
herself is, as indicated in Proposition X, based in part upon accurate
symbolization of her experience and in part upon distorted symbolization
in which the values held by others are introjected as if they were her
own experiences. With this concept of self she can accept and assimilate
those organic sensations of affection which she feels toward her child.
But the organic experience of dislike, distaste, or hatred toward her
child is something which is denied to her conscious self. The experience
exists, but it is not permitted accurate symbolization. The organic need
is for aggressive acts which would fulfill these attitudes and satisfy
the tension which exists. The organism strives for the achievement of
this satisfaction, but it can do so for the most part only through those
channels which are consistent with the self-concept of a good mother.
Since the good mother could be aggressive toward her
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_512}child only if he merited punishment, she
perceives much of his behavior as being bad, deserving punishment, and
therefore the aggressive acts can be carried through, without being
contrary to the values organized in her picture of self. If under great
stress, she at some time should shout at her child, "I hate you," she
would be quick to explain that "I was not myself," that this behavior
occurred but was out of her control. "I don't know what made me say
that, because of course I don't mean it." This is a good illustration of
most maladjustment in which the organism is striving for certain
satisfactions in the field as organically experienced, whereas the
concept of self is more constricted and cannot permit in awareness many
of the actual experiences.

Clinically two somewhat different degrees of this tension are observed.
There is first of all the type just illustrated, in which the individual
has a definite and organized self-concept, based in part upon the
organic experiences (in this case, feelings of affection) of the
individual. While this concept of a good mother has been introjected
from social contacts, it has also been formed in part from some of the
sensations actually experienced by the individual, and has thus become
more genuinely her own.

In other instances, the individual feels, as he explores his
maladjustment, that he has no self, that he is a zero, that his only
self consists of endeavoring to do what others believe he should do. The
concept of self, in other words, is based almost entirely upon
valuations of experience which are taken over from others and contains a
minimum of accurate symbolization of experience, and a minimum of direct
organismic valuing of experience. Since the values held by others have
no necessary relationship to one's actual organic experiencings, the
discrepancy between the self structure and the experiential world
gradually comes to be expressed as a feeling of tension and distress.
One young woman, after slowly permitting her own experiences to come
into awareness and form the basis of her concept of self, puts it very
briefly and accurately thus: "I've always tried to be what the others
thought I should be, but now I'm wondering whether I shouldn't just see
that I am what I am."

[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_513}XV) *Psychological adjustment exists when the
concept of the self is such that all the sensory and visceral
experiences of the organism are, or may be, assimilated on a symbolic
level into a consistent relationship with the concept of self.*

::: top
This proposition may be put in several different ways. We may say that
freedom from inner tension, or psychological adjustment, exists when the
concept of self is at least roughly congruent with all the experiences
of the organism. To use some of the illustrations previously given, the
woman who perceives and accepts her own sexual cravings, and also
perceives and accepts as a part of her reality the cultural values
placed upon suppression of these cravings, will be accepting and
assimilating all the sensory evidence experienced by the organism in
this connection. This is possible only if her concept of self in this
area is broad enough to include both her sex desires and her desire to
live in some harmony with her culture. The mother who "rejects" her
child can lose the inner tensions connected with her relationship to her
child if she has a concept of self which permits her to accept her
feelings of dislike for the child, as well as her feelings of affection
and liking.
:::

The feeling of reduction of inner tension is something that clients
experience as they make progress in "being the real me" or in developing
a "new feeling about myself." One client, after gradually giving up the
notion that much of her behavior was "not acting like myself" and
accepting the fact that her self could include these experiences and
behaviors which she had hitherto excluded, expressed her feeling in
these words: "I can remember an organic feeling of relaxation. I did not
have to keep up the struggle to cover up and hide this shameful person."
The cost of maintaining an alertness of defense to prevent various
experiences from being symbolized in consciousness is obviously great.

The best definition of what constitutes integration appears to be this
statement that all the sensory and visceral experiences are admissable
to awareness through accurate symbolization, and organizable into one
system which is internally consistent and []{#022_c11.html_lpn_514}which
is, or is related to, the structure of self. Once this type of
integration occurs, then the tendency toward growth can become fully
operative, and the individual moves in the directions normal to all
organic life. When the self-structure is able to accept and take account
in consciousness of the organic experiences, when the organizational
system is expansive enough to contain them, then clear integration and a
sense of direction are achieved, and the individual feels that his
strength can be and is directed toward the clear purpose of
actualization and enhancement of a unified organism.

One aspect of this proposition for which we have some research evidence,
but which could be tested even more clearly, is that conscious
acceptance of impulses and perceptions greatly increases the possibility
of conscious control. It is for this reason that the person who has come
to accept his own experiences also acquires the feeling of being in
control of himself. If it seems puzzling that the term "conscious
awareness" should be used almost interchangeably with "conscious
control," perhaps an analogy may be of help in clarification. I am
driving my car on an icy pavement. I am controlling its direction (as
the self feels itself to be in control of the organism). I desire to
swing left to follow the curve of the road. At this point the car
(analogous to the physiological organism) responds to physical laws
(analogous to physiological tensions) of which I am not aware, and
skids, moving in a straight line rather than rounding the curve. The
tension and panic I feel are not unlike the tension of the person who
finds that "I am doing things which are not myself, which I cannot
control." The therapy is likewise similar. If I am aware of, and willing
to accept all my sensory experiences, I sense the car's momentum
forward, I do not deny it, I swing the wheel "with the skid," rather
than around the curve, until the car is again under control. Then I am
able to turn left, more slowly. In other words I do not immediately gain
my conscious objective, but by accepting all the evidences of experience
and organizing them into one integrated perceptual system, I acquire the
control by which reasonable conscious objectives can be achieved. This
is very parallel to the feeling of the person who has completed
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_515}therapy. He may have found it necessary to
modify his objectives, but any disappointment in this respect is more
than compensated by the increased integration and consequent control. No
longer are there aspects of his behavior which he cannot govern. The
sense of autonomy, of self-government, is synonymous with having all
experiences available to consciousness.

The term "available to consciousness" in the last sentence is
deliberately chosen. It is the fact that all experiences, impulses,
sensations are *available* that is important, and not necessarily the
fact that they are present in consciousness. It is the organization of
the concept of self *against* the symbolization of certain experiences
contradictory to itself, which is the significant negative fact.
Actually, when all experiences are assimilated in relationship to the
self and made a part of the structure of self, there tends to be *less*
of what is called "self-consciousness" on the part of the individual.
Behavior becomes more spontaneous, expression of attitudes is less
guarded, because the self can accept such attitudes and such behavior as
a part of itself. Frequently a client at the beginning of therapy
expresses real fear that others might discover his real self. "As soon
as I start thinking about what *I* am, I have such a terrible conflict
at what I am that it makes me feel awful. It's such a self-depreciation
that I hope nobody ever knows it. . . . I'm afraid to act natural, I
guess, because I just don't feel as though I like myself." In this frame
of mind, behavior must always be guarded, cautious, self-conscious. But
when this same client has come to accept deeply the fact that "I am what
I am," then she can be spontaneous and can lose her self-consciousness.

XVI\) *Any experience which is inconsistent with the organization or
structure of self may be perceived as a threat, and the more of these
perceptions there are, the more rigidly the self-structure is organized
to maintain itself.*

::: top
This proposition is an attempt to formulate a description of certain
clinical facts. If the rejecting mother previously mentioned is told
that several observers have come to the conclusion
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_516}that she does reject her child, the inevitable
result is that she will, for the moment, exclude any assimilation of
this experience. She may attack the conditions of observation, the
training or authority of the observers, the degree of understanding they
possess, and so forth and so on. She will organize the defenses of her
own concept of herself as a loving and good mother, and will be able to
substantiate this concept with a mass of evidence. She will obviously
perceive the judgment of the observers as a threat, and will organize in
defense of her own governing concept. The same phenomenon would be
observed if the girl who regards herself as utterly lacking in ability
received a high score on an intelligence test. She can and will defend
her self against this threat of inconsistency. If the self cannot defend
itself against deep threats, the result is a catastrophic psychological
breakdown and disintegration.
:::

A concise and helpful formulation of the essential elements in threat
and defense, as they apply to personality, has been constructed by Hogan
(87, 88). In his summary he lists eight statements as describing the way
in which defensive behavior occurs. These are as follows:

::::: block
:::: sl
::: topbot
1\. Threat occurs when experiences are perceived or anticipated as
incongruent with the structure of the self.

2\. Anxiety is the affective response to threat.

3\. Defense is a sequence of behavior in response to threat, the goal of
which is the maintenance of the structure of the self.

4\. Defense involves a denial or distortion of perceived experience to
reduce the incongruity between the experience and the structure of the
self.

5\. The awareness of threat, but not the threat itself, is reduced by
the defensive behavior.

6\. Defensive behavior increases susceptibility to threat in that denied
or distorted experiences may be threatened by recurring perceptions.

7\. Threat and defense tend to recur again and again in sequence; as
this sequence progresses, attention is removed farther and farther from
the original threat, but more of experience is distorted and susceptible
to threat.

8\. This defensive sequence is limited by the need to accept reality.
(88)
:::
::::
:::::

[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_517}Hogan's theory helps to explain the spread of
defensive behavior in the individual by noting the fact that the more of
sensory and visceral experience that is denied symbolization, or given a
distorted symbolization, the greater the likelihood that any new
experience will be perceived as threatening, since there is a larger
false structure to be maintained.

XVII\) *Under certain conditions, involving primarily complete absence
of any threat to the self-structure, experiences which are inconsistent
with it may be perceived, and examined, and the structure of self
revised to assimilate and include such experiences.*

::: top
Here an important clinical fact, attested by many therapeutic cases, is
difficult to state in accurately generalized form. It is clear that
self-concepts change, both in the ordinary development of the
individual, and in therapy. The previous proposition formulates the
facts about the defenses of the self, while this one endeavors to state
the way in which change may come about.
:::

To proceed from the more clear-cut examples to those less clear: In
therapy of a client-centered form, by means of the relationship and the
counselor's handling of it, the client is gradually assured that he is
accepted as he is, and that each new facet of himself which is revealed
is also accepted. It is then that experiences which have been denied can
be symbolized, often very gradually, and hence brought clearly into
conscious form. Once they are conscious, the concept of self is expanded
so that they may be included as a part of a consistent total. Thus the
rejecting mother, in such an atmosphere, is apt first to admit the
perception of her behavior --- "I suppose that at times it must seem to
him that I don't like him" --- and then the possibility of an experience
inconsistent with self --- "I suppose that at times I *don't* like him"
--- and gradually the formulation of a broadened concept of self: "I can
admit that I like him and I don't like him and we can still get along
satisfactorily." Or a woman who hates her mother and justifies the
pattern of self which includes such hate, comes first to recognize that
there has been other than hating behavior --- "I keep cleaning up my
house when she comes over, as if to show []{#022_c11.html_lpn_518}her
how good I am, as if to try to win her favor" --- then admits
experiences directly contradictory to her concept of self --- "I feel a
real warmth toward her, a wholesome kind of affection" --- and
gradually, on the basis of trying to live by a revised concept of her
self in this relationship, comes to broaden that concept to a point
where tension is reduced --- "I get along all right with her. It's the
most wonderful thing the way I have gotten mother out of my system. I
can take her or leave her without so much tension."

If we try to analyze the elements which make possible this
reorganization of the structure of self, there would appear to be two
possible factors. One is the self-initiated apprehension of the new
material. Exploration of experience is made possible by the counselor,
and since the self is accepted at every step of its exploration and in
any change it may exhibit, it seems possible gradually to explore areas
at a "safe" rate, and hitherto denied experiences are slowly and
tentatively accepted just as a small child slowly and tentatively
becomes acquainted with a frightening object. Another factor which may
be involved is that the counselor is accepting toward all experiences,
all attitudes, all perceptions. This social value may be introjected by
the client, and applied to his own experiences. This last certainly
cannot be the major reason, since it is often known to the client that
the counselor is one among a thousand in holding such a value, and that
society in general would not accept the client as he is. Nevertheless
this introjection of the counselor attitude may be at least a temporary
or partial step toward the client's experiencing of himself as
acceptable.

Another problem to be borne in mind is that the acceptance of
experiences inconsistent with the self often occurs between interviews,
without ever being verbalized to the counselor. The essential factor
appears to be that the person achieves the attitude that it is safe to
look at organic experience and then can permit it to be symbolized in
consciousness even though the therapist is not present.

A question sometimes raised is that if absence of threat to the
self-concept were all that was required, it might seem that the
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_519}individual could, at any time that he was
alone, face these inconsistent experiences. We know that this does
happen in many minor circumstances. A man may be criticized for a
persistent failing. At the time he refuses to admit this experience at
face value, because it is too threatening to his self-organization. He
denies the fault, rationalizes the criticism. But later, alone, he
rethinks the matter, accepts the criticism as just, and revises his
concept of self, and consequently his behavior, as a result. For
experiences which are deeply denied, however, because they are deeply
inconsistent with the concept of self, this does not avail. It appears
possible for the person to face such inconsistency only while in a
relationship with another in which he is sure that he will be accepted.

To leave this discussion with a somewhat simpler example, the child who
feels that he is weak and powerless to do a certain task, to build a
tower or repair a bicycle, may find, as he works rather hopelessly at
the task, that he is successful. This experience is inconsistent with
the concept he holds of himself, and may not be integrated at once; but
if the child is left to himself he gradually assimilates, upon his own
initiative, a revision of his concept of self, that while he is
generally weak and powerless, in this respect he has ability. This is
the normal way in which, free from threat, new perceptions are
assimilated. But if this same child is repeatedly told by his parents
that he is competent to do the task, he is likely to deny it, and to
prove by his behavior that he is unable to do it. The more forceful
intrusion of the notion of his competence constitutes more of a threat
to self and is more forcefully resisted.

It is clear that a more refined analysis is needed of the exact
conditions which are necessary to permit a reorganization of the
self-concept and the assimilation of contradictory experiences. We know
one way in which this reorganization may be brought about, but the
conditions which are crucial for this type of experience are not
sufficiently known.

It should also be obvious that what is being described here is a
learning process, perhaps the most important learning of which the
person is capable, namely the learning of self. It is to be hoped
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_520}that those who have specialized in theory of
learning may begin to utilize the knowledge from that field in helping
to describe the way in which the individual learns a new configuration
of self.

XVIII\) *When the individual perceives and accepts into one consistent
and integrated system all his sensory and visceral experiences, then he
is necessarily more understanding of others and is more accepting of
others as separate individuals.*

::: top
This proposition has been felt to be true in our clinical therapeutic
work, and is now supported by Sheerer's research investigation (188,
189). It is one of the unexpected findings that have grown out of the
client-centered approach. To the person not familiar with therapeutic
experience, it may seem like wishful thinking to assert that the person
who accepts himself will, because of this self-acceptance, have better
interpersonal relations with others.
:::

We find clinically, however, that the person who completes therapy is
more relaxed in being himself, more sure of himself, more realistic in
his relations with others, and develops notably better interpersonal
relationships. One client, discussing the results which therapy has had
for her, states something of this fact in these words: "I am myself, and
I am different from others. I am getting more happiness in being myself,
and I find myself more and more letting other people assume the
responsibility for being selves."

If we try to understand the theoretical basis upon which this takes
place, it appears to be as follows:

::::::::::::::::: block
:::: block
::: top
The person who denies some experiences must continually defend himself
against the symbolization of those experiences.
:::
::::

:::: block
::: top
As a consequence, all experiences are viewed defensively as potential
threats, rather than for what they really are.
:::
::::

:::: block
::: top
Thus in interpersonal relationships, words or behaviors are experienced
and perceived as threatening, which were not so intended.
:::
::::

:::: block
::: top
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_521}Also, words and behaviors in others are
attacked because they represent or resemble the feared experiences.
:::
::::

:::: block
::: top
There is then no real understanding of the other as a separate person,
since he is perceived mostly in terms of threat or nonthreat to the
self.
:::
::::

:::: block
::: top
But when all experiences are available to consciousness and are
integrated, then defensiveness is minimized. When there is no need to
defend, there is no need to attack.
:::
::::

:::: block
::: topbot
When there is no need to attack, the other person is perceived for what
he really is, a separate individual, operating in terms of his own
meanings, based on his own perceptual field.
:::
::::
:::::::::::::::::

While this may sound abstruse, it is corroborated by much everyday
evidence, as well as by clinical experience. Who are the individuals, in
any neighborhood, or in any group, that inspire confidential
relationships, seem able to be understanding of others? They tend to be
individuals with a high degree of acceptance of all aspects of self. In
clinical experience, how do better interpersonal relationships emerge?
It is on this same basis. The rejecting mother who accepts her own
negative attitudes toward her child finds that this acceptance, which at
first she has feared, makes her more relaxed with her child. She is able
to observe him for what he is, not simply through a screen of defensive
reactions. Doing so, she perceives that he is an interesting person,
with bad features, but also good ones, toward whom she feels at times
hostile, but toward whom she also feels at times affectionate. On this
comfortable and realistic and spontaneous basis a *real* relationship
develops out of her real experiencing, a satisfying relationship to
both. It may not be composed entirely of sweetness and light, but it is
far more comfortable than any artificial relationship could possibly be.
It is based primarily upon an acceptance of the fact that her child is a
separate person.

The woman who hated her mother comes, after she has accepted all her
feelings of affection as well as hate, to see her mother as a person
with a variety of characteristics: interesting,
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_522}good, vulgar, and bad. With this much more
accurate perception she understands her mother, accepts her for what she
is, and builds a real rather than a defensive relationship with her.

The implications of this aspect of our theory are such as to stretch the
imagination. Here is a theoretical basis for sound interpersonal,
intergroup, and international relationships. Stated in terms of social
psychology, this proposition becomes the statement that the person (or
persons or group) who accepts himself thoroughly, will necessarily
improve his relationship with those with whom he has personal contact,
because of his greater understanding and acceptance of them. This
atmosphere of understanding and acceptance is the very climate most
likely to create a therapeutic experience and consequent self-acceptance
in the person who is exposed to it. Thus we have, in effect, a
psychological "chain reaction" which appears to have tremendous
potentialities for the handling of problems of social relationships.

XIX\) *As the individual perceives and accepts into his self-structure
more of his organic experiences, he finds that he is replacing his
present value* system *--- based so largely upon introjections which
have been distortedly symbolized --- with a continuing organismic
valuing* process.

::: top
In therapy, as the person explores his phenomenal field, he comes to
examine the values which he has introjected and which he has used as if
they were based upon his own experience. (See Proposition X.) He is
dissatisfied with them, often expressing the attitude that he has just
been doing what others thought he should do. But what does *he* think he
should do? There he is puzzled and lost. If one gives up the guidance of
an introjected system of values, what is to take its place? He often
feels quite incompetent to discover or build any alternative system. If
he cannot longer accept the "ought" and "should," the "right" and
"wrong" of the introjected system, how can he know what values take
their place?
:::

Gradually he comes to experience the fact that he is making value
judgments, in a way that is new to him, and yet a way that
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_523}was also known to him in his infancy. Just as
the infant places an assured value upon an experience, relying on the
evidence of his own senses, as described in Proposition X, so too the
client finds that it is his own organism which supplies the evidence
upon which value judgments may be made. He discovers that his own
senses, his own physiological equipment, can provide the data for making
value judgments and for continuously revising them. No one needs to tell
him that it is good to act in a freer and more spontaneous fashion,
rather than in the rigid way to which he has been accustomed. He senses,
he feels that it is satisfying and enhancing. Or when he acts in a
defensive fashion, it is his own organism that feels the immediate and
short-term satisfaction of being protected and that also senses the
longer-range dissatisfaction of having to remain on guard. He makes a
choice between two courses of action, fearfully and hesitantly, not
knowing whether he has weighed their values accurately. But then he
discovers that he may let the evidence of his own experience indicate
whether he has chosen satisfyingly. He discovers that he does not need
to *know* what are the correct values; through the data supplied by his
own organism, he can experience what is satisfying and enhancing. He can
put his confidence in a valuing *process*, rather than in some rigid,
introjected *system* of values.

Let us look at this proposition in a slightly different way. Values are
always accepted because they are perceived as principles making for the
maintenance, actualization, and enhancement of the organism. It is on
this basis that social values are introjected from the culture. In
therapy it would seem that the reorganization which takes place is on
the basis that those values are retained which are *experienced* as
maintaining or enhancing the organism as distinguished from those which
are said by others to be for the good of the organism. For example, an
individual accepts from the culture the value, "One should neither have
nor express feelings of jealous aggressiveness toward siblings." The
value is accepted because it is presumed to make for the enhancement of
the individual --- a better, more satisfied person. But in therapy this
person, as a client, examines this value in terms of a more basic
criterion --- namely, his own sensory and visceral
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_524}experiences: "Have I felt the denial of
aggressive attitudes as something enhancing my self?" The value is
tested in the light of personal organic evidence.

It is in the outcome of this valuing of values that we strike the
possibility of very basic similarities in all human experience. For as
the individual tests such values, and arrives at his own personal
values, he appears to come to conclusions which can be formulated in a
generalized way: that the greatest values for the enhancement of the
organism accrue when all experiences and all attitudes are permitted
conscious symbolization, and when behavior becomes the meaningful and
balanced satisfaction of *all* needs, these needs being available to
consciousness. The behavior which thus ensues will satisfy the need for
social approval, the need to express positive affectional feelings, the
need for sexual expression, the need to avoid guilt and regret as well
as the need to express aggression. Thus, while the establishment of
values by each individual may seem to suggest a complete anarchy of
values, experience indicates that quite the opposite is true. Since all
individuals have basically the same needs, including the need for
acceptance by others, it appears that when each individual formulates
his own values, in terms of his own direct experience, it is not anarchy
which results, but a high degree of commonality and a genuinely
socialized system of values. One of the ultimate ends, then, of an
hypothesis of confidence in the individual, and in his capacity to
resolve his own conflicts, is the emergence of value systems which are
unique and personal for each individual, and which are changed by the
changing evidence of organic experience, yet which are at the same time
deeply socialized, possessing a high degree of similarity in their
essentials.

A S[CHEMATIC]{.sc} P[RESENTATION]{.sc}

Some of the preceding propositions, particularly from IX through XIX,
may be clarified by a schematic presentation of certain of the ways in
which the self functions in relation to personality. Any diagrammatic
representation of complex material tends to oversimplify and to seem
more complete than it actually is. The material which follows should
therefore be accepted []{#022_c11.html_lpn_525}with critical caution and
with an awareness of its limitations. The accompanying diagram can be
understood only by referring to the definitions of each element.

*Definitions*

*The Total Personality*. The diagram as a whole (Figures I and II, pages
526--527) is intended to focus upon the structure of personality. As
drawn in Figure I, it indicates a personality in a state of
psychological tension.

::: top
*Experience*. This circle represents the immediate field of sensory and
visceral experience. It would be comparable to the total phenomenal
field of the infant. It represents all that is experienced by the
individual, through all the sense modalities. It is a fluid and changing
field.
:::

::: top
*Self-Structure*. This circle represents the configuration of concepts
which has been defined as the structure of self, or the concept of self.
It includes the patterned perceptions of the individual's
characteristics and relationships, together with the values associated
with these. It is available to awareness.
:::

::: top
*Area I*. Within this portion of the phenomenal field the concept of
self and self-in-relationship is in accord with, or is congruent with,
the evidence supplied by sensory and visceral experience.
:::

::: top
*Area II*. This area represents that portion of the phenomenal field in
which social or other experience has been *distorted* in symbolization
and perceived as a part of the individual's own experience. Percepts,
concepts, and values are introjected from parents and others in the
environment, but are perceived in the phenomenal field as being the
product of sensory evidence.
:::

::: top
*Area III*. In this realm are those sensory and visceral experiences
which are *denied* to awareness because they are inconsistent with the
structure of the self.
:::

*Specific Illustrations*

The letters in the circles may be regarded as elements of experience. By
giving them specific content we may illustrate the functioning of
personality. Let us take first a somewhat minor example as illustrated
in Figure I.

[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_526}Figure [I]{style="font-size: 120%"} • The Total
Personality

::: topbot
![](html/docimages/image11.jpg){height="342" width="499"}
:::

(*a*) "*I am utterly inadequate in dealing with mechanical things, and
this is one evidence of general inadequacy.*" This is an introjected
concept and its associated value, taken over by the individual from his
parents. The quotation marks indicate that it is perceived *as if* it
were the direct sensory experience of failure with all mechanical
things, but it is not. The experience was, "My parents regard me as
inadequate in the mechanical field"; the distorted symbolization is, "I
am inadequate in the mechanical field." The basic reason for the
distortion is to guard against losing the important part of the
self-structure, "I am loved by my parents." This leads to a feeling
which may be schematized thus: "I want to be acceptable to my parents
and hence must experience myself as being the sort of person they think
I am."

(*b*) *I experience failure in dealing with mechanical contrivances.*
This is a direct experience which has occurred a number of times. These
experiences are assimilated into the structure of self because they are
consistent with it.

[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_527}Figure [II]{style="font-size: 120%"} • The
Total Personality

::: top
![](html/docimages/image12.jpg){height="348" width="403"}
:::

(*c*) *Experience of succeeding with a difficult mechanical operation*.
This is a type of sensory experience which is inconsistent with the
concept of self and hence cannot be admitted directly into awareness.
The person cannot perceive that "*I* experience success in mechanical
operations" because this perception would be disorganizing to the
structure of the self. In such an occurrence it is almost impossible
completely to deny the experience to awareness, since the sensory
evidence is clear. It is, however, "pre-perceived" as threatening and
admitted to awareness in a sufficiently distorted fashion to eliminate
the threat to the structure of self. It therefore appears in
consciousness in some such fashion as "It was just luck," "The pieces
just fell into place," "I couldn't do it again in a million years." This
distorted symbolization could take its place in Area II in our diagram,
since it is consistent with self. The actual experience, however, is
denied to awareness in any accurately symbolized form, and hence remains
in Area III.

[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_528}Let us take another example, drawing this time
upon the experience of Miss Har, described in Chapter 3 (particularly
pages 79 and 76, in that order.)

(*d*) "*I feel nothing but hatred for my father, and I am morally right
in feeling this.*" Miss Har's mother had been deserted by her husband,
and it is not surprising that Miss Har had introjected this feeling,
this concept of the relationship, and the value attached to it, as if
they were based upon her own sensory and visceral experience.

(*e*) *I have experienced dislike for my father in my contacts with
him*. On the few occasions when she had met her father, there were
elements of his behavior which were not satisfying to her. This was
first-hand sensory experience. It is congruent with the self-structure
and assimilated into it. Her behavior is in accord with this total
self-structure.

(*f*) *Experience of positive feelings toward her father.* Such
experiences occurred, but were totally inconsistent with the whole
structure of self. They were therefore denied to awareness, Only in the
most distorted way do they appear in consciousness. She does admit the
perception, "I am like my father in several ways, and this is shameful."
She also overemphasizes her hatred for her father as a defense against
permitting such experiences in awareness. (This is an inference from
outside of her phenomenological field. It is confirmed by the fact that
eventually, as described later, she can perceive this from her own
internal frame of reference.)

Perhaps one other illustration may be added to indicate the introjection
of values from the culture.

(*g*) "*I regard homosexual behavior as terrible*." Here the
experiencing of a social attitude in others is distortedly perceived as
a value based upon experience.

(*h*) *I experience distaste for homosexual behavior*. In certain
specific experiences, the sensory and visceral reactions have been
unpleasant and unsatisfying. Being in accord with the self-structure,
these experiences are assimilated into it.

(*i*) *Occasional experience of homosexual desires*. These are denied to
awareness, because they would be disorganizing to self.

[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_529}Many aspects of self would not exhibit the
discrepancies evident in these three examples, but would be of this
order:

(*j*) *I hear others say that I am tall, and have other evidence that
they regard me as tall.* Here the attitude of others is not introjected,
but is simply perceived for what it is. It is therefore in the category
of sensory experience which has occurred in a social relationship, and
is accurately symbolized.

(*k*) *I experience myself as tall in relation to others.*

(*l*) *Very rarely do I find myself in a group where I experience myself
as shorter than others.*

*j*, *k*, *l*, are three different sorts of sensory evidence, all
admitted to awareness. The attitudes of others are perceived as such,
not as own experience. The evidence of tallness which is acquired
through sensory experience is accepted into awareness. The occasional
contradictory evidence is also accepted, and thus modifies the
self-concept to some degree. Thus the individual has a unitary and
securely founded concept of himself as taller than most people, a
concept which is based upon several types of evidence, all admitted to
awareness.

The picture given thus far, and the conclusion which would be based upon
the diagram in Figure I, would be that in this schematic individual
there is much potential psychological tension. There is a considerable
degree of incongruence between the sensory and visceral experience of
the organism, and the structure of the self, the former involving much
that is denied to awareness, and the latter involving an awareness of
much that is not so. Whether or not this schematic individual would feel
himself to be maladjusted would depend upon his environment. If his
environment supported the "quasi" elements of his self-structure, he
might never recognize the tensional forces in his personality, although
he would be a "vulnerable" person. If the culture gave sufficiently
strong support to his concept of self, he would have positive attitudes
toward self. He would experience tension and anxiety, and feel
maladjusted, only in so far as his culture, or overwhelming sensory
evidence, gave him some vague perception of the inconsistencies within
his personality. Such an awareness or anxiety might also come about if
he were exposed to a highly []{#022_c11.html_lpn_530}permissive
situation in which the boundaries of self-organization could be relaxed,
and experiences ordinarily denied to awareness might be dimly perceived.
However such anxiety or uneasiness is caused, it is in this state that
he would tend to welcome psychotherapy. Let us see, diagrammatically,
what occurs in therapy.

*The Alteration of Personality in Therapy*

Figure II (page 527) shows our schematic person after successful
psychotherapy. The definitions of the circles and areas remain
unchanged, but it is evident that they have a different relationship to
each other, the structure of self now being much more congruent with the
sensory and visceral experience of the individual. The specific ways in
which that relationship has changed may be illustrated by again
referring to the schematic elements of experience previously described.
These have now been reorganized in the perceptual field in ways which
may be indicated as follows:

(*a*) *I realize my parents felt I was inadequate in mechanical things,
and that this had a negative value for them.*

(*b*) *My own experience confirms this evaluation in a number of ways.*

(*c*) *But I do have some competence in this field*.

Note that experience (*c*), as previously described, has now been
admitted to awareness and organized into the self-structure. Experience
(*a*) is no longer perceived in distorted fashion, but it is perceived
as sensory evidence of the attitude of others.

(*d*) *I perceive that my mother hates my father and expects me to do
the same*.

(*e*) *I dislike my father in some ways and for some things*.

(*f*) *And I also like him in some ways and for some things, and both of
these experiences are an acceptable part of me*.

Here again introjected attitudes and values are perceived for what they
are, and are no longer distorted in their symbolization. Feelings
formerly inconsistent with self can be integrated into the
self-structure, because it has expanded to include them. Experiences are
valued in accordance with the satisfactions which they bring, rather
than in accordance with the views of others. It may be well at this
point to re-read the excerpts from the case of Miss
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_531}Har, in Chapter 3, to realize that the process
by which this integration is achieved is a painful, vacillating one,
that the acceptance of all the sensory evidence is at first a very
fearful and tentative acceptance, and that keeping the locus of
evaluation within oneself means that initially there is much uncertainty
about values.

*g*, *h*, *i.* These are left unchanged. They are intended as a
schematic representation of the fact that therapy never achieves
complete congruence of self and experience, never clears away all
introjections, never explores the entire area of denied experience. If
the client has deeply learned that it is safe to accept all sensory
experience into awareness without distortion, he may deal differently
with his homosexual impulses (*i*) when they recur, and he may recognize
the introjected cultural attitude (*g*) as being simply that. If
circumstances tend to focus on this area, he may return for further
therapy.

*j*, *k*, *l*. The individual's securely based concept of his height,
and the other stable concepts of which it is representative, remain
unchanged.

*Characteristics of the Altered Personality*

Several of the characteristics of the personality as represented in
Figure II may be briefly noted.

There is less potential tension or anxiety, less vulnerability.

There is a lessened possibility of threat, because the structure of the
self has become more inclusive, more flexible, and more discriminating.
There is therefore less likelihood of defensiveness.

Adaptation to any life situation is improved, because the behavior will
be guided by a more complete knowledge of the relevant sensory data,
there being fewer experiences distorted and fewer denied.

The client after therapy feels more in control of himself, more
competent to cope with life. In terms of this diagram, more of the
relevant experience is present in awareness, and hence subject to
rational choice. The client is less likely to experience himself
behaving in ways that are "not myself."

There is represented in this second diagram the basis for the "greater
acceptance of self" which clients experience. More of the
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_532}total experience of the organism is directly
incorporated into the self; or more accurately, the self tends to be
discovered in the total experience of the organism. The client feels he
is his "real" self, his organic self.

The individual represented in Figure II would be more accepting toward
another, more able to understand him as a separate and unique person,
because he would have less need of being on defensive guard.

Following therapy, the individual is formulating his evaluations of
experience on the basis of all the relevant data. He thus has a flexible
and adaptable system of values, but one that is soundly based.

C[ONCLUSION]{.sc}

This chapter has endeavored to present a theory of personality and
behavior which is consistent with our experience and research in
client-centered therapy. This theory is basically phenomenon logical in
character, and relies heavily upon the concept of the self as an
explanatory construct. It pictures the end-point of personality
development as being a basic congruence between the phenomenal field of
experience and the conceptual structure of the self --- a situation
which, if achieved, would represent freedom from internal strain and
anxiety, and freedom from potential strain; which would represent the
maximum in realistically oriented adaptation; which would mean the
establishment of an individualized value system having considerable
identity with the value system of any other equally well-adjusted member
of the human race.

It would be too much to hope that the many hypotheses of this theory
will prove to be correct. If they prove to be a stimulation to
significant study of the deeper dynamics of human behavior, they will
have served their purpose well.

SUGGESTED READINGS

::: sl
If one wishes to compare the theory developed in this chapter with other
recent formulations of personality theory, the writers mentioned
[]{#022_c11.html_lpn_533}on page 481 would be a good starting point (69,
9, 127, 128, 137, 109, 205, 129, 141, 38, 104, 222, 200, 37). To this
list of newer theories should be added some more conventional exposition
of Freudian personality theory such as Fenichel (56).

Some suggestion of the fluid and changing character of the thinking
which has gone into this chapter may be gained by comparing an earlier
formulation (172) with this present statement.
:::

[]{#023_ref.html}

<div>

[]{#023_ref.html_ref}

</div>

#### R[EFERENCES]{.sc} {.fronthead}

:::: block1
<div>

1\. Aichhorn, A. *Wayward Youth*. New York: Viking Press, 1935.

2\. Aidman, Ted. Changes in self perception as related to changes in
perception of one's environment. M.A. paper, University of Chicago,
1947.

3\. Albrecht, M., and L. Gross. Nondirective teaching. *Sociol. Soc*.
*Res*., 1948, *32*, 874--881.

4\. Alexander, F., and T. M. French. *Psychoanalytic Therapy*. New York:
Ronald Press, 1946.

5\. Allen, F. H. *Psychotherapy with Children*. New York: W. W. Norton,
1942.

6\. Allport, G. W. The psychology of participation. *Psychol. Rev*.,
1945, *53*, 117--132. \[Permission to quote given by the *Psychological
Review* and the American Psychological Association.\]

7\. Alpert, B., and P. A. Smith. How participation works. *J. Social
Issues*, 1949, *5*, 3--13.

8\. Anderson, H. H., and H. M. Brewer. Studies of teachers' classroom
personalities: I. Dominative and socially integrative behavior of
kindergarten teachers. *App. Psychol. Monogr*., 1945, No. 6, 157 pp.

9\. Angyal, A. *Foundations for a Science of Personality*. New York:
Commonwealth Fund, 1941.

10\. Ash, Philip. The reliability of psychiatric diagnoses. *J. Abnorm.
& Soc. Psychol*., 1949, *44*, 272--276.

11\. Assum, A. L., and S. J. Levy. Analysis of a nondirective case with
followup interview. *J. Abnorm. & Soc. Psychol*., 1948, *43*, 78--89.

12\. Axline, Virginia M. Mental deficiency --- symptom or disease? *J.
Consult. Psychol*., 1949, *13*, 313--327.

13\. Axline, Virginia M. Nondirective therapy for poor readers. *J.
Consult. Psychol*., 1947, *11*, 61--69.

14\. Axline, Virginia M, *Play Therapy*. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1947.

15\. Axline, Virginia M. Play therapy and race conflict in young
children. *J. Abnorm. & Soc. Psychol*., 1948, *43*, 300--310.

16\. Axline, Virginia M. Play therapy experiences as described by child
participants. *J. Consult, Psychol*., 1950, *14*, 53--63.

17\. Baldwin, A. L.; Joan Kalhorn; and F. H. Breese. Patterns of parent
behavior. *Psychol. Monogr*. No. 268, 1945, *58*, No. 3, 1--75.

18\. Bartlett, Marion R., and staff. Data on the personal adjustment
counseling program for veterans. Mimeographed report, Personal
Adjustment Counseling Division, Advisement and Guidance Service, Office
of Vocational Rehabilitation and Education.

19\. Baruch, Dorothy W. Therapeutic procedures as part of the educative
process. *J. Consult. Psychol*., 1940, *4*, 165--172.

20\. Bavelas, A.; L. Festinger; P. Woodward; and A. Zander. The relative
effectiveness of a lecture method and a method of group decision for
changing food habits. Mimeographed report of the Committee on Food
Habits, National Research Council, Washington, D.C.

21\. Beier, Ernst G. The effect of induced anxiety on some aspects of
intellectual functioning. Ph.D. thesis, Columbia University, 1949.

22\. Bell, J. E. *Projective Techniques*. New York: Longmans, Green,
1948.

23\. Benne, K. D., and Paul Sheats. Functional roles of group members.
*J. Social Issues*, 1948, *4*, 41--49.

24\. Bills, Robert E. Nondirective play therapy with retarded readers.
*J. Consult. Psychol*., 1950, *14*., 140--149.

25\. Bills, Robert E. Play therapy with well-adjusted retarded readers.
*J. Consult. Psychol*. (in process of publication).

26\. Bills, Robert E.; C. J. Leiman, and R. W. Thomas. A study of the
validity of the TAT and a set of animal pictures. 1949. (To be
published.)

27\. Bion, W. R. Experiences in groups: *Human Relations*, 1948, *1*
314--320.

28\. Bion, W. R. Experiences in groups: II. *Human Relations*, 1948,
*1*, 487--511.

29\. Bixler, Ray H. Limits are therapy. *J. Consult. Psychol*., 1949,
*13*, 1--11.

30\. Bixler, Ray H. A method of case transfer. *J. Clin. Psychol*.,
1946, *2*, 27--278

31\. Bixler, R. H. and Virginia H. Bixer. Clinical Counseling in
vocational guidance. *J. Clin. Psychol*., 1945, *1*, 186--192.

32\. Bixler, R. H., and Virginia H. Bixler. Test interpretation in
vocational counseling. *Educ. & Psychol. Measmt*., 1946, *6*, 145--155.

33\. Blocksma, D. D. An experiment in counselor learning. Ph.D. thesis
in progress, University of Chicago.

34\. Blocksma, D. D., and E. H. Porter, Jr. A short-term training
program in client-centered counseling. *J. Consult. Psychol.*, 1947,
*11*, 55--60.

35\. Boring, E. G., and H. Sachs. Was this analysis a success? *J.
Abnorm. & Soc. Psychol.*, 1940, *35*, 3--16.

36\. Brody, B., and A. L. Grey. The non-medical psychotherapist: a
critique and a program. *J. Abnorm. & Soc. Psychol.*, 1948, *43*,
179--192.

37\. Burrow, Trigant. *The Neurosis of Man.* New York: Harcourt, Brace,
1949.

38\. Cameron, Norman. *The Psychology of Behavior Disorders.* New York:
Houghton Mifflin, 1947.

39\. Cantor, N. *The Dynamics of Learning.* Buffalo: Foster and Stewart,
1946.

40\. Carr, Arthur C. An evaluation of nine nondirective psychotherapy
cases by means of the Rorschach. *J. Consult. Psychol.*, 1949, *13*,
196--205.

41\. Coch, Lester, and J. R. P. French, Jr. Overcoming resistance to
change. *Human Relations*, 1948, *1*, 512--532.

42\. Combs, Arthur W. Basic aspects of non-directive therapy. *Amer. J.
Orthopsychiat.*, 1946, *16*, 589--605.

43\. A coordinated research in psychotherapy. *J. Consult. Psychol.*,
1949, *13*, 149--220. (A complete issue devoted to nine articles growing
out of a coordinated series of projects. The nine articles are
separately listed in this bibliography.)

44\. Covner, B. J. Principles for psychological counseling with client
organization. *J. Consult. Psychol.*, 1947, *11*, 227--244.

45\. Cowen, E. L., and A. W. Combs. Followup study of 32 cases treated
by nondirective psychotherapy. *J. Abnorm. & Soc. Psychol.*, 1950, *45*,
232--258.

46\. Cowen, E. L., and W. M. Cruickshank. Group therapy with physically
handicapped children: II. Evaluation. *J. Educ. Psychol.*, 1948, *39*,
281--297.

47\. Cruickshank, W. M., and E. L. Cowen. Group therapy with physically
handicapped children: I. Report of study. *J. Educ. Psychol.*, 1948,
*39*, 193--215.

48\. Curran, C. A. Nondirective counseling in allergic complaints. *J.
Abnorm. & Soc. Psychol.*, 1948, *43*, 442--451.

49\. Curran, C. A. *Personality Factors in Counseling.* New York: Grune
and Stratton, 1945.

50\. Doll, Edgar A. *Vineland Social Maturity Scale.* Educ. Test Bureau,
Educ. Test Publishers, Minneapolis, 1947.

51\. Dollard, John, and O. H. Mowrer. A method of measuring tension in
written documents. *J. Abnorm. & Soc. Psychol.*, 1947, *42*, 3--32.

52\. Duncker, Karl. On problem solving. *Psychol. Monogr.*, No. 270,
1945, *58*, No. 5, 1--113.

53\. Eiserer, Paul E. The implications of nondirective counseling for
classroom teaching. *Growing Points in Educational Research*, 1949
Official Report; Washington, D.C.: American Educational Research
Association.

54\. Estes, S. G. Concerning the therapeutic relationship in the
dynamics of cure. *J. Consult. Psychol.*, 1948, *12*, 76--81.

55\. Faw, Volney E. A psychotherapeutic method of teaching psychology.
*Amer. Psychologist*, 1949, *4*, 104--109.

56\. Fenichel, Otto. *The Psychoanalytic Theory of Neuroses.* New York:
W. W. Norton, 1945.

57\. Fiedler, Fred E. A comparative investigation of early therapeutic
relationships created by experts and non-experts of the psychoanalytic,
non-directive, and Adlerian schools. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Chicago, 1949. (Accepted for publication by *J. Consult. Psychol.*)

58\. Fiedler, Fred E. The concept of an ideal therapeutic relationship.
*J. Consult. Psychol.*, 1950, *14*, 239--245.

59\. Finke, Helene. Changes in the expression of emotionalized attitudes
in six cases of play therapy. M.A. thesis, University of Chicago, 1947.

60\. Fleming, Louise, and W. U. Snyder. Social and personal changes
following non-directive group play therapy. *Amer. J. Orthopsychiat.*,
1947, *17*, 101--116.

61\. Foulkes, S. H. *Introduction to Group-Analytic Psychotherapy.*
London: William Heinemann Medical Books, Ltd., 1948.

62\. French, J. R. P., Jr.; A. Kornhauser; and A. Marrow, editors.
Conflict and cooperation in industry. *J. Social Issues*, 1946, *2*,
1--54.

63\. Freud, Anna. *Introduction to the Technic of Child Analysis.* New
York: Nervous and Mental Disease Publishing Co., 1928.

64\. Freud, Sigmund. *Autobiography.* London: Hogarth Press, 1946.

65\. Freud, Sigmund. *Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego*.
London: Hogarth Press, 1948. (Published in the United States by
Liveright Publishing Corporation.)

66\. Freud, Sigmund. Psychoanalysis: Freudian school. *Encyclopaedia
Britannica*, *18*, 1944.

67\. Golden, C. S., and H. J. Ruttenberg. *The Dynamics of Industrial
Democracy*. New York: Harper and Bros., 1942.

68\. Golden, C. S., and H. J. Ruttenberg. Labor and management
responsibility for production efficiency. In T. M. Newcomb and E. L.
Hartley, *Readings in Social Psychology.* New York: Henry Holt, 1947,
461--465. (Reprinted from *The Dynamics of Industrial Democracy.* New
York: Harper and Bros., 1942.)

69\. Goldstein, Kurt. *Human Nature in the Light of Psychopathology.*
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1940.

70\. Gordon, Thomas. What is gained by group participation. *Educ.
Leadership*, 1950, *7*, 220--226.

71\. Gorlow, Leon. Nondirective group psychotherapy: an analysis of the
behavior of members as therapists. Ph.D. thesis, Teachers College,
Columbia University, 1950.

72\. Green, A. W. Social values and psychotherapy. *J. Pers.*, 1946,
*14*, 199--228.

73\. Gross, L. An experimental study of the validity of the
non-directive method of teaching. *J. Psychol.*, 1948, *26*, 243--248.

74\. *Group Psychotherapy.* War Department, TB MED 103, Washington,
D.C., October 10, 1944.

75\. Grummon, D. L., and T. Gordon. The counseling center of the
University of Chicago. *Amer. Psychologist*, 1948, *3*, 166--171.

76\. Haigh, Gerard. Defensive behavior in client-centered therapy. *J.
Consult. Psychol.*, 1949, *13*, 181--189.

77\. Haigh, Gerard, and Bill L. Kell. Multiple therapy as a method for
training and research in psychotherapy. *J. Abnorm. & Soc. Psychol.*
(accepted for publication).

78\. Haimowitz, Natalie Reader. An investigation into some personality
changes occurring in individuals undergoing client-centered therapy.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago, 1948.

79\. Hamlin, R. M., and G. W. Albee. Muench's tests: a control group.
*J. Consult. Psychol.*, 1948, *12*, 412--416.

80\. Harrower, M. R., ed. *Training in Clinical Psychology: Transactions
of the First Conference.* New York: Macy Foundation, 1947.

81\. Hayakawa, S. I. *Language in Thought and Action.* New York:
Harcourt, Brace, 1949.

82\. Hildreth, Harold. A battery of feeling and attitude scales for
clinical use. *J. Clin. Psychol.*, 1946, *2*, 214--220.

83\. Hiltner, Seward. *Pastoral Counseling.* New York:
Abingdon-Cokesbury Press, 1949.

84\. Hobbs, Nicholas. Nondirective group therapy. *J. Nat'l. Assn. of
Deans of Women*, 1949, *12*, 114--121.

85\. Hoch, Erasmus L. The nature of the group process in non-directive
group psychotherapy. Ph.D. thesis, Teachers College, Columbia
University, 1950.

86\. Hoffman, A. Edward. A study of reported behavior changes in
counseling. *J. Consult. Psychol.*, 1949, *13*, 190--195.

87\. Hogan, Richard. The development of a measure of client
defensiveness in a counseling relationship. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Chicago, 1948.

88\. Hogan, Richard. The development of a measure of client
defensiveness in the counseling relationship. Ph.D. thesis abstract,
University of Chicago, 1948.

89\. Horney, Karen, ed. *Are You Considering Psychoanalysis?* New York:
W. W. Norton, 1946.

90\. Horney, Karen. *Self Analysis.* New York: W. W. Norton, 1942.

91\. Hunt, J. McV. *Personality and the Behavior Disorders.* 2 vols. New
York: Ronald Press, 1944.

92\. Hutchins, Robert M. Education and democracy. *School and Society*,
1949, *69*, 425--428.

93\. Ichheiser, Gustav. *Misunderstandings in Human Relations.* Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1949.

94\. Jaques, Elliott. Interpretive group discussion as a method of
facilitating social change. *Human Relations*, 1948, *1*, 533--549.

95\. Jaques, Elliott, ed. Social therapy. *J. Social Issues*, 1947, *3*,
67 pp.

96\. Jaques, Elliott. Some principles of organization of a social
therapeutic institution. *J. Social Issues*, 1947, *3*, 4--10.

97\. Jellinek, E. M., and D. Shakow. Method of scoring the Kent-Rosanoff
free association test. Unpublished manuscript.

98\. Johnson, Wendell. *People in Quandaries.* New York: Harper and
Bros., 1946.

99\. Kauffman, P. E., and V. C. Raimy. Two methods of assessing
therapeutic progress. *J. Abnorm. & Soc. Psychol.*, 1949, *44*,
379--385.

100\. Kelley, Earl C. *Education for What is Real.* New York: Harper and
Bros., 1947.

101\. Kessler, Carol. Semantics and non-directive counseling. M.A.
paper, University of Chicago, 1947.

102\. Klapman, J. W. *Group Psychotherapy.* New York: Grune and
Stratton, 1946.

103\. Klein, Melanie. *The Psycho-analysis of Children.* London: Hogarth
Press, 1937.

104\. Kluckhohn, Clyde, and H. A. Murray, editors. *Personality in
Nature*, *Society and Culture.* New York: Knoff, 1948.

105\. Korzybski, Alfred. *Science and Sanity.* Lancaster, Pa.: Science
Press Printing Co., 1933.

106\. Krech, David, and R. S. Crutchfield. *Theory and Problems of
Social Psychology.* New York: McGraw-Hill, 1948.

107\. Landis, C. Psychoanalytic phenomena. *J. Abnorm. & Soc. Psychol.*,
1940, *35*, 17--28.

108\. Landisberg, Selma, and W. U. Snyder. Non-directive play therapy.
*J. Clin. Psychol.*, 1946, *2*, 203--213.

109\. Lecky, Prescott. *Self-Consistency: a Theory of Personality.* New
York: Island Press, 1945.

110\. Leeper, Robert W. A motivational theory of emotion to replace
"emotion as disorganized response." *Psychol. Rev.*, 1948, *55*, 5--21.

111\. Leeper, Robert W. Cognitive and symbolic processes. Unpublished
manuscript.

112\. Lewin, Kurt, *et al.* The relative effectiveness of a lecture
method and a method of group decision for changing food habits.
Mimeographed report, National Research Council, Washington, D.C., 1942.

113\. Lewin, Kurt, and Paul Grabbe. Conduct, knowledge and acceptance of
new values. *J. Social Issues*, 1945, *1*, 53--64.

114\. Lewis, Virginia W. Changing the behavior of adolescent girls.
*Archives of Psychol.*, 1943, No. 279, 1--87.

115\. Lilienthal, David E. *TVA --- Democracy on the March.* New York:
Pocket Books, 1945.

116\. Lincoln, J. F. *Intelligent Selfishness and Manufacturing.*
Cleveland: Lincoln Electric Co., 1942.

117\. Lipkin, S. The client evaluates nondirective psychotherapy. *J.
Consult. Psychol.*, 1948, *12*, 137--146.

118\. Lippitt, Ronald. An experimental study of the effect of democratic
and authoritarian group atmospheres. *Univ. Iowa Stud. Child Welfare*,
1940, *16*, 43--195.

119\. Lippitt, Ronald, and R. K. White. The "social climate" of
children's groups. Chapter XXVIII in R. Barker, J. Kounin, and H.
Wright. *Child Development and Behavior.* New York: McGraw-Hill, 1943.

120\. Luchins, A. S. On training clinical psychologists in
psychotherapy. *J. Clin. Psychol.*, 1949, *5*, 132--137.

121\. McCleary, R. A., and R. S. Lazarus. Autonomic discrimination
without awareness. *J. Pers.*, 1949, *18*, 171--179.

122\. McGinnies, Elliott. Emotionality and perceptual defense. *Psychol.
Rev.*, 1949, *56*, 244--451.

123\. McGregor, Douglas. Conditions of effective leadership in the
industrial organization. In T. M. Newcomb and E. L. Hartley, *Readings
in Social Psychology.* New York: Henry Holt, 1947, 427--435. (Reprinted
from *J. Consult. Psychol.*, 1944, *8*, 55--63.)

124\. McGregor, D.; I. Knickerbocker; M. Haire; and A. Bevelas, editors.
The consultant role and organizational leadership: Improving human
relations in industry. *J. Social Issues*, 1948, *4*, 1--53.

125\. Main, Tom, and Marie Nyswander. Some observations on the third
national training laboratory in group development. Unpublished
manuscript, 1949.

126\. Marrow, A. J., and J. R. P. French, Jr. Changing a stereotype in
industry. *J. Social Issues*, 1945, *1*, 33--37.

127\. Maslow, A. H. Dymanics of personality organization. *Psychol.
Rev.*, 1943, *50*, 514--539, 541--558.

128\. Maslow, A. H. A theory of human motivation. *Psychol. Rev.*, 1943,
*50*, 370--396.

129\. Masserman, J. H. *Principles of Dynamic Psychiatry.* New York:
Saunders, 1946.

130\. Mayo, Elton. *The Social Problems of an Industrial Civilization.*
Boston: Division of Research, Harvard University Graduate School of
Business Administration, 1945.

131\. Meister, R. K., and H. E. Miller. The dynamics of non-directive
psychotherapy. *J. Clin. Psychol.*, 1946, *2*, 59--67.

132\. Miller, H. E. "Acceptance" and related attitudes as demonstrated
in psychotherapeutic interviews. *J. Clin. Psychol.*, 1949, *5*, 83--87.

133\. Miller, Hyman, and D. W. Baruch. Psychological dynamics in
allergic patients as shown in group and individual psychotherapy. *J.
Consult. Psychol.*, 1948, *12*, 111--115.

134\. Mitchell, J. H., and C. A. Curran. A method of approach to
psychosomatic problems in allergy. *West Virginia Med. J.*, 1946, *42*,
1--24.

135\. Moreno, J. L. *Group Therapy.* New York: Beacon House, 1945.

136\. Mowrer, O. H. Learning theory and the neurotic paradox. *Amer. J.
Orthopsychiat.*, 1948, *18*, 571--610.

137\. Mowrer, O. H., and Clyde Kluckhohn. A dynamic theory of
personality. Chapter III in J. McV. Hunt, *Personality and the Behavior
Disorders*, vol. 1. New York: Ronald Press, 1944.

138\. Mowrer, O. H., and A. D. Ullman. Time as a determinant in
integrative learning. *Psychol. Rev.*, 1945, *52*, 61--90.

139\. Mosak, Harold. Evaluation in psychotherapy: a study of some
current measures. Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago, 1950.

140\. Muench, George A. An evaluation of non-directive psychotherapy by
means of the Rorschach and other tests. *App. Psychol. Monogr.*, 1947,
No. 13, 1--163.

141\. Murphy, Gardner. *Personality: a Biosocial Approach to Origins and
Structure.* New York: Harper and Bros., 1947.

142\. Newcomb, T. M. Autistic hostility and social reality. *Human
Relations*, 1947, *1*, 69--86.

143\. Patterson, C. H. Is psychotherapy dependent upon diagnosis? *Amer.
Psychologist*, 1948, *3*, 155--159.

144\. Pearse, I. H., and Lucy H. Crocker. *The Peckham Experiment: a
Study in the Living Structure of Society.* London: George Allen and
Unwin, Ltd., 1943.

145\. Pearse, I. H., and G. Scott Williamson. *Biologists in Search of
Material.* London: Faber and Faber Limited, 1938.

146\. Peres, H. An investigation of nondirective group therapy. *J.
Consult. Psychol.*, 1947, *11*, 159--172.

147\. Perry, William G., Jr. Of counselors and college. *Harvard Educ.
Rev.*, 1948, 8--34.

148\. Porter, E. H., Jr. *An Introduction to Therapeutic Counseling.*
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1950.

149\. Porter, E. H., Jr. The development and evaluation of a measure of
counseling interview procedures. I. The development. *Educ. & Psychol.
Measmt.*, 1943, *3*, 105--126.

150\. Porter, E. H., Jr. The development and evaluation of a measure of
counseling interview procedures. II. The evaluation. *Educ. & Psychol.
Measmt.*, 1943, *3*, 215--238.

151\. Postman, L.; J. S. Bruner; and E. McGinnies. Personal values as
selective factors in perception. *J. Abnorm. & Soc. Psychol.*, 1948,
*43*, 142--154.

152\. Radke, Marian, and Dayna Klisurich. Experiments in changing food
habits. *J. Amer. Dietetic Assn.*, 1947, *23*, 403--409.

153\. Raimy, Victor C. The self-concept as a factor in counseling and
personality organization. Ph.D. thesis, Ohio State University, 1943.

154\. Raimy, Victor C. Self reference in counseling interviews. *J.
Consult. Psychol.*, 1948, *12*, 153--163.

155\. Rank, Otto. *Will Therapy;* and *Truth and Reality.* New York:
Knopf, 1945.

156\. Raskin, Nathaniel J. An analysis of six parallel studies of
therapeutic process. *J. Consult. Psychol.*, 1949, *13*, 206--220.

157\. Raskin, Nathaniel J. An objective study of the locus of evaluation
factor in psychotherapy. Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago, 1949.

158\. Raskin, Nathaniel J. The development of nondirective therapy. *J.
Consult. Psychol.*, 1948, *12*, 92--110.

159\. Raskin, Nathaniel J. The nondirective attitude. Unpublished
manuscript, 1947.

160\. Recommended graduate training program in clinical psychology.
Report of the Committee on Training in Clinical Psychology of the
American Psychological Association, *Amer. Psychologist*, 1947, *2*,
539--558.

161\. Reik, Theodor. *Listening with the Third Ear.* New York: Farrar,
Straus, 1948.

162\. Ribble, Margaret A. Infantile experience in relation to
personality development. Chapter XX in J. McV. Hunt, *Personality and
the Behavior Disorders*, vol. 2. New York: Ronald Press, 1944.

163\. Roethlisberger, F. J., and W. J. Dickson. *Management and the
Worker.* Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1939.

164\. Rogers, Carl R. *Clinical Treatment of the Problem Child.* New
York: Houghton Mifflin, 1939.

165\. Rogers, Carl R. The clinical psychologist's approach to
personality problems. *The Family*, 1937, *18*, 233--243.

166\. Rogers, Carl R. *Counseling and Psychotherapy.* Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1942.

167\. Rogers, Carl R. Current trends in psychotherapy. Chapter V in
Wayne Dennis, ed., *Current Trends in Psychology.* Pittsburgh:
University of Pittsburgh Press, 1947, 109--137.

168\. Rogers, Carl R. Divergent trends in methods of improving
adjustment. *Harvard Educ. Rev.*, 1948, 209--219.

169\. Rogers, Carl R. The process of therapy. *J. Consult. Psychol.*,
1940, *4*, 161--164.

170\. Rogers, Carl R. Significant aspects of client-centered therapy.
*Amer. Psychologist*, 1946, *1*, 415--422. \[Permission to quote given
by the *American Psychologist* and the American Psychological
Association.\]

171\. Rogers, Carl R. Some implications of client-centered counseling
for college personnel work. *Educ. & Psychol. Measmt.*, 1948, *8*,
540--549.

172\. Rogers, Carl R. Some observations on the organization of
personality. *Amer. Psychologist*, 1947, *2*, 358--368.

173\. Rogers, Carl R. The use of electrically recorded interviews in
improving psychotherapeutic techniques. *Amer. J. Orthopsychiat.*, 1942,
*12*, 429--434.

174\. Rogers, Natalie. Changes in self concept in the case of Mrs. Ett.
*Personal Counselor*, 1947, *2*, 278--291.

175\. Rogers, Natalie. Measuring psychological tensions in non-directive
counseling. *Personal Counselor*, 1948, *3*, 237--264.

176\. Rosenzweig, Saul. *Psychodiagnosis.* New York: Grune and Stratton,
1949.

177\. Schilder, P. *Psychotherapy.* New York: W. W. Norton, 1938.

178\. Schwebel, M., and M. J. Asch. Research possibilities in
nondirective teaching. *J. Educ. Psychol.*, 1948, *39*, 359--369.

179\. Seeman, Julius. A study of client self-selection of tests in
vocational counseling. *Educ. & Psychol. Measmt.*, 1948, *8*, 327--346.

180\. Seeman, Julius. A study of the process of nondirective therapy.
*J. Consult. Psychol.*, 1949, *13*, 157--168.

181\. Shaffer, L. F. The problem of psychotherapy. *Amer. Psychologist*,
1947, *2*, 459--467.

182\. Shakow, D. One psychologist as analysand. *J. Abnorm. & Soc.
Psychol.*, 1940, *35*, 198--211.

183\. Shaw, Clifford R. Memorandum submitted to the Board of Directors
of the Chicago Area Project. January 10, 1944, mimeographed report.

184\. Shaw, F. J. The role of reward in psychotherapy. *Amer.
Psychologist*, 1949, *4*, 177--179.

185\. Shaw, F. J. A stimulus-response analysis of repression and insight
in psychotherapy. *Psychol. Rev.*, 1946, *53*, 36--42.

186\. Shedlin, Arthur J. A psychological approach to group leadership in
education. Unpublished manuscript.

187\. Shedlin, Arthur J. *The Effectiveness of Group Climate: an
Experiment in Human Relations.* National Conference of Christians and
Jews, Inc., 1948.

188\. Sheerer, Elizabeth T. An analysis of the relationship between
acceptance of and respect for self and acceptance of and respect for
others in seven counseling cases. Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago,
1949.

189\. Sheerer, Elizabeth T. An analysis of the relationship between
acceptance of and respect for self and acceptance of and respect for
others in ten counseling cases. *J. Consult. Psychol.*, 1949, *13*,
169--175.

190\. Shoben, E. J., Jr. A learning-theory interpretation of
psychotherapy. *Harvard Educ. Rev.*, 1948, 129--145.

191\. Shoben, E. J., Jr. Psychotherapy as a problem in learning theory.
*Psychol. Bull.*, 1949, *46*, 366--392.

192\. Slavson, S. R. *Analytic Group Psychotherapy with Children*,
*Adolescents and Adults.* New York: Columbia University Press, 1950.

193\. Smith, H. C., and D. S. Dunbar. The personality and achievement of
the classroom participant. Unpublished research study.

194\. Snyder, W. U. Client-centered therapy. In L. A. Pennington, and I.
A. Berg, editors, *An Introduction to Clinical Psychology.* New York:
Ronald Press, 1948, 465--497.

195\. Snyder, W. U. A comparison of one unsuccessful with four
successful nondirectively counseled cases. *J. Consult. Psychol.*, 1947,
*11*, 38--42.

196\. Snyder, W. U. An investigation of the nature of non-directive
psychotherapy. Ph.D. thesis, Ohio State University, 1943.

197\. Snyder, W. U. An investigation of the nature of non-directive
psychotherapy. *J. Gen. Psychol.*, 1945, *33*, 193--223.

198\. Snyder, W. U. The present status of psychotherapeutic counseling.
*Psychol. Bull.*, 1947, *44*, 297--386.

199\. Snyder, W. U., *et al. Casebook of Non-directive Counseling.*
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1947.

200\. Snygg, Donald, and Arthur W. Combs. *Individual Behavior: a New
Frame of Reference for Psychology.* New York: Harper and Bros., 1949.

201\. Stephenson, W. Introduction to inverted factor analysis, with some
applications to studies in orexis. *J. Educ. Psychol.*, 1936, *27*,
353--367.

202\. Stephenson, W. Methodological consideration of Jung's typology.
*J. Ment. Sci.*, 1939, *85*, 185--205.

203\. Stock, Dorothy. An investigation into the interrelations between
the self-concept and feelings directed toward other persons and groups.
*J. Consult. Psychol.*, 1949, *13*, 176--180.

204\. Strom, Kenneth. A re-study of William U. Snyder's "An
investigation of the nature of non-directive psychotherapy." M.A.
thesis, University of Chicago, 1948.

205\. Sullivan, H. S. *Conceptions of Modern Psychiatry.* Washington,
D.C.: W. A. White Foundation, 1945.

206\. Survey Research Center Study No. 6. Selected findings from a study
of clerical workers in the Prudential insurance company of America.
Human Relations, University of Michigan, 1948.

207\. Sutherland, J. D., and I. E. Menzies. Two industrial projects. *J.
Social Issues*, 1947, *3*, 51--58.

208\. Symonds, P. A. Education and psychotherapy. *J. Educ. Psychol.*,
1949, *40*, 1--32.

209\. Taft, Jessie. *The Dynamics of Therapy in a Controlled
Relationship.* New York: Macmillan, 1933.

210\. Tavistock Institute of Human Relations. Two research projects on
human relations in industry. Document No. 173, January 1949.

211\. Telschow, Earl. The role of the group leader in nondirective group
psychotherapy. Ed. D. project, Teachers College, Columbia University,
1950.

212\. Thelen, H. A., and John Withall. Three frames of reference: the
description of climate. *Human Relations*, 1949, *2*, 159--176.

213\. Thetford, William N. The measurement of physiological responses to
frustration before and after nondirective psychotherapy. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Chicago, 1949.

214\. Thetford, William N. The measurement of physiological responses to
frustration before and after nondirective psychotherapy. *Amer.
Psychologist*, 1948, *3*, 278. Abstract of thesis.

215\. Thorne, F. C. The clinical method in science. *Amer.
Psychologist*, 1947, *2*, 159--166.

216\. Thorne, F. C. Directive psychotherapy: IV. The therapeutic
implications of the case history. *J. Clin. Psychol.*, 1945, *1*,
318--330.

217\. Thorne, F.; J. Carter; *et al.* Symposium: critical evaluation of
nondirective counseling and psychotherapy. *J. Clin. Psychol.*, 1948,
*4*, 225--263.

218\. *To Secure These Rights.* Report of the President's Committee on
Civil Rights. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1947.

219\. Travis, L., and D. Baruch. *Personal Problems of Everyday Living.*
New York: Appleton-Century, 1941.

220\. Whitaker, Carl. Teaching the practicing physician to do
psychotherapy. *Southern Med. J.*, 1949, *42*, 809--903.

221\. Whitaker, C. A.; J. Warkentin; and N. Johnson. A philosophical
basis for brief psychotherapy. *Psychiatric Quarterly*, 1949, *23*,
439--443.

222\. White, Robert W. *The Abnormal Personality.* New York: Ronald
Press, 1948.

223\. Williams, Herbert D. Experiment in self-directed education.
*School and Society*, 1930, *31*, 715--718.

224\. Withall, John. The development of a technique for the measurement
of social-emotional climate in classrooms. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Chicago, 1948.

225\. Withall, John. The development of a technique for the measurement
of social-emotional climate in classrooms. *J. Exp. Educ.*, 1949,
347--361.

226\. Witmer, H. L., ed. *Teaching Psychotherapeutic Medicine.* New
York: Commonwealth Fund, 1947.

227\. Wood, Austin. Another psychologist analyzed. *J. Abnorm. & Soc.
Psychol.*, 1941, *36*, 87--90.

228\. Zimmerman, Jervis. Modification of the discomfort relief quotient
as a measure of progress in counseling. M.A. thesis, University of
Chicago, 1950.

</div>
::::

[]{#025_endnotes.html}

<div>

[]{#025_endnotes.html_endnotes}

</div>

#### E[NDNOTES]{.sc} {.fronthead}

[1](#010_c1.html_f1){#025_endnotes.html_e1}. See for example the
discussion of Democracy at the Grass Roots, and The Release of Human
Energies, in *TVA --- Democracy on the March*, by David E. Lilienthal.

[2](#010_c1.html_f2){#025_endnotes.html_e2}. What term shall be used to
indicate the person with whom the therapist is dealing? "Patient,"
"subject," "counselee," "analysand," are terms which have been used. We
have increasingly used the term client, to the point where we have
absorbed it into the label of "client-centered therapy." It has been
chosen because, in spite of its imperfections of dictionary meaning and
derivation, it seems to come closest to conveying the picture of this
person as we see it. The client, as the term has acquired its meaning,
is one who comes actively and voluntarily to gain help on a problem, but
without any notion of surrendering his own responsibility for the
situation. It is because the term has these connotations that we have
chosen it, since it avoids the connotation that he is sick, or the
object of an experiment, and so on. The term client does have certain
legal connotations which are unfortunate, and if a better term emerges
we shall be happy to use it. For the present, however, this seems the
term most appropriately related to our concept of the person coming for
help.

[3](#010_c1.html_f3){#025_endnotes.html_e3}. In a paper entitled "Newer
Concepts of Psychotherapy," delivered to the Minnesota chapter of Psi
Chi in December, 1940. In a slightly revised form, this paper became
Chapter II of the book *Counseling and Psychotherapy*, published in
1942.

[4](#010_c1.html_f4){#025_endnotes.html_e4}. Numbers in parentheses
refer to the list of references at the end of the book.

[5](#011_c2.html_f5){#025_endnotes.html_e5}. This chapter is a revision
and extension of an article which first appeared in the *Journal of
Consulting Psychology* (April, 1949), *13*, 82--94.

[6](#011_c2.html_f6){#025_endnotes.html_e6}. This whole topic might be
helpfully pursued on a deeper level. What permits the therapist to have
a deep respect for, and acceptance of, another? In our experience, such
a philosophy is most likely to be held by the person who has a basic
respect for the worth and significance of himself. One cannot, in all
likelihood, accept others unless he has first accepted himself. This
could lead us off into various byways, to a consideration of those
experiences, including therapy, which assist the therapist to gain an
abiding and realistically founded self-respect. We shall leave such a
discussion for Chapter 10, limiting ourselves here simply to a
description of the philosophical organization which seems to be the most
effective foundation for this type of therapy.

[7](#011_c2.html_f7){#025_endnotes.html_e7}. From a psychoanalytic
interview recorded by Earl Zinn, and used by permission.

[8](#011_c2.html_f8){#025_endnotes.html_e8}. Subject, or client.

[9](#011_c2.html_f9){#025_endnotes.html_e9}. Counselor.

[10](#011_c2.html_f10){#025_endnotes.html_e10}. It will be evident from
this discussion that neither in practice nor in theory can we go along
with the comment by Green (72) that client-centered counseling is simply
a subtle way of getting across to the client the cues which indicate
approval of cultural values. His hypothesis could be partially
maintained in some of the early client-centered cases, but it does not
appear to be supported at all in the present handling by experienced
counselors. As client-centered therapy has developed, it becomes more
and more clear that it cannot be explained on such a basis.

[11](#011_c2.html_f11){#025_endnotes.html_e11}. Since the writing of the
above, a different explanation has been pointed out to the author. It is
quite possible that the child assumes that the therapist perceives the
situation as he does. The child, much more than the adult, assumes that
everyone shares with him the same perceptual reality. Therefore when
there is permissiveness and acceptance, this is experienced by the child
as understanding and acceptance, since he takes it for granted that the
therapist perceives as he does.

If this description is accurate, then the situation in play therapy
differs in no essential way from the description of the relationship
which has been given throughout the chapter.

[12](#011_c2.html_f12){#025_endnotes.html_e12}. See not only the
references indicated, but page 140 of Chapter 4, in which another study
using this technique is described.

[13](#012_c3.html_f13){#025_endnotes.html_e13}. The response which is
referred to as striking the spark was, from the counselor's point of
view, simply a good reflection of the attitude she had just expressed.
Something about the wording of it, or perhaps merely the objectification
of the feeling, struck her with some force. She had responded in some
such words as these: "Hm, that hit something. I'll have to think that
one over. I believe that leads somewhere."

[14](#012_c3.html_f14){#025_endnotes.html_e14}. Compare also the
experience of Miss Har, quoted earlier, page 79, in falling asleep
rather than hear the recording of her own voice expressing affection for
her father.

[15](#013_c4.html_f15){#025_endnotes.html_e15}. Adapted from Seeman
(180, pp. 161, 164, 165).

[16](#013_c4.html_f16){#025_endnotes.html_e16}. Without going into a
general description of the Q technique, the adaptation of it to this
type of problem may be described. From a number of recorded counseling
cases a large population of all the self-referent statements in the
cases was obtained. From this a random selection of 150 statements was
made to obtain a usable group. Obviously, this list includes a wide
variety of ways of perceiving the self. For the purposes of one research
being made the client is asked, before therapy, to sort these statements
into eleven piles, with those items least characteristic of him in pile
0, and those most characteristic in pile 10. He is further instructed to
place in each pile a given number --- 4, 5, 10, 16, 25, 30, 25, 16, 10,
5, 4, respectively --- so that the outcome is a forced normal
distribution. Having completed this sorting, which gives a rather
detailed picture of the perceived self, the client is asked to sort the
cards again, this time to portray his desired self or self-ideal. After
the conclusion of therapy he is again requested to sort the cards both
for self and for the self he desires to be.

Since within each sorting the items have been placed relative to each
other on the same continuum, the results of one sorting can be
correlated with the results of another sorting. Thus we can find the
correlation of pre-therapy self with post-therapy self, pre-therapy self
with pre-therapy ideal, etc. The size of the correlation coefficient
then represents the similarity between the ratings, if the correlation
is positive --- a lack of similarity if the correlation is about zero
--- and an oppositeness between ratings if the correlation is negative.
The maximum effectiveness of the method is obtained if all the
correlations are computed and the resulting matrix factored by the usual
techniques. This makes it possible to discover any patternings or
"factors" running through all the client's sortings.

One of the advantages of this technique is that it enables one to
utilize rather elaborate statistical procedures on large populations of
items which may come from one or a small number of cases. There is thus
much less loss of the clinical richness in the statistical
investigation. This mode of approach offers much promise as a research
tool. Unfortunately, no very adequate description of it is yet available
in published form, though the reader is referred to Stephenson (201,
202).

[17](#013_c4.html_f17){#025_endnotes.html_e17}. Beier's very interesting
study supplies indirect evidence on this matter of perceptual
differentiation by throwing the process in reverse and inducing anxiety,
then studying the result. He gave all his subjects (sixty-two women) a
Rorschach test, a test of perceptual disorientation, and a battery of
tests measuring abstract ability --- ability to sustain several tasks at
once, to synthesize them, to categorize materials, to shift from one
concept to another. He then induced threat in the experimental group by
giving each member a structured but accurate and individually different
interpretation of her Rorschach results. When the experimental group and
the matched control group were retested with the tests of abstract
reasoning it was found that the experimental group showed a loss of
abstract ability and an increase in rigidity of thinking and perception,
as compared to the control group. The differences were significant.

From the point of view of our interest in therapy this study suggests
that differentiation and flexible hypothesis-formation are decreased
under threat, and probably increase in the absence of threat; also that
threat to the self may easily be produced by evaluation from an external
frame of reference by an expert.

[18](#013_c4.html_f18){#025_endnotes.html_e18}. The reader who is
unfamiliar with these tests will find brief introductory descriptions of
the Rorschach and the Kent-Rosanoff test in Bell (22). Similar
descriptions of the Bernreuter Adjustment Inventory and the Minnesota
Multiphasic are available in Rosenzweig (176). The Hildreth
Feeling-Attitude Scale is described in a journal article (82). The Bell
Adjustment Inventory, with a descriptive manual, is obtainable from
Stanford University Press, Stanford University, California.

[19](#013_c4.html_f19){#025_endnotes.html_e19}. Calculated from (18),
Table III, p. 4.

[20](#013_c4.html_f20){#025_endnotes.html_e20}. Since the above was
written, new facts emerge to further complicate the picture. Much of
this questioning was based on the fact that in one recorded case all the
measures except defensiveness showed the client making clear-cut
progress, but defensiveness equally clearly increased. Now, however, a
recorded follow-up interview with the client one year after the
completion of therapy, and follow-up tests given at the same time,
indicate with equal clarity that there has been real and lasting gain.
The client shows surprising progress in her inner adjustment to her
feminine role, and greater freedom in being herself. She also gives much
evidence indicating better adjustment to her family, to boy friends, to
social life, and to her work. Everyone who has read the interview
regards it as a definitely successful outcome.

What is the explanation? Was the defensiveness measure inaccurate? Or
did defensiveness increase during therapy, and dissolve later? There is
obviously much room for further research on this point.

[21](#014_c5.html_f21){#025_endnotes.html_e21}. The client has asked a
straightforward question which the counselor can answer without implying
any type of judgment upon the client, and without in any way suggesting
how she ought to think or behave. So he leaves the client's internal
frame of reference momentarily and answers it.

[22](#014_c5.html_f22){#025_endnotes.html_e22}. Lest the reader think
"Aha --- these client-centered therapists interpret just like everyone
else," it might be remarked that this is the first clear-cut
interpretation of the twelve interviews. The counselor confesses that he
was so interested in the client's perception of the counseling
relationship that he wished to see if this interpretation of it would be
accepted. It was, but her "That's right" conveys no real knowledge. It
is the client's spontaneous description of the relationship which is
real evidence of her own perception of the relationship.

[23](#014_c5.html_f23){#025_endnotes.html_e23}. In these excerpts, a
series of dots means that some material from the notes has been omitted.

[24](#014_c5.html_f24){#025_endnotes.html_e24}. As in setting any limit
in the therapeutic experience, this is something which is purely the
responsibility of the therapist, and he takes that responsibility. He
does not attempt to evaluate the client's experience by some such
statement as "That really wouldn't help you." He simply takes
responsibility for his own behavior, at the same time indicating
understanding and acceptance of the client's experience of the
situation.

[25](#014_c5.html_f25){#025_endnotes.html_e25}. Just as it is impossible
to convey on paper the venom and hatred in the client's voice, so it is
utterly impossible to convey the depth of empathy in the counselor's
responses. The counselor states, "I tried to enter into and to express
in my voice the full degree of the soul-consuming anger which she was
pouring out. The written words look incredibly pale, but in the
situation they were full of the same feeling she was so coldly and
deeply expressing."

[26](#014_c5.html_f26){#025_endnotes.html_e26}. To allay the reader's
curiosity, it may be said that this client showed much growth and
progress in thirty interviews, though she realized she still had a long
way to go. For ten months she held these gains, and then was troubled
once more by her conflicts. She tried in a peculiar way to get in touch
with the counselor, who was out of the city for some months, for more
help. Because of the channel she had chosen, the counselor knew nothing
of her request and she received no reply. Within a month she had a
frankly psychotic episode, from which she gradually made a partial
recovery. What the outcome would have been had the counselor been
available, it is impossible to state.

[27](#014_c5.html_f27){#025_endnotes.html_e27}. See, for example,
Frederick Allen's *Psychotherapy with Children.* Norton, 1942,
particularly Chapter III.

[28](#014_c5.html_f28){#025_endnotes.html_e28}. In the Counseling Center
at the University of Chicago a number of our research studies have been
based upon the giving of personality and other tests prior to and
following therapy. These tests, however, are explained to the client as
having to do with our research interests, rather than with his
counseling experience. The results are made available neither to the
client nor to the therapist, and this fact too is made known to the
client.

[29](#014_c5.html_f29){#025_endnotes.html_e29}. There are other, more
transitory objections which might be raised, but which have not had much
actual influence. One is the high degree of unreliability in diagnostic
formulations. Ash (10) has found that even under favorable conditions,
and considering only some sixty diagnostic categories, rather than any
more complex formulation of dynamic mechanisms, agreement by three
psychiatrists was found in only 20 per cent of the cases, and even when
the categories were grouped into five major classifications the
agreement was only 46 per cent. Surely therapy built upon any such shaky
foundation would be insecure indeed. Presumably, however, this condition
should change if psychological diagnosis increases in accuracy.

Another less influential consideration is that if certain diagnostic
types come to be regarded as not amenable to psychotherapy, work with
such individuals tends to cease, whether the judgment was correct or
not. In this way, too great a reliance upon diagnostic judgment can
stand in the way of needed experimentation and research.

[30](#014_c5.html_f30){#025_endnotes.html_e30}. The criteria for
counseling were as follows (other criteria were given for treatment of
parent and child, and for environmental treatment): " . . . it would
seem that direct counseling treatment of the individual, involving
planned and continued contacts, is advisable provided all of the
following conditions exist:

"1. The individual is under a degree of tension, arising from
incompatible personal desires or from the conflict of social and
environmental demands with individual needs. The tension and stress so
created are greater than the stress involved in expressing his feelings
about his problems.

"2. The individual has some capacity to cope with life. He possesses
adequate ability and stability to exercise some control over the
elements of his situation. The circumstances with which he is faced are
not so adverse or so unchangeable as to make it impossible for him to
control or alter them.

"3. There is an opportunity for the individual to express his
conflicting tensions in planned contacts with the counselor.

"4. He is able to express these tensions and conflicts either verbally
or through other media. A conscious desire for help is advantageous, but
not entirely necessary.

"5. He is reasonably independent, either emotionally or spatially, of
close family control.

"6. He is reasonably free from excessive instabilities, particularly of
an organic nature.

"7. He possesses adequate intelligence for coping with his life
situation, with an intelligence rating of dull-normal or above.

"8. He is of suitable age --- old enough to deal somewhat independently
with life, young enough to retain some elasticity of adjustment. In term
of chronological age this might mean roughly from ten to sixty." (166,
pp. 76--77)

[31](#017_c7.html_f31){#025_endnotes.html_e31}. First published in the
*Journal of the National Association of Deans of Women*, Vol. XII,
March, 1949, pp. 114--121, and reproduced here by permission.

[32](#017_c7.html_f32){#025_endnotes.html_e32}. The idea of theme
analysis is that of Leon Gorlow. The technique has been used in several
investigations of the process of group therapy. Agreement among
independent judges in identifying themes in verbatim protocols is almost
perfect.

[33](#018_c8.html_f33){#025_endnotes.html_e33}. See Chapter 2.

[34](#018_c8.html_f34){#025_endnotes.html_e34}. See Chapter 2, pp.
59--63.

[35](#018_c8.html_f35){#025_endnotes.html_e35}. See Chapter 2.

[36](#018_c8.html_f36){#025_endnotes.html_e36}. Throughout the following
excerpt the number in each note at the bottom of the page refers to the
same numbered item in the group discussion.

[37](#018_c8.html_f37){#025_endnotes.html_e37}. See Chapter 7, pages
311--312.

[38](#019_c9.html_f38){#025_endnotes.html_e38}. This study was
previously quoted to illustrate another point. See Chapter 4, pages
142--143, footnote.

[39](#019_c9.html_f39){#025_endnotes.html_e39}. As this volume goes to
press, the author has had the opportunity to read the manuscript of
another investigation of a student-centered approach: M. J. Asch,
"Nondirective Teaching in Psychology; A Study Based upon a Controlled
Experiment," *Psychological Monographs* (in process of publication). In
this study the experimental class of 23 was compared with control
groups, matched in various respects. On objective and essay-type
examinations the traditional group showed more gain. However, there was
no matching of motivation here, since the traditional class was informed
that its grades would be based on the examination, while the
experimental group was asked to take the examination, but told that the
results would in no way affect its grades. Judging from the student
reports, the experimental group gained much more diversified knowledge.

The personal adjustment of the experimental group showed decided
improvement during the course, as measured by the Minnesota Multiphasic
Inventory. The control group made significantly less gain in this
respect.

When the students evaluated their course experience on an instrument
devised for this purpose, the nondirectively-taught group felt far more
satisfaction with the course, and indicated more evidence of gain from
the experience.

In this research there is a rather adequate description of what was
involved in the "nondirective teaching," though there is no objective
measurement of the conditions. The students selected their own goals for
the course, selected most of the reading materials, participated freely
in relatively unstructured class discussions, wrote weekly "reaction
reports" regarding their experience, and determined their own grades for
the course.

[40](#020_c10.html_f40){#025_endnotes.html_e40}. Particularly from the
Committee on Human Development, whose training program is broadly based
in courses designed to give an understanding of the individual as a
biological organism, as a member of cultural groups, and as a
psychological entity.

[41](#020_c10.html_f41){#025_endnotes.html_e41}. Adapted from Blocksma
(33, pp. 119, 163)

[42](#020_c10.html_f42){#025_endnotes.html_e42}. Adapted from Blocksma
(33, p. 118)

[43](#020_c10.html_f43){#025_endnotes.html_e43}. Adapted from Blocksma
(33, p. 125)

[44](#020_c10.html_f44){#025_endnotes.html_e44}. The faculty members of
the Department of Psychology currently involved in this program are, in
addition to the writer: John M. Butler, Thomas Gordon, Donald L.
Grummon, E. H. Porter, Jr., Nathaniel Raskin, Julius Seeman, Arthur J.
Shedlin. Other staff members of the Counseling Center also give
assistance in consultation. Virginia Axline was formerly involved in
this program and had much to do with its development.

[45](#020_c10.html_f45){#025_endnotes.html_e45}. It should be reported,
however, that successful discussions have been held with classes of one
hundred, without any subdivision. The main difficulty with such large
classes is the problem of providing the other resources mentioned above.

[]{#024_index.html}

<div>

[]{#024_index.html_index}

</div>

#### I[NDEX]{.sc} {.fronthead}

::::::::::::::::::::::::::: block1
<div>

Acceptance, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_30), [ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_41),
[ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_50), [ref4](#012_c3.html_lpn_96),
[ref5](#013_c4.html_lpn_159), [ref6](#013_c4.html_lpn_194)

of others, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_520)

in personality formation, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_502)

in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_258),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_276)

of self, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_138), [ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_194),
[ref3](#022_c11.html_lpn_514)

in teaching, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_384), [ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_392),
[ref3](#019_c9.html_lpn_401)

as a technique, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_355)

and transference attitudes, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_203)

Acting out, danger of with play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_256)

Adjustment counseling, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_3); *see also*
Client-centered psychotherapy

Admission to training, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_463)

Aichhorn, August, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_386)

Albee, G. W., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_173)

Alexander, Franz, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_4),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_196)

Alice, excerpts from case of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_151)

Allen, F. H., [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_10), [ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_219),
[ref3](#014_c5.html_lpn_231), [ref4](#016_c6.html_lpn_236),
[ref5](#016_c6.html_lpn_237), [ref6](#016_c6.html_lpn_276)

Allergies, therapeutic work with, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_229)

Allport, G. W., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_323),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_329)

Alpert, Bert., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_370),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_383)

Alter ego, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_35), [ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_40),
[ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_41), [ref4](#011_c2.html_lpn_42),
[ref5](#014_c5.html_lpn_208)

American Psychological Association, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_3),
[ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_14), [ref3](#020_c10.html_lpn_429),
[ref4](#020_c10.html_lpn_434)

Committee on Graduate Training, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_478)

Ames, Adelbert, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_385)

"Anarchic participation," [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_370)

Anderson, H. H., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_347),
[ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_395)

Angyal, Andras, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_100),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_481), [ref3](#022_c11.html_lpn_483),
[ref4](#022_c11.html_lpn_488), [ref5](#022_c11.html_lpn_497)

Asch, M. J., [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_424), [ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_426)

Ash, Philip, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_225)

Assimilation of denied experience, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_104)

Attention as a technique, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_349)

Attitudes, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_19)

as basic to training, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_432)

clarification of, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_28),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_62)

implementation of, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_24),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_34), [ref3](#018_c8.html_lpn_339),
[ref4](#020_c10.html_lpn_433)

research on expression of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_133)

toward group leader, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_331)

toward self, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_136), [ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_137),
[ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_138), [ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_139),
[ref5](#013_c4.html_lpn_157), [ref6](#013_c4.html_lpn_191)

toward students, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_401),
[ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_408)

toward therapist, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_66),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_102), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_105),
[ref4](#012_c3.html_lpn_106), [ref5](#012_c3.html_lpn_110),
[ref6](#012_c3.html_lpn_115), [ref7](#012_c3.html_lpn_118),
[ref8](#013_c4.html_lpn_150), [ref9](#013_c4.html_lpn_167),
[ref10](#014_c5.html_lpn_198)

*see also* Reflection of attitudes; *also* Transference

Autistic hostility, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_344)

Axline, V. M., [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_11),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_130), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_185),
[ref4](#016_c6.html_lpn_239), [ref5](#016_c6.html_lpn_263),
[ref6](#016_c6.html_lpn_266), [ref7](#016_c6.html_lpn_270),
[ref8](#016_c6.html_lpn_276), [ref9](#017_c7.html_lpn_319),
[ref10](#019_c9.html_lpn_428), [ref11](#020_c10.html_lpn_452),
[ref12](#020_c10.html_lpn_462)

::: top
Baldwin, A. L., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_340)
:::

Baruch, D. W., [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_277),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_438)

Bavelas, Alex, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_383)

Behavior Research Photopolygraph, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_183)

Beier, E. G., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_142), [ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_418)

Bell Adjustment Inventory, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_172),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_173), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_176)

Bell, J. E., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_173)

Benne, K. D., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_332)

Bernreuter Adjustment Inventory, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_172),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_173), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_177)

Bills, R. E., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_185),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_271), [ref3](#016_c6.html_lpn_274),
[ref4](#016_c6.html_lpn_275), [ref5](#016_c6.html_lpn_277)

Biological knowledge for therapists, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_439)

Bion, W. R., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_353), [ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_383)

Bixler, R. H., [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_226),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_258), [ref3](#016_c6.html_lpn_277)

Bixler, V. H., [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_226)

Blocksma, D. D., [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_25),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_444), [ref3](#020_c10.html_lpn_445),
[ref4](#020_c10.html_lpn_452), [ref5](#020_c10.html_lpn_478)

Boring, E. G., [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_130)

Bown, O. H., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_160)

Breese, F. H., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_340)

Brewer, H. M., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_347)

Brody, B. S., [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_478)

Broken appointments, frequency of, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_75)

Bruner, J. S., [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_506)

Burrow, Trigant, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_481),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_486)

Butler, J. M., [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_462)

::: top
Cameron, Norman, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_481)
:::

Cantor, Nathaniel, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_385),
[ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_396), [ref3](#019_c9.html_lpn_420),
[ref4](#019_c9.html_lpn_424), [ref5](#019_c9.html_lpn_428)

Capacity of the client, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_9),
[ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_10), [ref3](#010_c1.html_lpn_14),
[ref4](#011_c2.html_lpn_23), [ref5](#011_c2.html_lpn_31),
[ref6](#011_c2.html_lpn_35), [ref7](#011_c2.html_lpn_47),
[ref8](#011_c2.html_lpn_48), [ref9](#011_c2.html_lpn_54),
[ref10](#011_c2.html_lpn_56), [ref11](#011_c2.html_lpn_59),
[ref12](#011_c2.html_lpn_60), [ref13](#011_c2.html_lpn_63),
[ref14](#012_c3.html_lpn_122), [ref15](#013_c4.html_lpn_150),
[ref16](#014_c5.html_lpn_221), [ref17](#016_c6.html_lpn_238),
[ref18](#016_c6.html_lpn_276), [ref19](#018_c8.html_lpn_327),
[ref20](#018_c8.html_lpn_338), [ref21](#019_c9.html_lpn_384),
[ref22](#019_c9.html_lpn_427), [ref23](#020_c10.html_lpn_454),
[ref24](#020_c10.html_lpn_467)

Carlson's Raiders, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_58)

Carr, A. C., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_173), [ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_196)

Carter, J. W., [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_231)

Case supervision for students; *see* Supervision of trainees

*Casebook of Non-directive Counseling* (Snyder),
[ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_13)

Casual interviewing, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_470)

Catalyst-leader, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_63)

Child-rearing practices, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_339)

Civil rights, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_325)

Clarification of attitudes; *see* Reflection of attitudes

Client-centered counseling; *see* Client-centered psychotherapy

Client-centered psychotherapy, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_4),
[ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_5), [ref3](#010_c1.html_lpn_6),
[ref4](#010_c1.html_lpn_12), [ref5](#012_c3.html_lpn_129),
[ref6](#013_c4.html_lpn_141)

background for, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_436)

basic principles of, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_276),
[ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_292)

cultural influences of, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_5),
[ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_292), [ref3](#018_c8.html_lpn_367)

implications of, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_11),
[ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_388)

and problem-solving, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_146)

range of application of, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_10),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_176), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_189),
[ref4](#016_c6.html_lpn_276), [ref5](#017_c7.html_lpn_279),
[ref6](#017_c7.html_lpn_313); *see also* Limits of applicability

training for, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_432); *see also* Training in
psychotherapy

Client-centered teaching, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_11)

in cases of reading retardation, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_270)

*see also* Student-centered teaching

Client-centeredness, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_30)

assimilation of, as predictor of success on the job,
[ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_457)

Client expectations, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_66)

transference development, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_215)

Client planning, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_180)

Client's frame of reference, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_34),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_41)

in group therapy, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_288)

in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_245)

*see also* Internal frame of reference

Client's perception, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_65),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_141), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_145)

Client's perception of counselor, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_36),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_38), [ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_41),
[ref4](#012_c3.html_lpn_66), [ref5](#012_c3.html_lpn_105),
[ref6](#012_c3.html_lpn_106)

as described by client, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_90),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_102), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_105)

Client's perceptual field, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_34),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_128), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_136),
[ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_141)

as described by client, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_90)

in group therapy, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_288)

in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_254)

and problem-solving, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_146)

Clients, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_7)

Clinical psychology, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_3),
[ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_14), [ref3](#020_c10.html_lpn_429),
[ref4](#020_c10.html_lpn_434), [ref5](#020_c10.html_lpn_436)

Coch, Lester, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_57), [ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_64),
[ref3](#018_c8.html_lpn_381)

Combs, A. W., [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_18), [ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_146),
[ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_196), [ref4](#019_c9.html_lpn_386),
[ref5](#019_c9.html_lpn_428), [ref6](#022_c11.html_lpn_481),
[ref7](#022_c11.html_lpn_488)

Committee on Human Development of the University of Chicago,
[ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_435)

Communication:

of attitudes, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_114),
[ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_306), [ref3](#022_c11.html_lpn_495)

barriers to as perceived barriers, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_344)

"expressional" aspect of, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_352)

in teaching, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_401)

universal barriers to, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_346)

Conference on Training in Clinical Psychology,
[ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_478)

Contacts; *see* Interviews

Control, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_127), [ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_497),
[ref3](#022_c11.html_lpn_514)

Cooke, M. L., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_343)

Cooley, C. H., [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_497)

Counseling, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_3)

measurement of skill in, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_452); *see also*
Client-centered psychotherapy

*Counseling and Psychotherapy: Newer Concepts in Practice* (Rogers),
[ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_9), [ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_14),
[ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_64), [ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_196),
[ref5](#014_c5.html_lpn_228)

Counseling Center of the University of Chicago,
[ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_13), [ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_75),
[ref3](#014_c5.html_lpn_223), [ref4](#016_c6.html_lpn_273),
[ref5](#018_c8.html_lpn_320), [ref6](#018_c8.html_lpn_356),
[ref7](#018_c8.html_lpn_380), [ref8](#020_c10.html_lpn_444),
[ref9](#020_c10.html_lpn_472), [ref10](#020_c10.html_lpn_475)

Counseling hour, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_7)

in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_242)

stability of, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_70)

support of, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_87)

Counseling process; *see* Therapeutic process

Counselor attitudes toward client, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_122),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_150), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_159)

Covner, B. J., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_383)

Cowen, E. L., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_177),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_270), [ref3](#016_c6.html_lpn_277)

Criteria of evaluation, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_415)

Cruickshank, W. M., [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_270),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_277)

Cultural anthropology and training in therapy,
[ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_437)

"Cure" of a psychological condition, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_230)

Curran, C. A., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_145),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_196)

Current feelings, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_134)

::: top
Darrow, C. W., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_183)
:::

Decision-making in groups, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_343)

Defensiveness, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_97),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_100), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_117),
[ref4](#012_c3.html_lpn_127), [ref5](#022_c11.html_lpn_496)

in education, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_390)

occurrence of, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_516)

scale of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_157)

during therapy, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_182),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_187)

Democratic cooperation, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_327)

Denied attitudes, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_75),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_127), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_135),
[ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_194)

effect of discovery of, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_77)

Denying to consciousness, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_30),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_41), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_97),
[ref4](#012_c3.html_lpn_100), [ref5](#012_c3.html_lpn_114),
[ref6](#013_c4.html_lpn_147), [ref7](#022_c11.html_lpn_499),
[ref8](#022_c11.html_lpn_501), [ref9](#022_c11.html_lpn_504),
[ref10](#022_c11.html_lpn_506), [ref11](#022_c11.html_lpn_507)

Dependency in groups, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_331)

illustration of, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_340)

Dependency in therapy, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_214)

and being evaluated, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_214)

and expectation of dependency, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_215)

and experience of dependency, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_215)

and projection of threat, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_217)

in teaching, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_419)

Dewey, John, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_386)

Diagnosis in psychotherapy, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_30)

detrimental effects of, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_223)

as an experience by the client, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_223)

in group therapy, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_289)

intent to use in response, measurement of, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_452)

and interpretation, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_222)

philosophical implications of, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_224)

and psychosomatic problems, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_226)

rationale of, in client-centered psychotherapy,
[ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_221)

rationale of, in organic illness, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_230)

social implications of, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_224)

training in, and training for therapy, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_441)

transitory objections to, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_225)

trends regarding, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_219)

use of, conclusions regarding, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_221)

Dickson, W. J., [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_10)

Differentiation, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_142)

Directiveness, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_113),
[ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_207)

measurement of, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_452)

Directive therapy, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_196)

Discomfort-Relief quotient, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_181)

Discord in groups, measure of, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_306)

Disowning, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_509)

Distributed leadership, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_332)

Dollard, John, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_181)

Dunbar, D. S., [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_425)

Duncker, Karl, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_146)

Dynamics of groups, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_3),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_322), [ref3](#018_c8.html_lpn_323),
[ref4](#019_c9.html_lpn_402); *see also* Group-member participation

Dynamics of interpersonal relationship, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_15)

*Dynamics of Learning*, *The* (Cantor), [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_385)

Dynamics of personality; *see* Personality dynamics, *also* Personality
structure

::: top
Eclecticism, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_8)
:::

Education:

basis for, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_384)

democratic goals of, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_387)

growth versus maintenance of status quo as goals,
[ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_391)

and philosophical orientation, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_387)

*Education for What Is Real* (Kelley), [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_385)

Educational method, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_385),
[ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_388)

Educational outcomes, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_392),
[ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_414), [ref3](#019_c9.html_lpn_418)

of "free-discussion" course, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_425)

of nondirective versus conventional course,
[ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_424), [ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_425)

in psychological adjustment, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_426)

Ego-involvement, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_326),
[ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_389), [ref3](#020_c10.html_lpn_470),
[ref4](#022_c11.html_lpn_494)

Eiserer, P. E., [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_392)

Electrically recorded interviews, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_6),
[ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_13), [ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_25),
[ref4](#011_c2.html_lpn_27)

in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_266)

use in training, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_431),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_465)

use in measurement of therapeutic skill, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_452)

Emotion, its place in personality, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_492)

Emotional identification, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_29),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_122)

Emotionalized attitudes and transference, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_218)

Empathy, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_28), [ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_54)

as desirable for training in therapy, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_437)

measure of, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_454)

as a technique, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_348)

Encouragement, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_31)

Ending therapy, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_85),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_117), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_126),
[ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_136)

in group therapy, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_294)

in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_264)

Estes, S. G., [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_64)

Evaluation, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_150)

detrimental effects of in diagnosis, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_223)

in learning, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_414)

and transference attitudes, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_202),
[ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_208), [ref3](#014_c5.html_lpn_214)

*see also* Locus of evaluation

Evaluational interaction, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_498)

Examinations, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_414)

Experimental frustration, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_183)

Exploration of attitudes, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_72),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_124)

outcome of, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_75)

in teaching, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_396)

Extensional quality of reaction, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_144)

External frame of reference, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_33),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_45), [ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_47),
[ref4](#019_c9.html_lpn_418), [ref5](#022_c11.html_lpn_495)

and therapist maladjustment, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_42)

External reality, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_146)

::: top
Failure cases, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_188)
:::

Faw, V. E., [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_425), [ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_428)

Fenichel, Otto, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_198),
[ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_203), [ref3](#014_c5.html_lpn_221),
[ref4](#022_c11.html_lpn_533)

Fiedler, F. E., [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_52),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_54), [ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_55),
[ref4](#011_c2.html_lpn_64)

Figure-ground relationship, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_145),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_146), [ref3](#022_c11.html_lpn_483),
[ref4](#022_c11.html_lpn_501), [ref5](#022_c11.html_lpn_504)

Finke, H. M., [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_268)

Fleming, Louise, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_272),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_273)

Foulkes, S. H., [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_301),
[ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_319)

Fred, excerpts from case of, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_254)

"Free-floating attention," [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_352)

French, J. R. P., Jr., [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_57),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_64), [ref3](#018_c8.html_lpn_326),
[ref4](#018_c8.html_lpn_381)

French, T. M., [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_4), [ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_196),
[ref3](#014_c5.html_lpn_231)

Freud, Anna, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_235)

Freud, Sigmund, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_4),
[ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_198), [ref3](#016_c6.html_lpn_236),
[ref4](#020_c10.html_lpn_439), [ref5](#022_c11.html_lpn_495)

on groups, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_328)

Fromm, Eric, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_290)

Frustration tolerance, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_183)

::: top
Gaps in current knowledge, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_187)
:::

Gates Primary Reading Tests, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_270),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_271)

Generalization, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_143)

Gestalt psychology, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_4)

Goals of education, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_386)

in current training program, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_464)

Golden, C. S., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_339),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_368), [ref3](#018_c8.html_lpn_383)

Goldstein, Kurt, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_481),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_489)

Gordon, Thomas, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_18),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_340), [ref3](#018_c8.html_lpn_371),
[ref4](#020_c10.html_lpn_444), [ref5](#020_c10.html_lpn_462)

Gorlow, Leon, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_295), [ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_311)

Grabbe, Paul, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_383)

"Gradient of autonomy," [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_498)

Grading students, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_414)

Great Books course, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_409)

Green, A. W., [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_49)

Grey, A. L., [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_478)

Gross, Llewellyn, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_424)

Group-centered administration; *see* Group-centered leadership

Group-centered leadership:

centrality of total participation in, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_325)

development of rationale for, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_320)

in large organizations, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_368)

origins of, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_337)

outcomes of, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_368)

theoretical bases for, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_323)

Group-centeredness, index of, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_308)

Group-centered therapy, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_11)

basic principles in, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_292)

ease of speech in, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_292)

economy of, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_278)

effectiveness of, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_315)

frequency of meetings in, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_294)

illustration of, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_280)

and individual therapy, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_278),
[ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_286), [ref3](#017_c7.html_lpn_314)

and interpersonal relations as therapeutic agent,
[ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_289)

interplay of roles in, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_309)

length of meetings in, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_294)

optimal number of clients in, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_293)

and prior individual therapy, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_313)

and psychotic tendencies, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_313)

range of application of, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_279),
[ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_313)

selection of group members, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_294),
[ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_312)

starting, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_294)

themes in, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_295)

therapeutic atmosphere in, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_286)

therapeutic process in, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_296)

and therapist's role, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_305)

Group climate, as leadership pattern, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_346)

*see also* Group process

Group disequilibrium and adjustive behavior,
[ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_324)

Group dynamics movement, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_332)

Group facilitation, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_291),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_367)

and distribution of leadership, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_332)

and reflection of intent, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_351)

Group leadership; *see* Group-centered leadership, *also* Leadership
function

Group member participation:

and acceptance of group standards, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_381)

changes in as outcome of leadership, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_378)

dependence of on inner forces, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_367)

and dependency, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_331),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_380)

deterrence of by group leader, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_332)

and morale, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_326)

and reactive behavior, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_329),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_378)

value of, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_326)

Group process, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_329)

and access to leadership, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_332)

and freedom of communication, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_343)

inhibition of by leaders, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_333)

and opportunity for participation, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_340)

releasing of, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_329)

Group structure:

dependency in, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_331)

as dynamic system of forces, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_324)

as obedient herd, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_328)

as relationship between members, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_323)

Growth; *see* Self-enhancement

Grummon, D. L., [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_18),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_462)

Guess Who Test, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_272)

::: top
Haigh, G. V., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_157),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_182), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_187),
[ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_196), [ref5](#020_c10.html_lpn_471),
[ref6](#020_c10.html_lpn_478)
:::

Haimowitz, N. R., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_174),
[ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_229)

Haire, Mason, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_383)

Hallucinations, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_119)

Hamlin, R. M., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_173)

Harrower-Erickson, M. R., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_174)

Harvard University, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_224)

Henderson, Lawrence, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_16)

Henry, excerpts from the case of, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_247)

Herbert Bryan, the case of, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_30)

Hertz, M. R., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_173)

Hildreth Feeling-Attitude Scale, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_172),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_173), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_177)

Hiltner, Seward, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_64)

Hoch, E. L., [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_302)

Hoffman, A. E., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_157),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_181), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_196)

Hogan, R. A., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_182),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_187), [ref3](#022_c11.html_lpn_516)

Horney, Karen, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_4), [ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_64),
[ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_130), [ref4](#014_c5.html_lpn_231),
[ref5](#022_c11.html_lpn_489)

Hull, C. L., [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_495)

Hutchins, R. M., [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_387)

Hypotheses in psychotherapy, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_4),
[ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_6), [ref3](#010_c1.html_lpn_7),
[ref4](#010_c1.html_lpn_8), [ref5](#010_c1.html_lpn_9),
[ref6](#011_c2.html_lpn_22), [ref7](#011_c2.html_lpn_26),
[ref8](#011_c2.html_lpn_47), [ref9](#013_c4.html_lpn_131),
[ref10](#013_c4.html_lpn_172)

and community effort, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_59),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_63)

and play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_238),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_276)

and teaching, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_384), [ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_388)

Hypotheses and personality operation, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_486)

Hypothesis, implementation of, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_35),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_122), [ref3](#017_c7.html_lpn_305),
[ref4](#018_c8.html_lpn_335)

in client-centered teaching, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_388),
[ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_393)

::: top
Ichheiser, Gustav, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_351),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_352)
:::

Improved adjustment, evidences for, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_180)

Information-giving:

measurement of, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_452)

in teaching, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_397), [ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_401)

Insight, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_119), [ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_146),
[ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_148), [ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_157)

appearance of, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_108)

as outcome of group-centered leadership, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_375)

in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_244)

and student-centered teaching, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_424)

in a training program, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_446)

Integration, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_513); *see also* Self-enhancement

Intensional quality of reactions, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_144)

Internal frame of reference, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_29),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_31), [ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_32),
[ref4](#011_c2.html_lpn_34), [ref5](#011_c2.html_lpn_36),
[ref6](#011_c2.html_lpn_41), [ref7](#011_c2.html_lpn_47),
[ref8](#011_c2.html_lpn_48), [ref9](#012_c3.html_lpn_119),
[ref10](#012_c3.html_lpn_127), [ref11](#013_c4.html_lpn_191),
[ref12](#018_c8.html_lpn_354), [ref13](#019_c9.html_lpn_392),
[ref14](#019_c9.html_lpn_419)

difficulty in understanding, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_43)

and personality theory, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_494)

Internalization of experience, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_151),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_376)

as educational good, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_387)

Internship in counseling, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_475)

Interpreting, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_31), [ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_207),
[ref3](#017_c7.html_lpn_289)

criterion of correctness of, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_221)

in group work, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_353)

measurement of use of, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_452)

Interviews:

frequency of, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_10)

number of, related to outcome, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_185)

number of, and therapeutic skill, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_456)

responsibility for reopening of, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_122)

Introjection, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_149),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_151), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_192)

in personality formation, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_498),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_522)

I.Q., increases in, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_340)

Ivimey, M., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_196)

::: top
Jaques, Elliott, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_353),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_357)
:::

Jellinek, E. M., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_176)

Job adjustment and duration of counseling, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_185)

*Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology*,
[ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_130)

*Journal of Consulting Psychology*, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_19),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_196)

*Journal of the National Association of Deans of Women*,
[ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_280)

*Journal of Social Issues*, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_383)

::: top
Kalhorn, Joan, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_340)
:::

Kell, B. L., [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_471),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_478)

Kelley, Earl, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_385), [ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_428)

Kent-Rosanoff Word Association Test, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_172),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_173), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_176)

Kessler, Carol, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_150)

Kilpatrick, Elizabeth, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_130)

Kilpatrick, W. H., [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_386)

Klapman, J. W., [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_318)

Klein, Melanie, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_236)

Klisurich, Dayna, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_339),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_381)

Klopfer, Bruno, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_173)

Kluckhohn, Clyde, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_481),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_489)

Knickerbocker, Irving, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_383)

Kornhauser, A. W., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_326)

::: top
Landis, C., [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_130)
:::

Landisberg, S. I., [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_267)

Lazarus, R. S., [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_506)

Leader, role of, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_63),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_326), [ref3](#018_c8.html_lpn_332)

characteristics of, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_348)

function of; *see* Leadership function

Leadership function, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_330)

diffusion of, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_332), [ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_367)

effectiveness of, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_334),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_343)

goals of, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_335), [ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_336)

inaccurate evaluation of, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_343)

planning for group, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_364)

as property of group, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_332)

and responsibility, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_330)

and superior ability, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_330)

transference of, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_336)

Learning, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_15), [ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_384)

evaluation of, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_414)

facilitation of, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_401)

illustration of process in class, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_402)

movement in, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_142)

resistance to, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_390)

and self-enhancement, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_389)

and self-organization, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_390)

Lecky, Prescott, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_481),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_497)

Leeper, R. W., [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_493),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_498)

Lewin, Kurt, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_15), [ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_57),
[ref3](#018_c8.html_lpn_346), [ref4](#018_c8.html_lpn_382)

Lewis, V. W., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_196)

Lilienthal, David, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_5),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_58)

Limits of applicability:

and age ranges, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_229)

and degree of disturbance, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_229)

and defectives and delinquents, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_229)

earlier criteria of, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_228)

and intra-punitive males, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_229)

and personality types, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_229)

in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_238)

and psychosomatic ailments, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_229)

and social class, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_229)

Limits in psychotherapy:

acceptance of, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_255),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_356)

in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_257)

setting of, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_211)

in teaching, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_396)

"Linking" as a technique in group leadership,
[ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_358)

Lipkin, Stanley, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_70),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_129)

Lippitt, Ronald, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_56),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_346)

*Listening with the Third Ear* (Reik), [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_438)

Locus of evaluation, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_150)

analysis of in evaluation of therapeutic skill,
[ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_453)

and diagnosis, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_223)

in group-centered leadership, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_373)

and psychosomatic problems, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_226)

research study of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_156)

in student-centered teaching, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_414)

Locus of responsibility, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_47),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_63), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_122),
[ref4](#014_c5.html_lpn_227), [ref5](#018_c8.html_lpn_373)

Love as therapeutic agent, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_159)

Luchins, A. S., [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_478)

::: top
McCleary, R. A., [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_506)
:::

McGinnies, E. M., [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_506)

McGregor, Douglas, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_329),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_331), [ref3](#018_c8.html_lpn_383)

Macy Foundation, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_478)

Management, control patterns of, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_326)

Marrow, A. J., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_326)

Martha, excerpts from case of, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_256)

Maslow, A. H., [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_481),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_482)

Masserman, Jules, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_481)

Maturity of behavior, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_157),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_180), [ref3](#022_c11.html_lpn_487)

Mayo, Elton, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_16), [ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_187)

Mead, G. H., [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_497)

Meister, R. K., [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_50)

Mental defect, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_277)

Miller, H. E., [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_50), [ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_51)

Ministers, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_3)

Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory,
[ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_172), [ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_173),
[ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_177), [ref4](#019_c9.html_lpn_426)

Miss Cam, excerpts from the case of, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_88)

Miss Gil, excerpts from the case of, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_46),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_50)

Miss Har, excerpts from the case of, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_73),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_76), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_79),
[ref4](#012_c3.html_lpn_83), [ref5](#012_c3.html_lpn_84),
[ref6](#012_c3.html_lpn_87), [ref7](#012_c3.html_lpn_101)

Miss Tir, excerpts from the case of, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_210),
[ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_217)

Moralization, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_452)

Moreno, J. L., [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_319)

Mosaic, H. H., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_174),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_176), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_177)

Motivation for therapy, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_195)

Movement in learning, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_142)

Mowrer, O. H., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_132),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_181), [ref3](#022_c11.html_lpn_481),
[ref4](#022_c11.html_lpn_489)

Mr. M., the case of, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_30)

Mrs. Dar, excerpts from the case of, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_201),
[ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_210)

Mrs. Ett, excerpts from the case of, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_74),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_81), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_84),
[ref4](#012_c3.html_lpn_85), [ref5](#014_c5.html_lpn_203),
[ref6](#014_c5.html_lpn_210)

Muench, G. A., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_173),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_176), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_196)

Multiple therapy, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_460),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_471)

Murphy, Gardner, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_481)

Murray, H. A., [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_481)

Mutual counseling by students, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_470)

::: top
National Training Laboratory at Bethel, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_322)
:::

Need-satisfaction, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_491),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_504), [ref3](#022_c11.html_lpn_508)

Negative feelings, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_134)

Neurosis, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_508)

Neurotic signs, scales for measurement of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_173)

Newcomb, T. M., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_344)

Nonadjustive behavior in groups, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_325)

Nondirective, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_4), [ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_5),
[ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_21)

Nondirective behavior in member-therapists, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_311)

and notion of orthodoxy, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_430)

Nondirective counseling; *see* Client-centered psychotherapy

::: top
Ohio State University, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_429)
:::

Organic experience, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_109),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_483)

Organic problems, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_440)

Organized reaction of organism, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_486)

Orthodoxy in psychotherapy, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_430),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_460)

::: top
Patterson, C. H., [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_231)
:::

Peckham Centre Experiment, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_59),
[ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_227), [ref3](#018_c8.html_lpn_339),
[ref4](#018_c8.html_lpn_383)

Perceived leader, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_332)

Perception of self, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_136),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_140), [ref3](#019_c9.html_lpn_389)

Perceptual behavior, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_385)

personal factors affecting, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_506)

Perceptual field, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_484)

and development of self, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_497)

Perceptual-field reorganization, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_142),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_193), [ref3](#014_c5.html_lpn_221),
[ref4](#017_c7.html_lpn_317), [ref5](#018_c8.html_lpn_362),

in the learning process, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_389)

Perceptual "map," [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_485)

Peres, H., [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_304), [ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_315),
[ref3](#017_c7.html_lpn_319)

Permissiveness, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_50),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_56), [ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_58),
[ref4](#011_c2.html_lpn_63), [ref5](#016_c6.html_lpn_256)

as group therapy outcome, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_311)

and limits of freedom, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_356)

in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_256)

in teaching, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_401)

Personal Counselors, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_14),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_185), [ref3](#020_c10.html_lpn_478)

brief training program for, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_444)

*Personal Problems of Everyday Living* (Travis and Baruch),
[ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_438)

Personal reaction by counselor, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_208); *see also*
Counselor-attitudes toward client

Personal therapy for trainees, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_433),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_437), [ref3](#020_c10.html_lpn_447),
[ref4](#020_c10.html_lpn_465)

Personality dynamics, knowledge of in training,
[ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_438)

Personality structure, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_7),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_100), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_119),
[ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_172), [ref5](#013_c4.html_lpn_176),
[ref6](#013_c4.html_lpn_178), [ref7](#013_c4.html_lpn_191),
[ref8](#019_c9.html_lpn_418)

alteration of in therapy, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_531)

and training for therapy, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_435)

Personality theory, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_7),
[ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_15), [ref3](#019_c9.html_lpn_388)

and adequate symbolization, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_491)

and acceptance of self and others, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_520)

and development of self, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_497)

diagrammatic representation of, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_525)

and disowning, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_509)

and emotion, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_492)

and evaluational interaction, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_498)

and hypotheses, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_486)

and internal frame of reference, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_494)

and need satisfaction, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_491)

and organization of behavior, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_486)

and perceptual valence, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_503)

and phenomenal field, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_483)

and psychological tension, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_510)

and self-consistency, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_507)

and self-enhancement, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_487)

and self-reorganization, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_517)

and threat, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_515)

in training of therapists, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_440)

and value system, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_498),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_522)

and visceral experiences, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_513)

Phenomenal field, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_142),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_145), [ref3](#014_c5.html_lpn_221),
[ref4](#022_c11.html_lpn_483), [ref5](#022_c11.html_lpn_484),
[ref6](#022_c11.html_lpn_499), [ref7](#022_c11.html_lpn_503)

Phenomenal self, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_146)

Philadelphia group, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_4)

Philosophical orientation, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_5),
[ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_14), [ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_20)

as central in counselor training, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_432)

as educational method, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_393),
[ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_401), [ref3](#019_c9.html_lpn_416)

formulation of in training for therapy, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_437),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_447)

and goals of education, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_387)

Physically handicapped children, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_270),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_277)

Pilot-evaluation, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_344)

Play Analysis; *see* Play therapy, origins of

Play therapy, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_11), [ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_50),
[ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_158)

analysis of protocols of, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_267)

and capacity of child for self-help, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_238)

and child responsibility for pace, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_242)

choice of medium in, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_265)

compared with adult therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_268),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_275)

and demand for structure, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_263)

effect of on personality test performance, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_272)

and free association, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_235)

individual or group contacts in, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_262)

and limits, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_257)

origins of, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_235)

and permissiveness, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_256)

and problems of electrical recording in, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_266)

range of applicability of, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_238)

and Rankian theory, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_236)

research in, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_266)

with retarded readers, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_271)

and source of referrals, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_263)

and therapist's role, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_240)

and treatment of parents, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_239)

Porter, E. H., Jr., [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_64),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_444), [ref3](#020_c10.html_lpn_452),
[ref4](#020_c10.html_lpn_462), [ref5](#020_c10.html_lpn_478)

Positive feelings, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_134)

Postman, L. J., [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_506)

Practicum courses, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_467)

Pre- and post-testing, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_172)

Prediction, of interview effect, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_94)

of proper group memberships, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_313)

Pre-perception; *see* Subception

President's Committee on Civil Rights, report of,
[ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_325)

Primary experience, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_143)

Problem areas, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_10),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_104), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_145),
[ref4](#014_c5.html_lpn_226), [ref5](#014_c5.html_lpn_228),
[ref6](#020_c10.html_lpn_440)

Problem-solving, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_146)

and educational goals, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_387)

and external evaluation, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_418)

Professional responsibility, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_48),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_469), [ref3](#020_c10.html_lpn_472),
[ref4](#020_c10.html_lpn_473), [ref5](#020_c10.html_lpn_474)

Prognosis, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_30), [ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_313)

Psychiatry, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_3), [ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_14),
[ref3](#020_c10.html_lpn_435), [ref4](#020_c10.html_lpn_442)

brief training in, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_442)

Psychoanalytic interview, excerpt from, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_43)

Psychological adjustment, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_513)

Psychological "chain reaction," [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_522)

Psychological climate:

development of, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_393)

effect upon student, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_392)

measurement of, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_395)

*see also* Group climate; *also* Therapeutic atmosphere

Psychological Clinic of Ohio State University,
[ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_9), [ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_430)

Psychological health, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_501)

Psychological maladjustment, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_510)

Psychological tension, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_181),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_191), [ref3](#022_c11.html_lpn_502),
[ref4](#022_c11.html_lpn_510)

Psychosomatic problems, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_226),
[ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_229)

and play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_277)

Psychotherapy, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_3), [ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_6),
[ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_40)

basic element of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_148)

description of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_141)

desirable background for training in, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_436)

initial phases, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_150)

issues in, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_45)

as learning process, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_132)

and problem-solving, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_146)

theory of, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_7), [ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_15),
[ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_148), [ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_190),
[ref5](#016_c6.html_lpn_275), [ref6](#020_c10.html_lpn_439)

value system in, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_149)

Psychotherapy, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_319)

Psychotics, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_11), [ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_119),
[ref3](#022_c11.html_lpn_485)

as poor risks in group therapy, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_313)

::: top
"Q" technique, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_53),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_140), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_141),
[ref4](#016_c6.html_lpn_275)
:::

Questioning, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_31), [ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_452)

::: top
Race conflict, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_276),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_323)
:::

Radke, M. J., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_339), [ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_381)

Raimy, V. C., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_136), [ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_191)

Rank, Otto, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_4), [ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_10),
[ref3](#016_c6.html_lpn_236)

Rankian therapy, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_219),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_236), [ref3](#019_c9.html_lpn_385)

Raskin, N. J., [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_18), [ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_29),
[ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_156), [ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_188),
[ref5](#013_c4.html_lpn_196), [ref6](#020_c10.html_lpn_462)

Reactive behavior, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_329)

Reading retardation, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_270),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_271), [ref3](#016_c6.html_lpn_277)

and adjustment of readers, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_272)

Reality, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_484)

Reality-as-perceived, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_484)

Reality-testing, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_144)

Reassuring, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_31)

"Recommended Graduate Training Program in Clinical Psychology,"
[ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_429)

Reflection of attitudes, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_28),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_62), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_92),
[ref4](#012_c3.html_lpn_105), [ref5](#012_c3.html_lpn_112),
[ref6](#017_c7.html_lpn_289), [ref7](#017_c7.html_lpn_308),
[ref8](#018_c8.html_lpn_351), [ref9](#018_c8.html_lpn_354),
[ref10](#020_c10.html_lpn_452)

Rejection, feeling of, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_27)

Reik, Theodor, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_64),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_352), [ref3](#020_c10.html_lpn_438)

Relationship, counselor-client; *see* Therapeutic relationship

Relationship therapy; *see* Rankian therapy

Repressed material, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_147)

Repression, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_505)

Research in psychotherapy, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_12),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_30), [ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_51),
[ref4](#011_c2.html_lpn_52), [ref5](#011_c2.html_lpn_56),
[ref6](#013_c4.html_lpn_137), [ref7](#013_c4.html_lpn_138),
[ref8](#013_c4.html_lpn_140), [ref9](#013_c4.html_lpn_172),
[ref10](#014_c5.html_lpn_223), [ref11](#016_c6.html_lpn_267),
[ref12](#020_c10.html_lpn_436), [ref13](#020_c10.html_lpn_438),
[ref14](#020_c10.html_lpn_444), [ref15](#020_c10.html_lpn_477)

Resistance; *see* Threat

Respect for the individual, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_19),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_240), [ref3](#016_c6.html_lpn_263),
[ref4](#018_c8.html_lpn_338)

Ribble, M. A., [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_492)

Robinson, Virginia, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_10)

Rochester Guidance Center, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_9)

Roethlisberger, F. J., [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_10)

Rogers, C. R., [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_9), [ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_18),
[ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_27), [ref4](#011_c2.html_lpn_30),
[ref5](#013_c4.html_lpn_133), [ref6](#018_c8.html_lpn_338),
[ref7](#020_c10.html_lpn_444), [ref8](#022_c11.html_lpn_490)

Rogers, Natalie, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_181)

Role-taking, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_437)

in evaluation of therapeutic skills, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_452)

in training, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_468)

Rorschach test, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_172),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_173), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_174),
[ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_176), [ref5](#017_c7.html_lpn_311),
[ref6](#019_c9.html_lpn_418)

Rosenzweig, Saul, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_173)

Ruttenberg, H. J., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_339),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_368), [ref3](#018_c8.html_lpn_383)

::: top
Schilder, Paul, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_319)
:::

Schools of thought, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_7)

and intercommunication, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_197)

Schwebel, Milton, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_424)

Seeman, Julius, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_64),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_133), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_134),
[ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_157), [ref5](#013_c4.html_lpn_180),
[ref6](#013_c4.html_lpn_196), [ref7](#014_c5.html_lpn_226),
[ref8](#016_c6.html_lpn_267), [ref9](#020_c10.html_lpn_462)

Selection of student counselors, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_434)

for internship, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_475)

Self, definition of, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_498)

development of, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_497),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_501), [ref3](#022_c11.html_lpn_502)

experiencing of, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_108),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_142), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_172),
[ref4](#022_c11.html_lpn_497)

Self-actualization, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_489); *see also*
Self-enhancement

Self-concept, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_15), [ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_40),
[ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_95), [ref4](#012_c3.html_lpn_97),
[ref5](#012_c3.html_lpn_110), [ref6](#013_c4.html_lpn_136),
[ref7](#013_c4.html_lpn_148)

as active agent, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_505)

admission of material to, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_504),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_505)

congruence of, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_513)

development of, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_497)

experiences irrelevant to, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_503)

and neurosis, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_508)

and therapeutic movement, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_135),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_136), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_142),
[ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_190)

and threat, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_182)

Self-consistency, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_507),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_513)

Self-destructive forces, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_122)

Self-direction, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_64)

as educational goal, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_387),
[ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_392)

in group leadership, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_338)

in group therapy, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_287),
[ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_292), [ref3](#017_c7.html_lpn_294)

within limitations, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_396)

in play therapy contacts, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_242),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_263), [ref3](#016_c6.html_lpn_275)

in psychosomatic problems, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_226)

reliance on, in teaching, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_393),
[ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_401), [ref3](#019_c9.html_lpn_427)

in vocational guidance, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_226)

Self-enhancement, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_150),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_195), [ref3](#017_c7.html_lpn_316),
[ref4](#018_c8.html_lpn_327), [ref5](#019_c9.html_lpn_390),
[ref6](#019_c9.html_lpn_415), [ref7](#019_c9.html_lpn_427),
[ref8](#022_c11.html_lpn_487), [ref9](#022_c11.html_lpn_501),
[ref10](#022_c11.html_lpn_513)

Self-evaluation, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_414),
[ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_427), [ref3](#022_c11.html_lpn_499)

Self-ideal, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_140), [ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_142)

Self-inconsistency, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_72),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_74), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_97),
[ref4](#012_c3.html_lpn_110), [ref5](#012_c3.html_lpn_124),
[ref6](#013_c4.html_lpn_148), [ref7](#013_c4.html_lpn_151),
[ref8](#013_c4.html_lpn_191), [ref9](#017_c7.html_lpn_279),
[ref10](#017_c7.html_lpn_291)

and defensiveness, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_182)

in personality formation, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_500)

and reorganization in learning, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_390)

Self-in-relationship, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_97),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_139), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_141),
[ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_191), [ref5](#017_c7.html_lpn_291),
[ref6](#020_c10.html_lpn_451), [ref7](#022_c11.html_lpn_500),
[ref8](#022_c11.html_lpn_501)

Self-maintenance; *see* Self-enhancement

Self-preoccupation, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_108),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_129)

Self-regarding attitudes; *see* Attitudes, toward self

Self-reorganization, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_77),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_97), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_117),
[ref4](#012_c3.html_lpn_124), [ref5](#012_c3.html_lpn_127),
[ref6](#013_c4.html_lpn_137), [ref7](#013_c4.html_lpn_141),
[ref8](#013_c4.html_lpn_172), [ref9](#016_c6.html_lpn_276),
[ref10](#017_c7.html_lpn_291), [ref11](#017_c7.html_lpn_316),
[ref12](#019_c9.html_lpn_390), [ref13](#022_c11.html_lpn_517)

Self-responsibility, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_71),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_275)

as educational goal, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_387)

Self-selection in counselor training, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_434)

Self-structure, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_501),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_513), [ref3](#022_c11.html_lpn_515)

Semantics, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_144), [ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_485)

Shaffer, L. F., [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_50)

Shakow, D., [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_130), [ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_176)

Shaw, C. R., [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_59)

Sheats, Paul, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_332)

Shedlin, A. J., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_370),
[ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_392), [ref3](#019_c9.html_lpn_399),
[ref4](#019_c9.html_lpn_402), [ref5](#019_c9.html_lpn_410),
[ref6](#020_c10.html_lpn_462)

Sheerer, E. T., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_138),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_157), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_196),
[ref4](#022_c11.html_lpn_520)

Silence, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_106)

in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_244)

Slavson, S. R., [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_319)

Smith, G., [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_443)

Smith, H. C., [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_425)

Smith, P. A., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_370), [ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_383)

Snyder, W. U., [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_18), [ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_30),
[ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_64), [ref4](#012_c3.html_lpn_130),
[ref5](#013_c4.html_lpn_133), [ref6](#013_c4.html_lpn_134),
[ref7](#013_c4.html_lpn_180), [ref8](#013_c4.html_lpn_196),
[ref9](#016_c6.html_lpn_267), [ref10](#016_c6.html_lpn_272),
[ref11](#016_c6.html_lpn_273)

Snygg, Donald, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_146),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_196), [ref3](#019_c9.html_lpn_386),
[ref4](#019_c9.html_lpn_428), [ref5](#022_c11.html_lpn_481),
[ref6](#022_c11.html_lpn_488)

Social psychologists, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_3),
[ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_291)

Social responsibility, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_48)

Social therapy, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_337)

Sociologists, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_3)

Sociology and training in therapy, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_437)

Sociometric Test, Fleming's, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_272)

Spontaneity, appearance of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_142)

S--R Theory, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_489)

Stanford-Binet test of intelligence, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_270),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_271)

Stephenson, W., [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_53),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_140)

Stock, Dorothy, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_157),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_196)

Strom, Kenneth, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_180)

Structuring, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_69)

absence of in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_263)

example of in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_248)

example of understanding in absence of, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_255)

and group-centered leadership, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_340)

Student-centeredness, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_396)

Student-centered teaching:

and authoritarian philosophy, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_387)

and class size, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_466)

and democratic philosophy, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_387)

difference from counseling, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_398)

and evaluation, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_414)

illustrations of, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_402),
[ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_410)

origins of, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_384)

outcomes of, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_418)

principles of, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_388)

and teacher's role, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_399)

Student counselors, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_431)

background for, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_435)

counseling each other, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_470)

criteria for admission to training, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_463)

criteria for selection of, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_434)

a current program for, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_462)

length of training of, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_441)

prediction of success of, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_456)

supervision of, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_433),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_467), [ref3](#020_c10.html_lpn_471),
[ref4](#020_c10.html_lpn_475)

therapeutic experiences for, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_433)

Subception, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_506)

Suggesting, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_31)

Sullivan, H. S., [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_4),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_481), [ref3](#022_c11.html_lpn_489)

Supervision of trainees, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_433),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_467), [ref3](#020_c10.html_lpn_471),
[ref4](#020_c10.html_lpn_475)

Support, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_209), [ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_286),
[ref3](#020_c10.html_lpn_452)

Survey Research Center, of the University of Michigan,
[ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_58), [ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_339)

Symbolization in awareness, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_127),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_144), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_192),
[ref4](#022_c11.html_lpn_483), [ref5](#022_c11.html_lpn_491),
[ref6](#022_c11.html_lpn_510), [ref7](#022_c11.html_lpn_513)

and development of the self, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_497)

distortion of, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_499)

and the educative process, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_390)

and repression, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_505)

Symonds, P. A., [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_428)

Symptoms, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_132), [ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_136)

movement from toward self in therapy, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_135)

::: top
Taft, Jessie, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_10), [ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_231),
[ref3](#016_c6.html_lpn_236), [ref4](#016_c6.html_lpn_237),
[ref5](#016_c6.html_lpn_276)
:::

Tavistock Institute, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_322),
[ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_357), [ref3](#018_c8.html_lpn_368),
[ref4](#018_c8.html_lpn_383)

Teacher:

changing role of, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_399)

task of, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_386)

use of, by students, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_401)

Teacher-centeredness, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_396)

Techniques, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_5), [ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_9),
[ref3](#010_c1.html_lpn_12), [ref4](#010_c1.html_lpn_14),
[ref5](#011_c2.html_lpn_19), [ref6](#011_c2.html_lpn_21),
[ref7](#011_c2.html_lpn_30), [ref8](#012_c3.html_lpn_65),
[ref9](#012_c3.html_lpn_112), [ref10](#012_c3.html_lpn_122),
[ref11](#013_c4.html_lpn_150)

analysis of in evaluation of skill, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_453)

of conducting brief training, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_445)

in creating acceptant classroom climate, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_392)

in current training program, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_462)

in groups, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_288), [ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_305),
[ref3](#018_c8.html_lpn_348)

overemphasis on, in training, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_431)

research on, in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_267)

in student-centered teaching, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_399)

tendencies in, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_452)

trends in training, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_432)

Telschow, E. F., [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_306),
[ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_308)

Test of Personality Adjustment, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_272)

Thelen, H. A., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_347)

Thematic Apperception Test, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_178)

Theory of therapist's role, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_40),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_103)

Therapeutic atmosphere, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_51),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_113), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_122),
[ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_192), [ref5](#017_c7.html_lpn_286)

as psychological climate, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_347)

Therapeutic movement, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_65),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_132), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_135),
[ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_147), [ref5](#013_c4.html_lpn_151); *see also*
Group process

Therapeutic outcome:

in absence of usual relationship, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_158)

and defensiveness, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_182)

and functioning in life tasks, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_184)

in group therapy, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_311),
[ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_315)

magnitude of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_179)

permanence of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_178)

physiological, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_183)

in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_274),
[ref2](#016_c6.html_lpn_276)

rating of, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_57)

relation to duration of therapy, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_185)

research findings, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_178)

Therapeutic process, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_6),
[ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_7), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_65),
[ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_133), [ref5](#013_c4.html_lpn_180),
[ref6](#017_c7.html_lpn_296), [ref7](#018_c8.html_lpn_327)

in absence of desire for self-exploration, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_263)

and actions in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_268)

between interviews, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_74),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_93), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_121)

client experience of, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_77)

comparison of play and adult therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_268)

dependence upon essential conditions, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_328)

giving of help as agent in, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_292)

as the therapeutic relationship, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_172)

as unified phenomenon, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_157),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_188)

Therapeutic progress, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_83),
[ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_108), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_124),
[ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_151), [ref5](#017_c7.html_lpn_296)

basic motivations for, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_195)

criteria of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_157)

evidences of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_180)

and measures of defensiveness, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_187)

stages of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_137), [ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_147)

Therapeutic relationship, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_41),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_51), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_103),
[ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_144), [ref5](#013_c4.html_lpn_158),
[ref6](#014_c5.html_lpn_208)

absence of and successful outcomes, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_158)

and failure cases, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_189)

in group therapy, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_286)

as "love," [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_159)

in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_241)

safety of, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_74), [ref2](#012_c3.html_lpn_105),
[ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_112), [ref4](#012_c3.html_lpn_114),
[ref5](#012_c3.html_lpn_122), [ref6](#016_c6.html_lpn_241),
[ref7](#017_c7.html_lpn_291)

and training of counselors, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_432)

and transference attitudes, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_208)

Therapeutic skills, measurement of, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_452)

paper and pencil tests of, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_452)

Therapeutic success, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_133),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_137), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_139),
[ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_188)

and absence of verbal interchange, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_158)

in group therapy, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_305),
[ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_315)

prediction of for trainees, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_456)

rating of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_157)

research evidence for, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_172)

Therapist's maladjustments, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_42)

Therapist's role, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_26),
[ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_40), [ref3](#012_c3.html_lpn_103),
[ref4](#012_c3.html_lpn_113), [ref5](#012_c3.html_lpn_122),
[ref6](#013_c4.html_lpn_135), [ref7](#013_c4.html_lpn_150),
[ref8](#013_c4.html_lpn_160)

in group therapy, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_305)

in play therapy, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_240)

Thetford, W. N., [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_183)

Thinking, development of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_142)

Thorne, Frederick, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_231)

Threat, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_144), [ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_151),
[ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_192), [ref4](#017_c7.html_lpn_306),
[ref5](#022_c11.html_lpn_501)

in the educative process, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_390)

effect of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_142)

minimization of, and learning, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_391)

perception of, and barriers to communication,
[ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_346), [ref2](#018_c8.html_lpn_351)

perception of, and defensiveness, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_182)

perception of, and barriers to learning, [ref1](#019_c9.html_lpn_391)

and self-development, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_499)

and subception, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_506)

as basis of transference, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_217)

Training in psychotherapy, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_3),
[ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_13), [ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_43),
[ref4](#011_c2.html_lpn_62), [ref5](#014_c5.html_lpn_229),
[ref6](#017_c7.html_lpn_305), [ref7](#018_c8.html_lpn_327)

as apprenticeship, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_468)

background for, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_435),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_463)

brief, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_442), [ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_444)

and class-size, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_466),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_468)

criticisms of program of, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_458)

current program of, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_462)

and in diagnosis, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_441)

and internship, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_475)

length of, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_441)

and orthodoxy, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_430),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_460)

outcomes of, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_452),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_477)

and personal therapy, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_433),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_437), [ref3](#020_c10.html_lpn_447)

and practice of therapy, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_433),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_468)

and prediction of success, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_456)

supervision in, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_433),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_467)

trends in, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_432), [ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_468)

urgency of, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_429)

Transference:

as emotionalized attitudes, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_200)

as realistic attitudes, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_199)

creation of, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_214)

definition of, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_198)

development of, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_201)

disappearance of, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_209),
[ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_213)

discussed by client, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_201),
[ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_203)

extreme example of, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_210)

frequency of, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_199)

in group-centered therapy, [ref1](#017_c7.html_lpn_289)

handling of, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_203), [ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_213),
[ref3](#014_c5.html_lpn_218)

importance of, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_197)

insight into, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_203), [ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_205)

as projection, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_202),
[ref2](#014_c5.html_lpn_205), [ref3](#014_c5.html_lpn_208)

in psychoanalysis, [ref1](#014_c5.html_lpn_199)

*see also* Attitudes, toward therapists

Travis, L. E., [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_438)

::: top
Unconscious strivings, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_4)
:::

interpretation of, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_353)

Understanding, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_30), [ref2](#011_c2.html_lpn_41),
[ref3](#011_c2.html_lpn_54)

as a technique, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_351)

University of Chicago, Department of Psychology,
[ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_462)

University of Minnesota, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_443)

Unsuccessful cases, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_137),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_138)

::: top
Value judgments, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_150)
:::

Value system, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_149), [ref2](#017_c7.html_lpn_292)

and introjection, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_149)

and personality theory, [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_494),
[ref2](#022_c11.html_lpn_498), [ref3](#022_c11.html_lpn_522)

reorganization of, [ref1](#013_c4.html_lpn_193)

Veterans Administration, [ref1](#010_c1.html_lpn_10),
[ref2](#010_c1.html_lpn_14), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_185),
[ref4](#020_c10.html_lpn_444)

Vineland Social Maturity Scale, [ref1](#016_c6.html_lpn_274)

Visceral experiences, [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_97),
[ref2](#013_c4.html_lpn_145), [ref3](#013_c4.html_lpn_147),
[ref4](#013_c4.html_lpn_148), [ref5](#022_c11.html_lpn_483),
[ref6](#022_c11.html_lpn_500), [ref7](#022_c11.html_lpn_501),
[ref8](#022_c11.html_lpn_510), [ref9](#022_c11.html_lpn_517)

::: top
Warkentin, John, [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_471)
:::

Warmth, as a technique, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_348)

Western Electric studies, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_381)

Whitaker, C. A., [ref1](#020_c10.html_lpn_471),
[ref2](#020_c10.html_lpn_478)

White, R. K., [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_346)

White, R. W., [ref1](#022_c11.html_lpn_481)

Williams, H. D., [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_56)

Withall, John, [ref1](#018_c8.html_lpn_347),
[ref2](#019_c9.html_lpn_395)

Wood, A. B., [ref1](#012_c3.html_lpn_130)

::: top
Zinn, Earl, [ref1](#011_c2.html_lpn_44)
:::

</div>
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::
