DBT ® Skills Training Manual

Also from Marsha M. Linehan Books Cognitive-­Behavioral Treatment of
Borderline Personality Disorder DBT Skills Training Handouts and
Worksheets, Second Edition Dialectical Behavior Therapy with Suicidal
Adolescents Alec L. Miller, Jill H. Rathus, and Marsha M. Linehan
Mindfulness and Acceptance: Expanding the Cognitive-­Behavioral Tradition
Edited by Steven C. Hayes, Victoria M. Follette, and Marsha M. Linehan

DVDs Crisis Survival Skills, Part One: Distracting and Self-­Soothing
Crisis Survival Skills, Part Two: Improving the Moment and Pros and Cons
From Suffering to Freedom: Practicing Reality Acceptance Getting a New
Client Connected to DBT (Complete Series) Opposite Action: Changing
Emotions You Want to Change This One Moment: Skills for Everyday
Mindfulness Treating Borderline Personality Disorder: The Dialectical
Approach Understanding Borderline Personality: The Dialectical Approach
For more information and for DBT skills updates from the author, see her
websites: www.linehaninstitute.org, http://blogs.uw.edu/brtc, and
http://faculty.washington.edu/linehan/

DBT Skills Training Manual ®

Second Edition

Marsha M. Linehan

THE GUILFORD PRESS New York  London

© 2015 Marsha M. Linehan Published by The Guilford Press A Division of
Guilford Publications, Inc. 72 Spring Street, New York, NY 10012
www.guilford.com All rights reserved Except as indicated, no part of
this book may be reproduced, translated, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, microfilming, recording, or otherwise, without written
permission from the publisher. Printed in the United States of America
This book is printed on acid-free paper. Last digit is print number:

9 8

7

6 5

4

3

2

1

LIMITED DUPLICATION LICENSE These materials are intended for use only by
qualified mental health professionals. The publisher grants to
individual purchasers of this book nonassignable permission to reproduce
all handouts and worksheets posted to its website (see page xvii). This
license is limited to you, the individual purchaser, for personal use or
use with individual clients. This license does not grant the right to
reproduce these materials for resale, redistribution, electronic
display, or any other purposes (including but not limited to books,
pamphlets, articles, video- or audiotapes, blogs, file-­ sharing sites,
Internet or intranet sites, and handouts or slides for lectures,
workshops, or webinars, whether or not a fee is charged). Permission to
reproduce these materials for these and any other purposes must be
obtained in writing from the Permissions Department of Guilford
Publications.

The author has checked with sources believed to be reliable in her
efforts to provide information that is complete and generally in accord
with the standards of practice that are accepted at the time of
publication. However, in view of the possibility of human error or
changes in behavioral, mental health, or medical sciences, neither the
author, nor the editor and publisher, nor any other party who has been
involved in the preparation or publication of this work warrants that
the information contained herein is in every respect accurate or
complete, and they are not responsible for any errors or omissions or
the results obtained from the use of such information. Readers are
encouraged to confirm the information contained in this book with other
sources. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-­P ublication Data Linehan,
Marsha, author. \[Skills training manual for treating borderline
personality disorder\] DBT skills training manual / Marsha M. Linehan.
--- Second edition. p. ; cm. Dialectical behavior therapy skills
training manual Preceded by: Skills training manual for treating
borderline personality disorder / Marsha M. Linehan. c1993. Includes
bibliographical references and index. ISBN 978-1-4625-1699-5 (paperback
: alk. paper) 1. Dialectical behavior therapy. I. Title. II. Title:
Dialectical behavior therapy skills training manual. \[DNLM: 1.
Borderline Personality Disorder---­therapy. 2. Behavior Therapy---­
methods. 3. Psychotherapeutic Processes. 4. Psychotherapy---­methods. 5.
Suicide---­prevention & control. WM 190.5.B5\] RC489.D48
616.89´142---dc23 2014026329 DBT is a registered trademark of Marsha M.
Linehan.

When I teach my graduate students---who work with complex,
difficult-to-treat individuals at high risk for suicide---I always
remind them that they can choose whether to look out for themselves or
to look out for their clients, but they cannot always do both. If they
want to look out for themselves at a possible cost to their clients, I
remind them that they are in the wrong profession. I dedicate this book
to all those who have found the courage to carry on this work at a
possible cost to themselves. I also dedicate it to my colleagues at the
University of Washington Behavioral Research and Therapy Clinics: Elaine
Franks, who has done everything possible to limit the costs to me; my
students, who have kept me going when I wanted to stop; Katie Korslund,
my second in command, who has given me such wise counsel; Melanie
Harned, who has backed me up so many times in so many ways; and all
those at the University of Washington Human Subjects Division, who have
never even once impeded my often "out-ofthe-box" research treating
individuals at extremely high risk for suicide. Their willingness to
allow such high-risk research when other universities likely would not
sets an example for others---and made this book possible.

about the author

Marsha M. Linehan, PhD, ABPP, is the developer of dialectical behavior
therapy (DBT) and Professor of Psychology and of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences and Director of the Behavioral Research and Therapy
Clinics at the University of Washington. Her primary research interest
is in the development and evaluation of evidence-based treatments for
populations with high suicide risk and multiple, severe mental
disorders. Dr. Linehan's contributions to suicide research and clinical
psychology research have been recognized with numerous awards, including
the Gold Medal Award for Life Achievement in the Application of
Psychology from the American Psychological Foundation and the James
McKeen Cattell Award from the Association for Psychological Science. In
her honor, the American Association of Suicidology created the Marsha
Linehan Award for Outstanding Research in the Treatment of Suicidal
Behavior. She is a Zen master and teaches mindfulness and contemplative
practices via workshops and retreats for health care providers.

vi

Preface

The original edition of this skills training manual was published in
1993. At that time, the only research conducted on Dialectical Behavior
Therapy (DBT) was a 1991 clinical trial comparing DBT to treatment as
usual for the treatment of chronically suicidal individuals meeting
criteria for borderline personality disorder (BPD). Since then, an
enormous amount of research has been conducted on "standard" DBT, which
typically consists of DBT individual therapy, group skills training,
telephone coaching, and a therapist consultation team. Research has also
been conducted on stand-alone DBT skills training, and on the behavioral
practices that together make up the DBT skills. The new skills in this
edition are a product of my experience and research using the original
skills; the wide-­ranging research on emotions, emotion regulation,
distress tolerance, and mindfulness, as well as new findings in the
social sciences; and new treatment strategies developed within the
cognitive-­behavioral paradigm. The major changes in the revised skills
package are described below.

Skills for Multiple Disorders and Nonclinical Populations The original
skills training manual was focused entirely on treating clients with
high risk for suicide and BPD. This was primarily because the research
on DBT, including DBT skills, had been conducted with clients meeting
criteria for BPD and for high suicide risk. Since the first edition,
however, a number of studies have been conducted focusing on skills
training with different populations. For example, DBT skills training
has been shown effective with eating disorders,1, 2 treatment-­resistant
depression, 3, 4 and a variety of other disorders. 5 In

my colleagues' and my research, increases in use of skills mediates
reductions in suicide attempts, nonsuicidal self-­injury, difficulties
regulating emotions, and interpersonal problems.6 A subset of skills was
also added to a treatment for problem drinkers and improved outcomes
compared to a treatment without the skills.7 A subset of DBT skills is
taught in the evidence-based National Education Alliance for Borderline
Personality Disorder's Family Connections program for family members of
individuals with BPD. The entire set of core skills is taught in the
friends and families skills groups at the University of Washington
Behavioral Research and Therapy Clinics, which consist of individuals
who want to learn skills for coping with and accepting individuals in
their lives who are difficult. This could include friends or relatives
with serious mental health problems, employees with problematic
colleagues and/or managers, managers with problematic employees, and
therapists treating very difficult client populations. Corporate
consultants are looking at DBT skills as a way to improve corporate
morale and productivity. New sets of specialized skills have been
developed for specific disorders, including a module targeting emotion
overcontrol,8 middle path skills developed originally for parents and
adolescents but appropriate for many populations,9 skills for attention-­
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and a set of skills specifically
designed for individuals with addictions. DBT skills lesson plans are
now being used in school systems to teach middle school and high school
students,10 are working their way into programs focused on resilience,
and can be applied across work settings. DBT skills are widely taught in
general mental health programs in community mental health, inpatient,
acute care, forensic, and many other settings. In sum, there are
substantial data vii

viii • Preface

and clinical experience suggesting that DBT skills are effective across
a wide variety of both clinical and nonclinical populations and across
settings. Of course, it should not come as a surprise that DBT skills
are widely applicable. I developed many of the skills by reading
treatment manuals and treatment literature on evidence-based behavioral
interventions. I then looked to see what therapists told patients to do
for each problem, repackaged those instructions in skills handouts and
worksheets, and wrote teaching notes for therapists. For example, for
the skill "opposite action" (see Chapter 9) for fear, I repackaged
exposure-based treatments for anxiety disorders in simpler language. I
also applied the same principles of change across other disordered
emotions. "Check the facts" is a core strategy in cognitive therapy
interventions. DBT skills are what behavior therapists tell clients to
do across many effective treatments. Some of the skills are entire
treatment programs formulated as a series of steps. The new "nightmare
protocol," an emotion regulation skill, is an example of this. The
mindfulness skills are a product of my 18 years in Catholic schools, my
training in contemplative prayer practices through the Shalem
Institute's spiritual guidance program, and my 34 years as a Zen student
and now as a Zen master. Other skills came from basic behavioral science
and research in cognitive and social psychology. Some came from
colleagues developing new DBT skills for new populations.

New Skills in This Edition There are still four primary DBT skills
training modules: mindfulness skills, interpersonal effectiveness
skills, emotion regulation skills, and distress tolerance skills. Within
these modules, I have added the following new skills. 1. In mindfulness
skills (Chapter 7), I have added a section on teaching mindfulness from
alternative perspectives, including a spiritual perspective. 2. In
interpersonal effectiveness skills (Chapter 8), I have added two new
sections. The first focuses on skills for finding and building
relationships you want and ending relationships you don't want. The
second focuses on balancing acceptance and change in interpersonal
interactions. It closely duplicates the skills Alec Miller, Jill Rathus,
and I developed for adolescent multifamily skills training, in which
parents of adolescent clients also participate in skills training.11 3.
The emotion regulation skills (Chapter 9)

have been expanded greatly and also reorganized. The number of emotions
described in detail has expanded from six to ten (adding disgust, envy,
jealously, and guilt). A section on changing emotional responses adds
two new skills: check the facts and problem solving. Also in that
section, the opposite action skill has been extensively updated and
expanded. Skills for reducing emotional vulnerability have been
reorganized into a set of skills called the ABC PLEASE skills. In the
section on accumulating positive emotions, I changed the Pleasant Events
Schedule (now called the Pleasant Events List) to be appropriate for
both adolescent and adult clients. I also added a values and priorities
handout that lists a number of universal values and life priorities.
Another new skill, cope ahead, focuses on practicing coping strategies
in advance of difficult situations. Optional nightmare and sleep hygiene
protocols are also included. Finally, a new section is added for
recognizing extreme emotions ("Identify Your Personal Skills Breakdown
Point"), including steps for using crisis survival skills to manage
these emotions. 4. The distress tolerance skills (Chapter 10) now start
with a new STOP skill---stop, take a step back, observe, and proceed
mindfully---­adapted from the skill developed by Francheska
Perepletchikova, Seth Axelrod, and colleagues.12 The crisis survival
section now includes a new set of skills aimed at changing body
chemistry to rapidly regulate extreme emotions (the new TIP skills). A
new set of skills focused on reducing addictive behaviors has also been
added: dialectical abstinence, clear mind, community reinforcement,
burning bridges, building new ones, alternate rebellion, and adaptive
denial. 5. Across modules I have also made a number of changes. Every
module now starts with goals for that module along with a goals handout
and a corresponding pros and cons worksheet. The worksheet is optional
and can be used if the client is unwilling or ambivalent about
practicing the skills in the module. A mindfulness skill has been added
to both the interpersonal module (mindfulness of others) and the
distress tolerance module (mindfulness of current thoughts). Together
with mindfulness of current emotion (emotion regulation), these
additions are aimed at keeping the thread of mindfulness alive across
time.

More Extensive Teaching Notes Many people who have watched me teach DBT
skills have commented that most of what I actually teach

Preface • ix

was not included in the first edition of this book. In this second
edition, I have added much more information than was in the previous
one. First, as much as possible I have included the research
underpinnings for the skills included. Second, I have provided a very
broad range of different teaching points that you can choose from in
teaching, far more points than either you or I could possibly cover in a
skills training class. The teaching notes may, at first, seem
overwhelming. It is important to remember that this book is not to be
read cover to cover at one sitting. Instead, teaching notes are
organized by specific skills so that when teaching a specific skill you
can find the notes just for that skill or set of skills. It will be
important for you to read over the material for the skills you plan to
teach and then highlight just those points that you wish to make when
teaching. With practice over time, you will find that you expand your
teaching to include different parts of the material. You will also find
that some parts of the material fit some of your clients and other parts
fit other clients. The material is meant to be used flexibly. With
experience, you will no doubt start adding your own teaching points.

More Clinical Examples A larger number of clinical examples are also
included in this second edition. Examples are essential for good
teaching. However, you should feel free to modify the examples provided
and to substitute new ones to meet the needs of your clients. In fact,
this is the major difference in teaching skills for various populations;
one set of examples may be needed for clients with high emotion
dysregulation and impulse control difficulties, another for those with
emotion overcontrol, and another for substance-dependent clients.
Differences in culture, ethnicity, nationality, socioeconomic status,
and age may each necessitate different sets of examples. In my
experience, it is the examples but not the skills that need to be
changed across populations.

More Interactive Handouts and Optional Handouts Many of the handouts
have been modified to allow greater interaction during skills training
sessions. Most have check boxes so participants can check items of
importance to them or skills they are willing to practice in the coming
weeks. Each module also now includes a number of optional handouts.

These have the same number as the core handout with which they are
associated plus a letter (e.g., 1a, 1b). These optional handouts can be
given out and taught to participants, given out but not formally taught,
used by the skills trainer to teach but not given out, or simply ignored
if not viewed as useful. My experience is that these optional handouts
are extremely useful for some groups and individuals but not for others.

Improved Worksheets By popular demand, homework sheets have been re­
labeled worksheets. Also, on each handout the corresponding worksheets
are listed, and on each worksheet the corresponding handouts are listed.
There are now multiple alternative worksheets associated with many of
the handouts. The increase in worksheets is due to a number of factors.
First, it became clear over the years that a worksheet that works very
well for one person may not be good for another person. As a result, I
have developed a range of worksheets for each handout. For most skills
sections, there is one set of worksheets that covers the skills in the
entire section. This is for clients who are unlikely to complete much
homework practice and can help those who have already completed skills
training and are now working on maintaining their practice of skills.
Second, different clients like different types of practice. There are
clients who want to check off what homework they have done, clients who
prefer to describe their homework and rate its effectiveness, and those
who like to write diaries describing what they have done and how it
affected them. I have found it most effective to let clients choose
worksheets to fill out from a set.

Multiple Teaching Schedules Outlined The 1993 edition of the skills
manual included the specific skills and worksheets that were used in the
first randomized clinical trial of DBT. At that time, DBT had not spread
very far, and there were not many examples of how to choose skills for
situations in which some but not all of the skills could be taught, nor
were skills developed at that time for special populations such as
adolescents or individuals with addictions, eating disorders, and so
forth. Given the many new skills in this edition, it is not possible to
teach all the skills in a 24-week skills

x • Preface

group, even when the skills are repeated for a second 24 weeks, as in a
1-year DBT treatment program. This edition includes a number of
schedules for teaching skills, including schedules for 1-year, 6-month,
and briefer skills training in acute care units and nontraditional
settings. Schedules for particular populations (such as adolescents and
substance abusers) are also provided. As often as possible, the teaching
schedules are based on clinical trials that showed that the specific
skills schedule was effective. With this in mind, there are now several
sets of core DBT skills that are outlined in the appendices to Part I.
My general strategy in teaching skills is to give participants all the
DBT handouts and worksheets. I then follow a teaching schedule I
determine based on the population, the number of weeks of treatment, and
current research. Along the way, I tell participants that if we have
time I will teach them other skills---if they talk me into it.

A Word about Terms There are many terms for a person who teaches and
coaches behavioral skills: therapist, psychotherapist, individual
therapist, marital therapist, family therapist, milieu therapist, group
therapist, group leader, counselor, case manager, skills trainer,
behavioral coach, skills coach, crisis worker, mental health worker,
mental health care provider, and so on. In this manual, the term
"therapist" refers to a person who is providing psychotherapy or other
mental health services. In standard DBT, this would be the person's
individual therapist. The terms "skills trainer," "skills leader,"
"skills co-­leader," and "leader" refer to individuals who are providing
skills training either individually or in a group. In standard DBT, this
refers to the group skills leaders. On occasion I use the term
"provider" as a general reference to any person providing health care
services.

References 1. Telch, C. F., Agras, W. S., Linehan, M. M. (2001).
Dialectical behavior therapy for binge eating disorder. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69(6), 1061--1065.

2.  Safer, D. L., & Jo, B. (2010). Outcome from a randomized controlled
    trial of group therapy for binge eating disorder: Comparing
    dialectical behavior therapy adapted for binge eating to an active
    comparison group therapy. Behavior Therapy, 41(1), 106--120.
3.  Lynch, T. R., Morse, J. Q., Mendelson, T., & Robins, C. J. (2003).
    Dialectical behavior therapy for depressed older adults: A
    randomized pilot study. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry,
    11(1), 33--45.
4.  Harley, R., Sprich, S., Safren, S., Jacobo, M., & Fava, M. (2008).
    Adaptation of dialectical behavior therapy skills training group for
    treatment-­resistant depression. Journal of Nervous and Mental
    Disease, 196(2), 136--143.
5.  Soler, J., Pascual, J. C., Tiana, T., Cebria, A., Barrachina, J.,
    Campins, M. J., & Pérez, V. (2009). Dialectical behaviour therapy
    skills training compared to standard group therapy in borderline
    personality disorder: A 3-month randomised controlled clinical
    trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47, 353--358.
6.  Neacsiu, A. D., Rizvi, S. L., & Linehan, M. M. (2010). Dialectical
    behavior therapy skills use as a mediator and outcome of treatment
    for borderline personality disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
    48(9), 832--8.
7.  Whiteside, U. (2011). A brief personalized feedback intervention
    integrating a motivational interviewing therapeutic style and
    dialectical behavior therapy skills for depressed or anxious heavy
    drinking young adults. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University
    of Washington.
8.  Lynch, T. R. (in press). Radically open DBT: Treating the
    overcontrolled client. New York: Guilford Press.
9.  Miller, A. L., Rathus, J. H., & Linehan, M. M. (2007). Dialectical
    behavior therapy with suicidal adolescents. New York: Guilford
    Press.
10. Mazza, J. J., Dexter-Mazza, E. T., Murphy, H. E., Miller, A. L., &
    Rathus, J. L. (in press). Dialectical behavior therapy in schools.
    New York: Guilford Press.
11. Miller, A. L., Rathus, J. H., Linehan, M. M., Wetz­ ler, S., &
    Leigh, E. (1997). Dialectical behavior therapy adapted for suicidal
    adolescents. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 3(2), 78--86.
12. Perepletchikova, F., Axelrod, S., Kaufman, J., Rounsaville, B. J.,
    Douglas-­Palumberi, H., & Miller, A. (2011). Adapting dialectical
    behavior therapy for children: Towards a new research agenda for
    paediatric suicidal and non-­suicidal self-­injurious behaviors. Child
    and Adolescent Mental Health, 16, 116--121.

Acknowledgments

There is truly something magical about being a university professor.
Students arrive excited but often with threadbare knowledge, and before
you know it they have not only climbed on your shoulders but have built
a ladder from there reaching to the sky. I have been enormously
privileged to have had many such students and postdoctoral fellows in my
research clinic while I wrote this book. They have read countless
versions of the skills presented here and tried out new skills,
correcting, improving, and throwing them out as they went. They have
radically accepted canceled meetings and frantic requests to find
missing references, rearrange entire reference lists, and find research
I knew I had read but could not locate to save my soul. They have helped
me early in the day, at night, and when I called on weekends. They have
stayed by my side even though my door said: "Do Not Disturb: Please Do
Not Ignore This Message!" Although I am sure that I have missed some
names here (please let me know for the next printing), I want especially
to thank the following students and former students, now colleagues:
Milton Brown, Linda Dimeff, Safia Jackson, Alissa Jerud, Anita Lungu,
Ashley Maliken, Lyndsey Moran, Andrada Neacsiu, Shireen Rizvi, Cory
Secrist, Adrianne Stevens, Stephanie Thompson, Chelsey Wilks, and
Brianna Woods; and fellows and former fellows, now colleagues: Alex
Chapman, Eunice Chen, Melanie Harned, Erin Miga, Marivi Navarro, and
Nick Salman. Many others have jumped in when asked: colleagues Seth
Axelrod, Kate Comtois and her entire DBT team, Sona Dimidjian, Anthony
Dubose, Thomas Lynch, Helen McGowan, and Suzanne Witterholt. When I had
something controversial to say, I sent it to the DBT strategic planning
executive group (also known as

the Linehan Institute Research Advisory Board) for approval: Martin
Bohus, Alan Fruzzetti, André Ivanoff, Kathryn Korslund, and Shelley
McMain. No one with multiple jobs and never-­ending demands on their time
can get much done without strong administrative help. I could not have
gotten this book done without the help of Elaine Franks, my fabulous
administrative assistant. She canceled phone calls and meetings, said no
before I could say yes, called me at all hours---­morning, noon, and
night---to see what I was doing and how I was progressing, and sent me
repeated copies of things I had lost. Thao Truong, our office and
financial manager, made sure that the whole place did not fall apart
while everyone was waiting on me to finish tasks well beyond deadline.
Much of what is in this manual I learned from the many clients who
participated in skills training groups that I have conducted over the
years. I am grateful to all those who put up with the many versions that
did not work or were not useful, and to those among them who gave enough
feedback for me to make needed revisions in the skills being taught. I
want to thank Copyeditor Marie Sprayberry, Editorial Project Manager
Anna Brackett, Senior ­ Editor Barbara Watkins, Executive Editor Kitty
Moore, and the staff at The Guilford Press. In getting this manual out
in a timely fashion, they each had occasion to practice all the distress
tolerance skills in this book. Their concern for the manuscript and for
this form of treatment was evident at every step. Last, but certainly
not least, I want to thank my family: Nate and Geraldine, who supported
me at every step, and Catalina, who brought enough joy to keep us all
going. xi

Contents

List of Online Handouts and Worksheets

xvii

Part I An Introduction to DBT Skills Training Chapter 1

Rationale for Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Training

3

Chapter 2

Planning to Conduct DBT Skills Training

25

Chapter 3

Structuring Skills Training Sessions

43

Chapter 4

Skills Training Treatment Targets and Procedures

61

Chapter 5

Application of Fundamental DBT Strategies in Behavioral Skills Training

81

Part I Appendices

107

Part II Teaching Notes for DBT Skills Modules Chapter 6

General Skills: Orientation and Analyzing Behavior

125

I. The Goals of Skills Training, 127 II. Overview: Introduction to
Skills Training, 131 III. Orientation to Skills Training, 131 IV.
Biosocial Theory of Emotion Dysregulation, 138 V. Overview: Analyzing
Behavior, 143 VI. Chain Analysis of Problem Behavior, 143 xiii

xiv • Contents

VII. Analyzing Missing Links, 146
VIII. Missing-Links Analysis Combined with a Chain Analysis, 148
      References, 150 Chapter 7

Mindfulness Skills

151

    I.  Goals of This Module, 161
    II. Overview: Core Mindfulness Skills, 166
    III. Wise Mind, 167
    IV. Mindfulness “What” Skills: Observe, 176

V. Mindfulness "What" Skills: Describe, 187 VI. Mindfulness "What"
Skills: Participate, 192 VII. Mindfulness "How" Skills: Nonjudgmentally,
199 VIII. Mindfulness "How" Skills: One-­Mindfully, 208 IX. Mindfulness
"How" Skills: Effectively, 210 X. Summary of the Module, 213 XI.
Overview: Other Perspectives on Mindfulness, 213 XII. Mindfulness
Practice: A Spiritual Perspective, 214 XIII. Wise Mind: A Spiritual
Perspective, 218 XIV. Practicing Loving Kindness, 219 XV. Skillful
Means: Balancing Doing Mind and Being Mind, 222 XVI. Wise Mind: Walking
the Middle Path, 225 References, 227 Chapter 8

Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills

231

    I.  Goals of This Module, 235
    II. Factors Reducing Interpersonal Effectiveness, 237
    III.    Overview: Core Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills, 241
    IV. Clarifying Goals in Interpersonal Situations, 242

V.  Objectives Effectiveness Skills: DEAR MAN, 248

<!-- -->

VI. Relationship Effectiveness Skills: GIVE, 255
VII. Self-­Respect Effectiveness Skills: FAST, 260
VIII. Evaluating Your Options: How Intensely to Ask or Say No, 263 IX.
      Troubleshooting Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills, 266
IX. Overview: Building Relationships and Ending Destructive Ones, 270
X.  Skills for Finding Potential Friends, 270
XI. Mindfulness of Others, 276
XII. How to End Relationships, 280
XIII. Overview: Walking the Middle Path Skills, 285
XIV. Dialectics, 286
XV. Validation Skills, 294
XVI. Strategies for Changing Behavior, 306

References, 317 Chapter 9

Emotion Regulation Skills I. Goals of This Module, 323 II. Overview:
Understanding and Naming Emotions, 325 III. What Emotions Do for You,
326 IV. What Makes It Hard to Regulate Emotions, 332

318

Contents • xv

V.  A Model of Emotions, 335

<!-- -->

VI. Observing, Describing, and Naming Emotions, 345
VII. Overview: Changing Emotional Responses, 349
VIII. Check the Facts, 350 IX. Preparing for Opposite Action and Problem
      Solving, 359
IX. Acting Opposite to the Current Emotion, 361
X.  Problem Solving, 372
XI. Reviewing Opposite Action and Problem Solving, 378
XII. Overview: Reducing Vulnerability to Emotion Mind, 381
XIII. Accumulating Positive Emotions: Short Term, 382
XIV. Accumulating Positive Emotions: Long Term, 386
XV. Build Mastery and Cope Ahead Skills for Emotional Situations, 392
XVI. Taking Care of Your Mind by Taking Care of Your Body, 396
XVII. Nightmare Protocol, 398
XVIII. Sleep Hygiene Protocol, 400
XIX. Overview: Managing Really Difficult Emotions, 403
XX. Mindfulness of Current Emotions, 403
XXI. Managing Extreme Emotions, 407
XXII. Troubleshooting Emotion Regulation Skills, 409
XXIII. Review of Skills for Emotion Regulation, 410 References, 410
       Chapter 10 Distress Tolerance Skills

416

    I.  Goals of This Module, 420
    II. Overview: Crisis Survival Skills, 421
    III.    Knowing a Crisis When You See One, 422
    IV. STOP Problematic Behavior Immediately, 424

V. Pros and Cons as a Way to Make Behavioral Decisions, 427 VI. TIP
Skills for Managing Extreme Arousal, 431 VII. Distracting with Wise Mind
ACCEPTS, 439 VIII. Self-­Soothing, 442 IX. Improving the Moment, 445 X.
Overview: Reality Acceptance Skills, 450 XI. Radical Acceptance, 451
XII. Turning the Mind, 466 XIII. Willingness, 468 XIV. Half-­Smiling and
Willing Hands, 471 XV. Allowing the Mind: Mindfulness of Current
Thoughts, 473 XVI. Overview: When the Crisis Is Addiction, 477 XVII.
Dialectical Abstinence, 478 XVIII. Clear Mind, 482 XIX. Community
Reinforcement, 484 XX. Burning Bridges and Building New Ones, 486 XXI.
Alternate Rebellion and Adaptive Denial, 489 References, 491

Index

493

List of Online Handouts and Worksheets

Purchasers can download and print the handouts and worksheets at
www.guilford.com/skills-training-manual.

General Skills: Orientation and Analyzing Behavior General Handouts
Orientation Handouts General Handout 1: Goals of Skills Training General
Handout 1a: Options for Solving Any Problem General Handout 2:
Overview---Introduction to Skills Training General Handout 3: Guidelines
for Skills Training General Handout 4: Skills Training Assumptions
General Handout 5: Biosocial Theory

Handouts for Analyzing Behavior General Handout 6: Overview---Analyzing
Behavior General Handout 7: Chain Analysis General Handout 7a: Chain
Analysis, Step by Step General Handout 8: Missing-Links Analysis

General Worksheets Orientation Worksheet General Worksheet 1: Pros and
Cons of Using Skills

Worksheets for Analyzing Behavior General Worksheet 2: Chain Analysis of
Problem Behavior General Worksheet 2a: Example---Chain Analysis of
Problem Behavior General Worksheet 3: Missing-Links Analysis xvii

xviii • List of Online Handouts and Worksheets

Mindfulness Skills Mindfulness Handouts Handouts for Goals and
Definitions Mindfulness Handout 1: Goals of Mindfulness Practice
Mindfulness Handout 1a: Mindfulness Definitions

Handouts for Core Mindfulness Skills Mindfulness Handout 2:
Overview---Core Mindfulness Skills Mindfulness Handout 3: Wise
Mind---States of Mind Mindfulness Handout 3a: Ideas for Practicing Wise
Mind Mindfulness Handout 4: Taking Hold of Your Mind---"What" Skills
Mindfulness Handout 4a: Ideas for Practicing Observing Mindfulness
Handout 4b: Ideas for Practicing Describing Mindfulness Handout 4c:
Ideas for Practicing Participating Mindfulness Handout 5: Taking Hold of
Your Mind---"How" Skills Mindfulness Handout 5a: Ideas for Practicing
Nonjudgmentalness Mindfulness Handout 5b: Ideas for Practicing
One-­Mindfulness Mindfulness Handout 5c: Ideas for Practicing
Effectiveness

Handouts for Other Perspectives on Mindfulness Skills Mindfulness
Handout 6: Overview---Other Perspectives on Mindfulness Mindfulness
Handout 7: Goals of Mindfulness Practice---A Spiritual Perspective
Mindfulness Handout 7a: Wise Mind from a Spiritual Perspective
Mindfulness Handout 8: Practicing Loving Kindness to Increase Love and
Compassion Mindfulness Handout 9: Skillful Means---Balancing Doing Mind
and Being Mind Mindfulness Handout 9a: Ideas for Practicing Balancing
Doing Mind and Being Mind Mindfulness Handout 10: Walking the Middle
Path---Finding the Synthesis between Opposites

Mindfulness Worksheets Worksheets for Core Mindfulness Skills
Mindfulness Worksheet 1: Pros and Cons of Practicing Mindfulness
Mindfulness Worksheet 2: Mindfulness Core Skills Practice Mindfulness
Worksheet 2a: Mindfulness Core Skills Practice Mindfulness Worksheet 2b:
Mindfulness Core Skills Practice Mindfulness Worksheet 2c: Mindfulness
Core Skills Calendar Mindfulness Worksheet 3: Wise Mind Practice
Mindfulness Worksheet 4: Mindfulness "What" Skills---Observing,
Describing, Participating Mindfulness Worksheet 4a: Observing,
Describing, Participating Checklist Mindfulness Worksheet 4b: Observing,
Describing, Participating Calendar

List of Online Handouts and Worksheets • xix

Mindfulness Worksheet 5: Mindfulness "How" Skills---Nonjudgmentalness,
One-­Mindfulness, Effectiveness Mindfulness Worksheet 5a:
Nonjudgmentalness, One-­Mindfulness, Effectiveness Checklist Mindfulness
Worksheet 5b: Nonjudgmentalness, One-­Mindfulness, Effectiveness Calendar
Mindfulness Worksheet 5c: Nonjudgmentalness Calendar

Worksheets for Other Perspectives on Mindfulness Skills Mindfulness
Worksheet 6: Loving Kindness Mindfulness Worksheet 7: Balancing Being
Mind with Doing Mind Mindfulness Worksheet 7a: Mindfulness of Being and
Doing Calendar Mindfulness Worksheet 8: Mindfulness of Pleasant Events
Calendar Mindfulness Worksheet 9: Mindfulness of Unpleasant Events
Calendar Mindfulness Worksheet 10: Walking the Middle Path to Wise Mind
Mindfulness Worksheet 10a: Analyzing Yourself on the Middle Path
Mindfulness Worksheet 10b: Walking the Middle Path Calendar

Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills Interpersonal Effectiveness Handouts
Handouts for Goals and Factors That Interfere Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 1: Goals of Interpersonal Effectiveness
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 2: Factors in the Way of
Interpersonal Effectiveness Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 2a:
Myths in the Way of Interpersonal Effectiveness

Handouts for Obtaining Objectives Skillfully Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 3: Overview---Obtaining Objectives Skillfully Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 4: Clarifying Goals in Interpersonal Situations
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 5: Guidelines for Objectives
Effectiveness--- Getting What You Want (DEAR MAN) Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 5a: Applying DEAR MAN Skills to a Difficult
Current Interaction Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 6: Guidelines
for Relationship Effectiveness--- Keeping the Relationship (GIVE)
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 6a: Expanding the V in GIVE---Levels
of Validation Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 7: Guidelines for
Self-­Respect Effectiveness--- Keeping Respect for Yourself (FAST)
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 8: Evaluating Options for Whether or
How Intensely to Ask for Something or Say No Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 9: Troubleshooting---When What You Are Doing Isn't Working

Handouts for Building Relationships and Ending Destructive Ones
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 10: Overview---Building
Relationships and Ending Destructive Ones Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 11: Finding and Getting People to Like You

xx • List of Online Handouts and Worksheets

Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 11a: Identifying Skills to Find
People and Get Them to Like You Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 12:
Mindfulness of Others Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 12a:
Identifying Mindfulness of Others Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout
13: Ending Relationships Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 13a:
Identifying How to End Relationships

Handouts for Walking the Middle Path Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout
14: Overview---Walking the Middle Path Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 15: Dialectics Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 16: How to
Think and Act Dialectically Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 16a:
Examples of Opposite Sides That Can Both Be True Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 16b: Important Opposites to Balance Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 16c: Identifying Dialectics Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 17: Validation (Interpersonal Effectiveness
Worksheet 12) Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 18: A "How To" Guide
to Validation Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 18a: Identifying
Validation Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 19: Recovering from
Invalidation Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 19a: Identifying
Self-­Validation Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 20: Strategies for
Increasing the Probability of Behaviors You Want Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 21: Strategies for Decreasing or Stopping Unwanted
Behaviors Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 22: Tips for Using
Behavior Change Strategies Effectively Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 22a: Identifying Effective Behavior Change Strategies

Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheets Worksheets for Goals and Factors
That Interfere Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 1: Pros and Cons of
Using Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills Interpersonal Effectiveness
Worksheet 2: Challenging Myths in the Way of Obtaining Objectives

Worksheets for Obtaining Objectives Skillfully Interpersonal
Effectiveness Worksheet 3: Clarifying Priorities in Interpersonal
Situations Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 4: Writing Out
Interpersonal Effectiveness Scripts Interpersonal Effectiveness
Worksheet 5: Tracking Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills Use
Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 6: The Dime Game---Figuring Out
How Strongly to Ask or Say No Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 7:
Troubleshooting Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills

Worksheets for Building Relationships and Ending Destructive Ones
Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 8: Finding and Getting People to
Like You Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 9: Mindfulness of Others
Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 10: Ending Relationships

List of Online Handouts and Worksheets • xxi

Worksheets for Walking the Middle Path Interpersonal Effectiveness
Worksheet 11: Practicing Dialectics Interpersonal Effectiveness
Worksheet 11a: Dialectics Checklist Interpersonal Effectiveness
Worksheet 11b: Noticing When You're Not Dialectical Interpersonal
Effectiveness Worksheet 12: Validating Others Interpersonal
Effectiveness Worksheet 13: Self-­Validation and Self-­Respect
Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 14: Changing Behavior with
Reinforcement Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 15: Changing
Behavior by Extinguishing or Punishing It

Emotion Regulation Skills Emotion Regulation Handouts Emotion Regulation
Handout 1: Goals of Emotion Regulation

Handouts for Understanding and Naming Emotions Emotion Regulation
Handout 2: Overview---Understanding and Naming Emotions Emotion
Regulation Handout 3: What Emotions Do for You Emotion Regulation
Handout 4: What Makes It Hard to Regulate Your Emotions Emotion
Regulation Handout 4a: Myths about Emotions Emotion Regulation Handout
5: Model for Describing Emotions Emotion Regulation Handout 6: Ways to
Describe Emotions

Handouts for Changing Emotional Responses Emotion Regulation Handout 7:
Overview---Changing Emotional Responses Emotion Regulation Handout 8:
Check the Facts Emotion Regulation Handout 8a: Examples of Emotions That
Fit the Facts Emotion Regulation Handout 9: Opposite Action and Problem
Solving---Deciding Which to Use Emotion Regulation Handout 10: Opposite
Action Emotion Regulation Handout 11: Figuring Out Opposite Actions
Emotion Regulation Handout 12: Problem Solving Emotion Regulation
Handout 13: Reviewing Opposite Action and Problem Solving

Handouts for Reducing Vulnerability to Emotion Mind Emotion Regulation
Handout 14: Overview---Reducing Vulnerability to Emotion Mind: Building
a Live Worth Living Emotion Regulation Handout 15: Accumulating Positive
Emotions---Short Term Emotion Regulation Handout 16: Pleasant Events
List Emotion Regulation Handout 17: Accumulating Positive
Emotions---Long Term Emotion Regulation Handout 18: Values and
Priorities List Emotion Regulation Handout 19: Build Mastery and Cope
Ahead Emotion Regulation Handout 20: Taking Care of Your Mind by Taking
Care of Your Body Emotion Regulation Handout 20a: Nightmare Protocol,
Step by Step---When Nightmares Keep You from Sleeping Emotion Regulation
Handout 20b: Sleep Hygiene Protocol

xxii • List of Online Handouts and Worksheets

Handouts for Managing Really Difficult Emotions Emotion Regulation
Handout 21: Overview---Managing Really Difficult Emotions Emotion
Regulation Handout 22: Mindfulness of Current Emotions---Letting Go of
Emotional Suffering Emotion Regulation Handout 23: Managing Extreme
Emotions Emotion Regulation Handout 24: Troubleshooting Emotion
Regulation Skills---When What You Are Doing Isn't Working Emotion
Regulation Handout 25: Review of Skills for Emotion Regulation

Emotion Regulation Worksheets Emotion Regulation Worksheet 1: Pros and
Cons of Changing Emotions

Worksheets for Understanding and Naming Emotions Emotion Regulation
Worksheet 2: Figuring Out What My Emotions Are Doing for Me Emotion
Regulation Worksheet 2a: Example---Figuring Out What My Emotions Are
Doing for Me Emotion Regulation Worksheet 2b: Emotion Diary Emotion
Regulation Worksheet 2c: Example---Emotion Diary Emotion Regulation
Worksheet 3: Myths about Emotions Emotion Regulation Worksheet 4:
Observing and Describing Emotions Emotion Regulation Worksheet 4a:
Observing and Describing Emotions

Worksheets for Changing Emotional Responses Emotion Regulation Worksheet
5: Check the Facts Emotion Regulation Worksheet 6: Figuring Out How to
Change Unwanted Emotions Emotion Regulation Worksheet 7: Opposite Action
to Change Emotions Emotion Regulation Worksheet 8: Problem Solving to
Change Emotions

Worksheets for Reducing Vulnerability to Emotion Mind Emotion Regulation
Worksheet 9: Steps for Reducing Vulnerability to Emotion Mind Emotion
Regulation Worksheet 10: Pleasant Events Diary Emotion Regulation
Worksheet 11: Getting from Values to Specific Action Steps Emotion
Regulation Worksheet 11a: Getting from Values to Specific Action Steps
Emotion Regulation Worksheet 11b: Diary of Daily Actions on Values and
Priorities Emotion Regulation Worksheet 12: Build Mastery and Cope Ahead
Emotion Regulation Worksheet 13: Putting ABC Skills Together Day by Day
Emotion Regulation Worksheet 14: Practicing PLEASE Skills Emotion
Regulation Worksheet 14a: Target Nightmare Experience Forms Emotion
Regulation Worksheet 14b: Sleep Hygiene Practice Sheet

Worksheets for Managing Really Difficult Emotions Emotion Regulation
Worksheet 15: Mindfulness of Current Emotions Emotion Regulation
Worksheet 16: Troubleshooting Emotion Regulation Skills

List of Online Handouts and Worksheets • xxiii

Distress Tolerance Skills Distress Tolerance Handouts Distress Tolerance
Handout 1: Goals of Distress Tolerance

Handouts for Crisis Survival Skills Distress Tolerance Handout 2:
Overview---Crisis Survival Skills Distress Tolerance Handout 3: When to
Use Crisis Survival Skills Distress Tolerance Handout 4: STOP Skill
Distress Tolerance Handout 5: Pros and Cons Distress Tolerance Handout
6: TIP Skills---Changing Your Body Chemistry Distress Tolerance Handout
6a: Using Cold Water, Step by Step Distress Tolerance Handout 6b: Paired
Muscle Relaxation, Step by Step Distress Tolerance Handout 6c: Effective
Rethinking and Paired Relaxation, Step by Step Distress Tolerance
Handout 7: Distracting Distress Tolerance Handout 8: Self-­Soothing
Distress Tolerance Handout 8a: Body Scan Meditation Step by Step
Distress Tolerance Handout 9: Improving the Moment Distress Tolerance
Handout 9a: Sensory Awareness, Step by Step

Handouts for Reality Acceptance Skills Distress Tolerance Handout 10:
Overview---Reality Acceptance Skills Distress Tolerance Handout 11:
Radical Acceptance Distress Tolerance Handout 11a: Radical
Acceptance---Factors That Interfere Distress Tolerance Handout 11b:
Practicing Radical Acceptance Step by Step Distress Tolerance Handout
12: Turning the Mind Distress Tolerance Handout 13: Willingness Distress
Tolerance Handout 14: Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands Distress Tolerance
Handout 14a: Practicing Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands Distress
Tolerance Handout 15: Mindfulness of Current Thoughts Distress Tolerance
Handout 15a: Practicing Mindfulness of Thoughts

Handouts for Skills When the Crisis Is Addiction Distress Tolerance
Handout 16: Overview---When the Crisis Is Addiction Distress Tolerance
Handout 16a: Common Addictions Distress Tolerance Handout 17:
Dialectical Abstinence Distress Tolerance Handout 17a: Planning for
Dialectical Abstinence Distress Tolerance Handout 18: Clear Mind
Distress Tolerance Handout 18a: Behavior Patterns Characteristic of
Addict Mind and of Clean Mind Distress Tolerance Handout 19: Community
Reinforcement Distress Tolerance Handout 20: Burning Bridges and
Building New Ones Distress Tolerance Handout 21: Alternate Rebellion and
Adaptive Denial

xxiv • List of Online Handouts and Worksheets

Distress Tolerance Worksheets Worksheets for Crisis Survival Skills
Distress Tolerance Worksheet 1: Crisis Survival Skills Distress
Tolerance Worksheet 1a: Crisis Survival Skills Distress Tolerance
Worksheet 1b: Crisis Survival Skills Distress Tolerance Worksheet 2:
Practicing the STOP Skill Distress Tolerance Worksheet 2a: Practicing
the STOP Skill Distress Tolerance Worksheet 3: Pros and Cons of Acting
on Crisis Urges Distress Tolerance Worksheet 3a: Pros and Cons of Acting
on Crisis Urges Distress Tolerance Worksheet 4: Changing Body Chemistry
with TIP Skills Distress Tolerance Worksheet 4a: Paired Muscle
Relaxation Distress Tolerance Worksheet 4b: Effective Rethinking and
Paired Relaxation Distress Tolerance Worksheet 5: Distracting with Wise
Mind ACCEPTS Distress Tolerance Worksheet 5a: Distracting with Wise Mind
ACCEPTS Distress Tolerance Worksheet 5b: Distracting with Wise Mind
ACCEPTS Distress Tolerance Worksheet 6: Self-­Soothing Distress Tolerance
Worksheet 6a: Self-­Soothing Distress Tolerance Worksheet 6b:
Self-­Soothing Distress Tolerance Worksheet 6c: Body Scan Meditation,
Step by Step Distress Tolerance Worksheet 7: IMPROVE the Moment Distress
Tolerance Worksheet 7a: IMPROVE the Moment Distress Tolerance Worksheet
7b: IMPROVE the Moment

Worksheets for Reality Acceptance Skills Distress Tolerance Worksheet 8:
Reality Acceptance Skills Distress Tolerance Worksheet 8a: Reality
Acceptance Skills Distress Tolerance Worksheet 8b: Reality Acceptance
Skills Distress Tolerance Worksheet 9: Radical Acceptance Distress
Tolerance Worksheet 9a: Practicing Radical Acceptance Distress Tolerance
Worksheet 10: Turning the Mind, Willingness, Willfulness Distress
Tolerance Worksheet 11: Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands Distress
Tolerance Worksheet 11a: Practicing Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands
Distress Tolerance Worksheet 12: Mindfulness of Current Thoughts
Distress Tolerance Worksheet 12a: Practicing Mindfulness of Thoughts

Worksheets for Skills When the Crisis Is Addiction Distress Tolerance
Worksheet 13: Skills When the Crisis Is Addiction Distress Tolerance
Worksheet 14: Planning for Dialectical Abstinence Distress Tolerance
Worksheet 15: From Clean Mind to Clear Mind Distress Tolerance Worksheet
16: Reinforcing Nonaddictive Behaviors Distress Tolerance Worksheet 17:
Burning Bridges and Building New Ones Distress Tolerance Worksheet 18:
Practicing Alternate Rebellion and Adaptive Denial

Part I

An Introduction to DBT Skills Training

Chapter 1

Rationale for Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Training

What Is DBT? The behavioral skills training described in this manual is
based on a model of treatment called Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT).
DBT is a broad-based cognitive-­behavioral treatment originally developed
for chronically suicidal individuals diagnosed with borderline
personality disorder (BPD). Consisting of a combination of individual
psychotherapy, group skills training, telephone coaching, and a
therapist consultation team, DBT was the first psychotherapy shown
through controlled trials to be effective with BPD.1 Since then,
multiple clinical trials have been conducted demonstrating the
effectiveness of DBT not only for BPD, but also for a wide range of
other disorders and problems, including both undercontrol and
overcontrol of emotions and associated cognitive and behavioral
patterns. Furthermore, an increasing number of studies (summarized later
in this chapter) suggest that skills training alone is a promising
intervention for a variety of populations, such as persons with drinking
problems, families of suicidal individuals, victims of domestic abuse,
and others. DBT, including DBT skills training, is based on a
dialectical and biosocial theory of psychological disorder that
emphasizes the role of difficulties in regulating emotions, both under
and over control, and behavior. Emotion dysregulation has been linked to
a variety of mental health problems2 stemming from patterns of
instability in emotion regulation, impulse control, interpersonal
relationships, and self-image. DBT skills are aimed directly at these
dysfunctional patterns. The overall goal of DBT skills training is to
help individuals change behavioral, emotional, thinking, and
interpersonal patterns associated with problems in living. Therefore,
understanding the treatment philosophy and theo-

retical underpinnings of DBT as a whole is critical for effective use of
this manual. Such understanding is also important because it determines
therapists' attitude toward treatment and their clients. This attitude,
in turn, is an important component of therapists' relationships with
their clients, which are often central to effective treatment and can be
particularly important with suicidal and severely dysregulated
individuals.

A Look Ahead This manual is organized into two main parts. Part I
(Chapters 1--5) orients readers to DBT and to DBT skills training in
particular. Part II (Chapters 6--10) contains the detailed instructions
for teaching the specific skills. The client handouts and worksheets for
all of the skills modules can be found at a special website for this
manual (www.guilford.com/skillstraining-manual). They can be printed out
for distribution to clients, and modified as necessary to fit a
particular setting. A separate, printed volume of handouts and
worksheets, ideal for client use, which has its own website where
clients can print their own forms, is also available for purchase. In
the rest of this chapter, I describe the dialectical world view
underpinning the treatment, and the assumptions inherent in such a view.
The biosocial model of severe emotion dysregulation (including BPD) and
its development are then described, as well as how variations on the
model apply to difficulties in emotion regulation in general. As noted
above, the DBT skills presented in this manual are specifically designed
to address emotion dysregulation and its maladaptive consequences.
Chapter 1 concludes with a brief overview of the research on standard
DBT (individual psychotherapy, phone 3

4 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

coaching, consultation team, and skills training), as well as the
research on DBT skills training minus the individual therapy component.
In Chapters 2--5, I discuss practical aspects of skills training:
planning skills training, including ideas for different skills curricula
based on client population and the setting (Chapter 2); structuring
session format and starting skills training (Chapter 3); DBT skills
training treatment targets and procedures (Chapter 4); and applying
other DBT strategies and procedures to behavioral skills training
(Chapter 5). Together, these chapters set the stage for deciding how to
conduct skills training in a particular clinic or practice. A set of
Appendices to Part I consists of 11 different curricula for skills
training programs. In Part II, Chapter 6 begins the formal skills
training component of DBT. It covers how to introduce clients to DBT
skills training and orient them to its goals. Guidelines on how to teach
specific skills then follow, grouped into four skills modules:
Mindfulness Skills (Chapter 7), Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills
(Chapter 8), Emotion Regulation Skills (Chapter 9), and Distress
Tolerance Skills (Chapter 10). Every skill has corresponding client
handouts with instructions for practicing that skill. Every handout has
at least one (usually more than one) associated worksheet for clients to
record their practice of the skills. Again, all of these client handouts
and worksheets can be found at the special Guilford website for this
manual (see above for the URL), as well as in the separate volume.
Descriptions of handouts and related worksheets are given in boxes at
the start of each main section within the skill modules' teaching notes
(Chapters 6--10). I should note here that all skills training in our
clinical trials was conducted in groups, although we do conduct
individual skills training in my clinic. Many of the treatment
guidelines in this manual assume that skills training is being conducted
in groups, mainly because it is easier to adapt group skills training
techniques for individual clients than vice versa. (The issue of group
vs. individual skills training is discussed at some length in the next
chapter.) This manual is a companion to my more complete text on DBT,
Cognitive-­ Behavioral Treatment of Borderline Personality Disorder.3
Although DBT skills are effective for disorders other than BPD, the
principles underlying the treatment are still important and are
discussed fully there. Because I refer to that book often throughout
this manual, from

here on I simply call it "the main DBT text." The scientific
underpinnings and references for many of my statements and positions are
fully documented in Chapters 1--3 of that text; thus I do not review or
cite them here again.

The Dialectical World View and Basic Assumptions As its name suggests,
DBT is based on a dialectical world view. "Dialectics" as applied to
behavior therapy has two meanings: that of the fundamental nature of
reality, and that of persuasive dialogue and relationship. As a world
view or philosophical position, dialectics forms the basis of DBT.
Alternatively, as dialogue and relationship, dialectics refers to the
treatment approach or strategies used by the therapist to effect change.
These strategies are described in full in Chapter 7 of the main DBT text
and are summarized in Chapter 5 of this manual. Dialectical perspectives
on the nature of reality and human behavior share three primary
characteristics. First, much as dynamic systems perspectives do,
dialectics stresses the fundamental interrelatedness or wholeness of
reality. This means that a dialectical approach views analyses of
individual parts of a system as of limited value unless the analysis
clearly relates the parts to the whole. Thus dialectics directs our
attention to the individual parts of a system (i.e., one specific
behavior), as well as to the interrelatedness of the part to other parts
(e.g., other behaviors, the environmental context) and to the larger
wholes (e.g., the culture, the state of the world at the time). With
respect to skills training, a therapist must take into account first the
interrelatedness of skills deficits. Learning one new set of skills is
extremely difficult without learning other related skills
simultaneously---a task that is even more difficult. A dialectical view
is also compatible with both contextual and feminist views of
psychopathology. Learning behavioral skills is particularly hard when a
person's immediate environment or larger culture do not support such
learning. Thus the individual must learn not only self-­regulation skills
and skills for influencing his or her environment, but also when to
regulate them. Second, reality is not seen as static, but as made up of
internal opposing forces (thesis and antithesis) out of whose synthesis
evolves a new set of opposing forces. A very important dialectical idea
is that all propositions contain within them their own op-

1. Rationale for DBT Skills Training • 5

positions. As Goldberg put it, "I assume that truth is paradoxical, that
each article of wisdom contains within it its own contradictions, that
truths stand side by side" (pp. 295--296, emphasis in original).4
Dialectics, in this sense, is compatible with psychodynamic conflict
models of psychopathology. Dichotomous and extreme thinking, behavior,
and emotions are viewed as dialectical failures. The individual is stuck
in polarities, unable to move to syntheses. With respect to behavioral
skills training, three specific polarities can make progress extremely
difficult. The therapist must pay attention to each polarity and assist
each client in moving toward a workable synthesis. The first of these
polarities is the dialectic between the need for clients to accept
themselves as they are in the moment and the need for them to change.
This particular dialectic is the most fundamental tension in any
psychotherapy, and the therapist must negotiate it skillfully if change
is to occur. The second is the tension between clients' getting what
they need to become more competent, and losing what they need if they
become more competent. I once had a client in skills training who every
week reported doing none of the behavioral homework assignments and
insisted that the treatment was not working. When after 6 months I
suggested that maybe this wasn't the treatment for her, she reported
that she had been trying the new skills all along and they had helped.
However, she had not let me know about it because she was afraid that if
she showed any improvement, I would dismiss her from skills training. A
third very important polarity has to do with clients' maintaining
personal integrity and validating their own views of their difficulties
versus learning new skills that will help them emerge from their
suffering. If clients get better by learning new skills, they validate
their view that the problem all along was that they did not have
sufficient skills to help themselves. They have not been trying to
manipulate people, as others have accused them of doing. They are not
motivated to hurt others, and they do not lack positive motivation. But
the clients' learning new skills may also seem to validate others'
opinions in other ways: It may appear to prove that others were right
all along (and the client was wrong), or that the client was the problem
(not the environment). Dialectics not only focuses the client's
attention on these polarities, but also suggests ways out of them. (Ways
out are discussed in Chapter 7 of the main DBT text.)

The third characteristic of dialectics is an assumption, following from
the two characteristics above, that the fundamental nature of reality is
change and process rather than content or structure. The most important
implication here is that both the individual and the environment are
undergoing continuous transition. Thus therapy does not focus on
maintaining a stable, consistent environment, but rather aims to help
the client become comfortable with change. An example of this is that we
discourage people from sitting in exactly the same seats in a skills
training group for the whole time they are in the group. Within skills
training, therapists must keep aware not only of how their clients are
changing, but also of how they themselves and the treatment they are
applying are changing over time.

Biosocial Theory: How Emotion Dysregulation Develops *As noted earlier,
DBT was originally developed for individuals who were highly suicidal,
and secondarily for individuals who met criteria for BPD. Effective
treatment, however, requires a coherent theory. My first task,
therefore, was to develop a theory that would let me understand the act
of suicide, as well as BPD. I had three criteria for my theory: It had
to (1) guide treatment implementation, (2) engender compassion, and (3)
fit the research data. The biosocial theory I developed was based on the
premise that both suicide and BPD are, at their core, disorders of
emotion dysregulation. Suicidal behavior is a response to unbearable
emotional suffering. BPD is a severe mental disorder resulting from
serious dysregulation of the affective system. Individuals with BPD show
a characteristic pattern of instability in affect regulation, impulse
control, interpersonal relationship, and self-image.* The ideas
discussed in this section on the biosocial theory in general (and the
DBT model of emotions in particular) are not only drawn from the main
DBT text, but also based on the following: Neacsiu, A. D., Bohus, M., &
Linehan, M. M. (2014). Dialectical behavior therapy: An intervention for
emotion dysregulation. In J. J. Gross (Ed.), Handbook of emotion
regulation (2nd ed., pp. 491--507). New York: Guilford Press; and
Crowell, S. E., Beauchaine, T. P., & Linehan, M. M. (2009). A biosocial
developmental model of borderline personality: Elaborating and extending
Linehan's theory. Psychological Bulletin, 135(3), 495--510. Neacsiu et
al. discuss emotion dysregulation as central to BPD and mental disorder,
and Crowell et al. present an elaboration and extension of my original
biosocial theory.

6 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

Emotion dysregulation has also been related to a variety of other mental
health problems. Substance use disorders, eating disorders, and many
other destructive behavioral patterns often function as escapes from
unbearable emotions. Theorists have proposed that major depressive
disorder should be conceptualized as an emotion dysregulation disorder,
based partly on a deficit in up-­regulating and maintaining positive
emotions. 5 Similarly, literature reviews have demonstrated that anxiety
disorders, schizophrenia, and even bipolar disorders are directly linked
to emotion dysregulation.6, 7

The DBT Model of Emotions To understand emotion dysregulation, we have
to first understand what emotions actually are. Proposing any definition
of the construct "emotion," however, is fraught with difficulty, and
there is rarely agreement even among emotion researchers on any one
concrete definition. That being said, teaching clients about emotions
and emotion regulation requires some attempt at a description of
emotions, if not an exact definition. DBT in general, and DBT skills in
particular, are based on the view that emotions are brief, involuntary,
full-­system, patterned responses to internal and external stimuli.8
Similar to others' views, DBT emphasizes the importance of the
evolutionary adaptive value of emotions in understanding them.9 Although
emotional responses are systemic responses, they can be viewed as
consisting of the following interacting subsystems: (1) emotional
vulnerability to cues; (2) internal and/ or external events that, when
attended to, serve as emotional cues (e.g., prompting events); (3)
appraisal and interpretations of the cues; (4) response tendencies,
including neurochemical and physiological responses, experiential
responses, and action urges; (5) nonverbal and verbal expressive
responses and actions; and (6) aftereffects of the initial emotional
"firing," including secondary emotions. It is useful to consider the
patterned actions associated with emotional responses to be part and
parcel of the emotional responses rather than consequences of the
emotions. By combining all these elements into one interactional system,
DBT emphasizes that modifying any component of the emotional system is
likely to change the functioning of the entire system. In short, if one
wants to change one's own emotions, including emotional actions, it can
be done by modifying any part of the system.

Emotion Dysregulation Emotion dysregulation is the inability, even when
one's best efforts are applied, to change or regulate emotional cues,
experiences, actions, verbal responses, and/or nonverbal expressions
under normative conditions. Pervasive emotion dysregulation is seen when
the inability to regulate emotions occurs across a wide range of
emotions, adaptation problems, and situational contexts. Pervasive
emotion dysregulation is due to vulnerability to high emotionality,
together with an inability to regulate intense emotion-­ linked
responses. Characteristics of emotion dysregulation include an excess of
painful emotional experiences; an inability to regulate intense arousal;
problems turning attention away from emotional cues; cognitive
distortions and failures in information processing; insufficient control
of impulsive behaviors related to strong positive and negative affect;
difficulties organizing and coordinating activities to achieve non-mood-­
dependent goals during emotional arousal; and a tendency to "freeze" or
dissociate under very high stress. It can also present as emotion
overcontrol and suppression, which leads to pervasive negative affect,
low positive affect, an inability to up-regulate emotions, and
difficulty with affective communication. Systemic dysregulation is
produced by emotional vulnerability and by maladaptive and inadequate
emotion modulation strategies. Emotional vulnerability is defined by
these characteristics: (1) very high negative affectivity as a baseline,
(2) sensitivity to emotional stimuli, (3) intense response to emotional
stimuli, and (4) slow return to emotional baseline once emotional
arousal has occurred.

Emotion Regulation Emotion regulation, in contrast, is the ability to
(1) inhibit impulsive and inappropriate behavior related to strong
negative or positive emotions; (2) organize oneself for coordinated
action in the service of an external goal (i.e., act in a way that is
not mood-­ dependent when necessary); (3) self-­ soothe any physiological
arousal that the strong emotion has induced; and (4) refocus attention
in the presence of strong emotion. Emotion regulation can be automatic
as well as consciously controlled. In DBT, the focus is first on
increasing conscious control, and second on eliciting sufficient
practice to overlearn skills such that they ultimately become automatic.

1. Rationale for DBT Skills Training • 7

Biological Vulnerabilities (the "Bio" in the Biosocial Theory)10\*
Dispositions to negative affectivity, high sensitivity to emotion cues,
and impulsivity are biologically based precursors to emotion
dysregulation. The biological influences include heredity, intrauterine
factors, childhood or adulthood physical insults affecting the brain,
and the effects of early learning experiences on both brain development
and brain functioning. A dysfunction in any part of the extremely
complex human emotion regulation system can provide the biological basis
for initial emotional vulnerability and subsequent difficulties in
emotion modulation. Thus the biological disposition may be different in
different people. Two dimensions of infant temperament, effortful
control and negative affectivity, are particularly relevant here.
Effortful control, which contributes to both emotional and behavioral
regulation, is a general term for a number of self-­regulation behaviors
(including inhibiting dominant responses to engage in less dominant
responses, planning, and detecting errors in behavior). Children at risk
for pervasive emotion dysregulation and behavioral dyscontrol are likely
to be low on effortful control and high on negative affectivity, which
is characterized by discomfort, frustration, shyness, sadness, and
inability to be soothed.

The Caregiving Environment (the "Social" in the Biosocial Theory) The
contributions of the social environment, particularly the family,
include (1) a tendency to invalidate emotions and an inability to model
appropriate expressions of emotion; (2) an interaction style that
reinforces emotional arousal; and (3) a poor fit between the child's
temperament and the caregivers' parenting style. This final point is
emphasized here because it highlights the biology × environment
transactions that shape both child and caregiver behaviors. In theory, a
child with low biological vulnerability may be at risk for BPD and/or
high emo\*The "Biological Vulnerabilities (the "Bio" in the Biosocial
Theory)" section is adapted from Crowell, S. E., Beauchaine, T. P., &
Linehan, M. M. (2009). A biosocial developmental model of borderline
personality: Elaborating and extending Linehan's theory. Psychological
Bulletin, 135(3), 495-- 510. Copyright 2009 by the American
Psychological Association. Adapted by permission.

tion dysregulation if there is an extreme discrepancy between child and
caregiver characteristics, or if the family's resources are extremely
taxed (e.g., by a family member's alcoholism or a sibling with cancer).
Such situations have the potential to perpetuate invalidation, because
the demands of the child often exceed the ability of the environment to
meet those demands. The converse is also likely: A biologically
vulnerable child may be resilient in a well-­matched environment where
strong family supports are in place. Such differential outcomes led me
to propose three primary types of families that increase risk for BPD:
the disorganized family (e.g., one that is pervasively neglectful or
maltreating); the perfect family (e.g., one where expressing negative
emotions is taboo), and the normal family (one characterized primarily
by poorness of fit). Importantly, caregiver characteristics are not
necessarily fixed or preexisting. Rather, the caregiver is also a
product of complex biological, social, and psychological transactions,
including evocative effects of the child on parenting style.

The Role of the Invalidating Environment The role of invalidation in the
development of emotion dysregulation makes a lot of sense, once you
realize that a primary function of emotions in humans (as well as other
mammals) is to serve as a rapid communication system. Invalidation of
emotions sends the message that the communication was not received. When
the message is important, the sender understandably escalates the
communication by escalating the emotion. When the receiver does not
"get" the communication or disbelieves it, he or she understandably
increases efforts to stop the communication, usually by some means of
invalidation. And so it goes, around and around, escalating on both
sides until one side backs down. It is often the receiver who finally
stops and listens or gives in to the demands of the highly emotional
sender. Ergo, escalation has been reinforced. When this continues
intermittently, the pattern of escalated emotion dysregulation is
cemented. Such an environment is particularly damaging for a child who
begins life with high emotional vulnerability. The emotionally
vulnerable and reactive individual elicits invalidation from an
environment that might have otherwise been supportive. A defining
characteristic of an invalidating environment is the

8 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

tendency to respond erratically and inappropriately to private
experience (e.g., beliefs, thoughts, feelings, sensations), and in
particular to be insensitive to private experience that does not have
public accompaniments. Invalidating environments also tend to respond in
an extreme fashion (i.e., to over- or underreact) to private experiences
that do have public accompaniments. Phenomenological, physiological, and
cognitive components of emotions are prototypic private experiences that
lead to invalidation in these settings. To clarify the invalidating
environment's contribution to emotionally dysregulated behavioral
patterns, let us contrast it to environments that foster more adaptive
emotion regulation skills. In the optimal family, public validation of
private experience is given frequently. For example, when a child says,
"I'm thirsty," parents give him or her a drink (rather than saying, "No,
you're not. You just had a drink"). When a child cries, parents soothe
the child or attempt to find out what is wrong (rather than saying,
"Stop being a crybaby!"). When a child expresses anger or frustration,
family members take it seriously (rather than dismissing it as
unimportant). When the child says, "I did my best," the parent agrees
(rather than saying, "No, you didn't"). And so on. In the optimal
family, the child's preferences (e.g., for color of room, activities, or
clothes) are taken into account; the child's beliefs and thoughts are
elicited and responded to seriously; and the child's emotions are viewed
as important communications. Successful communication of private
experience in such a family is followed by changes in other family
members' behavior. These changes increase the probability that the
child's needs will be met and decrease the probability of negative
consequences. Parental responding that is attuned and is not aversive
results in children who are better able to discriminate their own and
others' emotions. By contrast, an invalidating family is problematic
because the people in it respond to the communication of preferences,
thoughts, and emotions with nonattuned responses---­ specifically, with
either nonresponsiveness or extreme consequences. This leads to an
intensification of the differences between an emotionally vulnerable
child's private experience and the experience the social environment
actually supports and responds to. Persistent discrepancies between a
child's private experience and what others in the environment describe
as the child's experience provide the fundamental learning environment
necessary for many of the behavioral problems associated with emotion
dysregulation.

In addition to early failures to respond optimally, an invalidating
environment more generally emphasizes controlling emotional
expressiveness, especially the expression of negative affect. Painful
experiences are often trivialized and attributed to negative traits,
such as lack of motivation, lack of discipline, and failure to adopt a
positive attitude. Strong positive emotions and associated preferences
may be attributed to other negative traits, such as lack of judgment and
reflection or impulsivity. Other characteristics of the invalidating
environment include restricting the demands a child may make upon the
environment, discriminating against the child on the basis of gender or
other arbitrary characteristics, and using punishment (from criticism up
to physical and sexual abuse) to control behavior. The invalidating
environment contributes to emotion dysregulation by failing to teach the
child to label and modulate arousal, to tolerate distress, or to trust
his or her own emotional responses as valid interpretations of events.
It also actively teaches the child to invalidate his or her own
experiences by making it necessary for the child to scan the environment
for cues about how to act and feel. By oversimplifying the ease of
solving life's problems, it fails to teach the child how to set
realistic goals. Moreover, by punishing the expression of negative
emotion and erratically reinforcing emotional communication only after
escalation by the child, the family shapes an emotional expression style
that vacillates between extreme inhibition and extreme disinhibition. In
other words, the family's usual response to emotion cuts off the
communicative function of ordinary emotions. Emotional invalidation,
particularly of negative emotions, is an interaction style
characteristic of societies that put a premium on individualism,
including individual self-­control and individual achievement. Thus, it
is quite characteristic of Western culture in general. A certain amount
of invalidation is, of course, necessary in raising a child and teaching
self-­control. Not all communications of emotions, preferences, or
beliefs can be responded to in a positive fashion. The child who is
highly emotional and who has difficulty controlling emotional behaviors
will elicit from the environment (especially parents, but also friends
and teachers) the greatest efforts to control the emotionality from the
outside. Invalidation can be quite effective at temporarily inhibiting
emotional expression. Invalidating environments, however, have different
effects on different children. The emotion control strategies used in
invalidating

1. Rationale for DBT Skills Training • 9

families may have little negative impact on children who are
physiologically well equipped to regulate their emotions, or may even be
useful to some such children. However, such strategies are hypothesized
to have a devastating impact on emotionally vulnerable children. This
transactional view of the development of pervasive emotion dysregulation
generally should not be used to diminish the importance of trauma in the
etiology of BPD and emotion dysregulation. Researchers have estimated
that up to 60--75% of individuals with BPD have histories of childhood
trauma,11, 12 and many continue to experience further trauma during
adulthood.13, 14 In one study, researchers found that 90% of inpatients
with BPD reported some experience of adult verbal, emotional, physical,
and/or sexual abuse, and that these rates of adult abuse were
significantly higher than those reported by comparison participants with
Axis II disorders other than BPD.14 It is unclear, however, whether the
trauma in and of itself facilitates the development of BPD and of high
emotion dysregulation patterns, or whether the trauma and the
development of the disorder both result from the extant familial
dysfunction and invalidation. In other words, the occurrence of
victimization and emotion regulation problems may arise from the same
set of developmental circumstances.

Development of Emotion Dysregulation: Summary Emotion dysregulation in
general, as well as the dysregulation encountered in BPD specifically,
is an outcome of biological disposition, environmental context, and the
transaction between the two during development. The biosocial
developmental model proposes the following: (1) The development of
extreme emotional lability is based on characteristics of the child
(e.g., baseline emotional sensitivity, impulsivity), in transaction with
a social context that shapes and maintains the lability; (2) reciprocal
reinforcing transactions between biological vulnerabilities and
environmental risk factors increase emotion dysregulation and behavioral
dyscontrol, which contribute to negative cognitive and social outcomes;
(3) a constellation of identifiable features and maladaptive coping
strategies develops over time; and (4) these traits and behaviors may
exacerbate risk for pervasive emotion dysregulation across development,
due to evocative effects on interpersonal relationships and social
functioning, and via

interference with healthy emotional development. This model is
illustrated in Figure 1.1.

The Consequences of Emotion Dysregulation Maccoby has argued that the
inhibition of action is the basis for the organization of all
behavior.15 The development of self-­regulatory repertoires (as in
effortful control, described above), especially the ability to inhibit
and control affect, is one of the most important aspects of a child's
development. The ability to regulate the experience and expression of
emotion is crucial, because its absence leads to the disruption of
behavior, especially goal-­directed behavior and other prosocial
behavior. Alternatively, strong emotion reorganizes or redirects
behavior, preparing the individual for actions that compete with the
nonemotionally or less emotionally driven behavioral repertoire. The
behavioral characteristics of individuals meeting criteria for a wide
range of emotional disorders, can be conceptualized as the effects of
emotion dysregulation and maladaptive emotion regulation strategies.
Impulsive behavior, and especially self-­injurious and suicidal
behaviors, can be thought of as maladaptive but highly effective emotion
regulation strategies. For example, overdosing usually leads to long
periods of sleep, which in turn reduce susceptibility to emotion
dysregulation. Although the mechanism by which self-­mutilation exerts
affect-­regulating properties is not clear, it is very common for
individuals engaging in such behavior to report substantial relief from
anxiety and other intense negative emotional states following such acts.
Suicidal behavior is also very effective in eliciting helping behaviors
from the environment, which may be effective in avoiding or changing
situations that elicit emotional pain. For example, suicidal behavior is
generally the most effective way for a nonpsychotic individual to be
admitted to an inpatient psychiatric unit. Suicide ideation, suicide
planning, and imagining dying from suicide, when accompanied with a
belief that pain will end with death, can bring an intense sense of
relief. Finally, planning suicide, imagining suicide, and engaging in a
self-­injurious act (and its aftereffects if it becomes public) can
reduce painful emotions by providing a compelling distraction. The
inability to regulate emotional arousal also interferes with the
development and maintenance

10

Biological vulnerabilities: •• Genetic influences (5-HTT s/s
polymorphism, TPH-1 gene, 5-HT receptor genes, DAT-1) •• Abnormalities
of brain systems (5-HT, DA, HPA axis) •• Fronto-limbic dysfunction, low
RSA

High-risk transaction: Caregiver contribution •• Invalidation of child
emotions •• Inadequate coaching of emotion •• Negative reinforcement of
aversive emotional expression •• Ineffective parenting due to poorness
of fit and/or insufficient family resources (e.g., time, money, social
supports)

Child contribution •• Negative affectivity •• Impulsivity •• High
emotional sensitivity

Inherited impulse control deficits are met with environmental
reinforcement of emotional lability Heightened emotion dysregulation ••
High emotional sensitivity •• Intense response to emotional stimuli ••
Slow return to baseline

Increased risk for psychopathology

Alternate outcomes

Information processing distorted

Cannot organize to achieve non-mooddependent goals

Cannot control mood-dependent behavior

Increased risk for negative outcomes (longer-lasting "traits"): ••
Social: Social isolation, problematic peer relationships, ineffective
individuation from parent •• Cognitive: Low self-efficacy, self-hatred,
hopelessness, disorganization, dissociation •• Emotional: Generalized
emotional vulnerability, sadness, shame, anger •• Behavioral:
Withdrawal, avoidance, frequent impulsive behaviors (including
self-injury)

Reactions to emotional situations (transient emotional states): Shuts
down, freezes

Process repeated over time

Repetitive maladaptive behaviors serve an emotion regulation/avoidance
function and become reinforcing Pervasive emotion dysregulation FIGURE
1.1. Illustration of the biosocial developmental model of BPD. 5-HT,
serotonin; 5-HTT, serotonin transporter; TPH-1, tryptophan hydroxylase
1; DA,

­dopamine; DAT-1, dopamine transporter 1; HPA,
hypothalamic--­pituitary--­adrenocortical; RSA, respiratory sinus
arrhythmia. Adapted from Crowell, S. E., Beauchaine, T. P., &
Lenzenweger, M. F. (2008). The development of borderline personality and
self-­injurious behavior. In T. P. Beauchaine & S. Hinshaw (Eds.), Child
psychopathology (p. 528). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Copyright 2008 by John
Wiley & Sons, Inc. Adapted by permission.

1. Rationale for DBT Skills Training • 11

of a sense of self. Generally, one's sense of self is formed by
observations of oneself and of others' reactions to one's actions.
Emotional consistency and predictability, across time and similar
situations, are prerequisites of identity development. Unpredictable
emotional lability leads to unpredictable behavior and cognitive
inconsistency, and consequently interferes with identity development.
The tendency of dysregulated individuals to try to inhibit emotional
responses may also contribute to an absence of a strong sense of
identity. The numbness associated with inhibited affect is often
experienced as emptiness, further contributing to an inadequate and at
times completely absent sense of self. Similarly, if an individual's
sense of events is never "correct" or is unpredictably "correct"---the
situation in an invalidating environment---then the individual may be
expected to develop an overdependence on others. Effective interpersonal
relationships depend on both a stable sense of self and a capacity for
spontaneity in emotional expression. Successful relationships also
require a capacity for self-­regulation of emotions and tolerance of
emotionally painful stimuli. Without such capabilities, it is
understandable that individuals develop chaotic relationships. When
emotion dysregulation is pervasive or severe, it interferes with a
stable sense of self and with normal emotional expression. Difficulties
controlling impulsive behaviors and expressions of extreme negative
emotions can wreak havoc on relationships in many ways; in particular,
difficulties with anger and anger expression preclude the maintenance of
stable relationships.

Relationship of Emotion Dysregulation to DBT Skills Training16 As noted
above, many mental disorders can be conceptualized as disorders of
emotion regulation, with deficits in both up- and down-­regulation. Once
you realize that emotions include both actions and action tendencies,
you can see the link between emotion dysregulation and many disorders
defined as behavior dyscontrol (e.g., substance use disorders). DBT
skills are aimed directly at these dysfunctional patterns. First,
dysregulation of the sense of self is common in individuals with severe
emotion dysregulation. In both depression and BPD, for example, it is
not unusual for individuals to report having no sense of a self at all,
feeling empty, and not knowing who they

are. Feelings of being disconnected from others, of contempt for self,
and of invalidity or worthlessness are also common. In addition,
individuals with high emotion dysregulation often view reality through
the lens of their emotions, rather than the light of reality as it is.
Thus both judgmental responses and distorted inferences, assumptions,
and beliefs are common sequelae. To address such dysregulation of the
sense of self, the first DBT skills training module (Chapter 7) aims to
teach a core set of "mindfulness" skills---that is, skills having to do
with the ability to consciously experience and observe oneself and
surrounding events with curiosity and without judgment; to see and
articulate reality as it is; and to participate in the flow of the
present moment effectively. To address the impact of high emotionality,
mindfulness skills also focuses on observing and accurately describing
internal and external present events without judgment or distortion of
reality. Mindfulness skills are core to all subsequent skills, and thus
are reviewed at the beginning of each subsequent skills module. Second,
individuals with emotion dysregulation often experience interpersonal
dysregulation. For example, they may have chaotic and intense
relationships marked with difficulties. Nevertheless, they may find it
extremely hard to let go of such relationships; instead, they may engage
in intense and frantic efforts to keep significant individuals from
leaving them. More so than most, these individuals seem to do well when
they are in stable, positive relationships and to do poorly when they
are not in such relationships. Problems with anger and jealousy can ruin
intimate relationships and friendships; envy and shame can lead to
avoidance of others. A highly anxious individual may need to have a
partner around all the time as a safety behavior. In contrast, severe
depression may cause difficulties connecting or engaging in
relationships. Thus another DBT skills training module (Chapter 8) aims
to teach interpersonal effectiveness skills. Third, difficulties with
emotion dysregulation are common in many disorders. These difficulties
include problems with recognizing emotions, with describing and labeling
emotions, with emotional avoidance, and with knowing what to do when an
emotion is on the scene. Therefore, a third DBT skills training module
(Chapter 9) aims to teach these and other emotion regulation skills.
Fourth, individuals with high emotion dysregulation often have patterns
of behavior dysregulation, such as substance misuse, attempts to injure
or kill

12 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

themselves, and other problematic impulsive behaviors. Impulsive and
suicidal behaviors are viewed in DBT as maladaptive problem-­solving
behaviors resulting from an individual's inability to tolerate emotional
distress long enough to pursue potentially more effective solutions. To
counter these maladap-

tive problem-­solving and distress tolerance behaviors, a fourth DBT
skills training module (Chapter 10) aims to teach effective, adaptive
distress tolerance skills. Table 1.1 lists the specific skills in each
of these modules.

TABLE 1.1. Overview of Specific DBT Skills by Module

Mindfulness Skills Core mindfulness skills Wise mind (states of mind)
"What" skills (observe, describe, participate) "How" skills
(nonjudgmentally, one-­mindfully, effectively) Other Perspectives on
Mindfulness Mindfulness practice: A spiritual perspective (including
wise mind and practicing loving kindness) Skillful means: Balancing
doing mind and being mind Wise mind: Walking the middle path
Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills Obtaining objectives skillfully
Clarifying priorities Objectives effectiveness DEAR MAN (Describe,
Express, Assert, Reinforce; stay Mindful, Appear confident, Negotiate)
Relationship effectiveness GIVE (be Gentle, act Interested, Validate,
use an Easy manner) Self-­respect effectiveness FAST (be Fair, no
Apologies, Stick to values, be Truthful) Whether and how intensely to
ask or say no Supplementary interpersonal effectiveness skills Building
relationships and ending destructive ones Skills for finding potential
friends Mindfulness of others How to end relationships Walking the
middle path skills Dialectics Validation Behavior change strategies

Emotion Regulation Skills Understanding and naming emotions Changing
emotional responses Checking the facts Opposite action Problem solving
Reducing vulnerability to emotion mind ABC PLEASE (Accumulate positive
emotions, Build mastery, Cope ahead; treat PhysicaL illness, balance
Eating, avoid mood-Altering substances, balance Sleep, get Exercise)
Managing really difficult emotions Mindfulness of current emotions
Managing extreme emotions Distress Tolerance Skills Crisis survival
skills STOP skill Pros and cons TIP body chemistry (Temperature, Intense
exercise, Paced breathing, Paired muscle relaxation) Distracting with
wise mind ACCEPTS (Activities, Contributing, Comparisons, Emotions,
Pushing away, Thoughts, Sensations) Self-­soothing through the senses
(vision, hearing, smell, taste, touch; body scan) IMPROVE the moment
(Imagery, Meaning, Prayer, Relaxation, One thing in the moment,
Vacation, Encouragement) Reality acceptance skills Radical acceptance
Turning the mind Willingness Half-­smiling Willing hands Mindfulness of
current thoughts Supplementary distress tolerance skills when the crisis
is addiction: Dialectical abstinence Clear mind Community reinforcement
Burning bridges and building new ones Alternative Rebellion and adaptive
denial

1. Rationale for DBT Skills Training • 13

The Standard DBT Treatment Program DBT was originally created for
high-risk, multiple-­ diagnosis clients with pervasive, severe emotion
dysregulation; the clinical problems presented by these clients were
complicated. It was clear from the beginning that treatment had to be
flexible and based on principles, rather than tightly scripted with one
protocol to fit all clients. To give some clarity and structure to the
inherent flexibility built into the treatment, DBT was constructed as a
modular intervention, with components that can be dropped in and pulled
out as the needs of each client and the structure of the treatment
dictate.

Improve motivation

Enhance capabilities

Ensure generalization

Enhance environment

Maintain skills and motivation of treatment providers

Treatment Functions DBT clearly articulates the functions of treatment
that it is designed: (1) to enhance an individual's capability by
increasing skillful behavior; (2) to improve and maintain the client's
motivation to change and to engage with treatment; (3) to ensure that
generalization of change occurs through treatment; (4) to enhance a
therapist's motivation to deliver effective treatment; and (5) to assist
the individual in restructuring or changing his or her environment in
such a way that it supports and maintains progress and advancement
toward goals (see Figure 1.2).

FIGURE 1.2. Functions of comprehensive treatment. Adapted from Lungu,
A., & Linehan, M. M. (2015). Dialectical behaviour therapy: A
comprehensive multi- and trans-­diagnostic intervention. In A. Nezu & C.
Nezu (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of cognitive behavioural therapies. New
York: Oxford University Press. Copyright 2014 by The Guilford Press.
Adapted by permission of The Guilford Press and Oxford University Press.

Individual treatment

Treatment Modes To accomplish these functions effectively, treatment is
spread among a variety of modes: individual therapy or case management,
group or individual skills training, between-­ session skills coaching,
and a therapist consultation team (see Figure 1.3). Each of the modes
has different treatment targets, and also different strategies available
for reaching those targets. It is not the mode itself that is critical,
but its ability to address a particular function. For example, ensuring
that new capabilities are generalized from therapy to a client's
everyday life might be accomplished in various ways, depending on the
setting. In a milieu setting, the entire staff might be taught to model,
coach, and reinforce use of skills; in an outpatient setting,
generalization usually occurs through telephone coaching. The individual
therapist (who is always the primary therapist in standard DBT),
together with the client, is respon-

Skills training

Between-session coaching

Therapist consultation

FIGURE 1.3. Modularity of treatment modes. Adapted

from Lungu, A., & Linehan, M. M. (2015). Dialectical behaviour therapy:
A comprehensive multi- and trans-­ diagnostic intervention. In A. Nezu &
C. Nezu (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of cognitive behavioural therapies.
New York: Oxford University Press. Copyright 2014 by The Guilford Press.
Adapted by permission of The Guilford Press and Oxford University Press.

14 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

sible for organizing the treatment so that all functions are met.

DBT Skills Modules The skills taught to clients reflect a key dialectic
described earlier---the need for clients to accept themselves as they
are, and the need for them to change. Hence there are sets of acceptance
skills as well as change skills. For any problem encountered, effective
approaches can include acceptance as well as change (see Figure 1.4).
Skills are further divided into the four skills modules by the topics
they address: mindfulness, emotion regulation, interpersonal
effectiveness, and distress tolerance. Each skills module is further
divided into a series of sections, and then further divided into a
series of separate skills that are ordinarily taught in sequence but can
also be pulled out separately for teaching and review. Clients can work
on a single skill or set of skills at a time; this helps keep them from
being overwhelmed by all the things they need to learn and change. Once
clients have made progress in a set of skills, they can incorporate
those skills into work on a new skills module. Some of the more complex
skills, such as the interpersonal assertiveness skills (i.e., the "DEAR
MAN" skills described in Chapter 8), are also made up of smaller parts
to increase comprehension and accessibility.

Roles of Skills Trainer and Individual Therapist As described earlier in
this chapter, the theoretical model on which DBT is based posits that a
combination of capability deficits and motivational problems underlies
emotion dysregulation. First, individuals with severe and pervasive
emotion dysregulation, including those with BPD, lack important
self-­regulation, interpersonal, and distress tolerance skills. In
particular, they are unable to inhibit maladaptive mood-­dependent
behaviors, or to initiate behaviors that are independent of current mood
and necessary to meet long-range goals. Second, the strong emotions and
associated dysfunctional beliefs learned in the original invalidating
environment, together with current invalidating environments, form a
motivational context that inhibits the use of any behavioral skills a
person does have. The person is also often reinforced for inappropriate
and dysfunctional behaviors. Therefore, attention needs to be paid to
increasing both a person's repertoire of skills and his or her
motivation to employ those skills. However, as my colleagues and I
developed this treatment approach, it quickly became apparent that (1)
behavioral skills training to the extent we believe necessary is
extraordinarily difficult, if not impossible, within the context of a
therapy oriented to reducing the motivation to die and/or act in a
highly

Mindfulness Acceptance skills Distress Tolerance

Emotion Regulation Change skills Interpersonal Effectiveness

FIGURE 1.4. Modularity of acceptance and change skills. Adapted from
Lungu, A., & Linehan, M. M. (2015). Dialectical behaviour therapy: A
comprehensive multi- and trans-­diagnostic intervention. In A. Nezu & C.
Nezu (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of cognitive behavioural therapies. New
York: Oxford University Press. Copyright 2014 by The Guilford Press.
Adapted by permission of The Guilford Press and Oxford University Press.

1. Rationale for DBT Skills Training • 15

emotionally reactive fashion; and (2) sufficient attention to
motivational issues cannot be given in a treatment with the rigorously
controlled therapy agenda needed for skills training. From this dilemma
was born the idea of splitting the therapy into two components: one that
focuses primarily on behavioral skills training, and one that focuses
primarily on motivational issues (including the motivation to stay
alive, to replace dysfunctional behaviors with skillful behaviors, and
to build a life worth living). The role of the skills trainer in
standard outpatient DBT with severely dysregulated clients is to
increase clients' abilities by teaching DBT skills and eliciting
practice. The role of the individual therapist is to manage crises and
help a client to apply the skills he or she is learning to replace
dysfunctional behaviors. The individual therapist provides telephone
coaching of skills to the client as needed. Furthermore, as noted above
and in Figure 1.3, an integral component of standard DBT is the
therapist consultation team: Skills trainers and individual therapists
meet on a regular basis not only to support each other, but also to
provide a dialectical balance for each other in their interactions with
clients. Individual therapy for chronically suicidal individuals and
others with severe disorders may be needed for several reasons. First,
with a group of serious and imminently suicidal clients, it can at times
be extraordinarily difficult for the skills trainers to handle the
crisis calls that might be needed. The caseload is simply too large.
Second, in a skills-­ oriented group that meets only once a week, there
is not much time to attend to individual process issues that may come
up. Nor is there time to adequately help each individual integrate the
skills into his or her life. Some clients need much more time than
others do on particular skills, and the need to adjust the pace to the
average needs makes it very likely that without outside attention,
individuals will fail to learn at least some of the skills. What kind of
individual psychotherapy works best with skills training? Our research
findings to date are mixed. In our first study on the topic, we found
that skills training plus DBT individual therapy is superior to skills
training plus non-DBT individual therapy.17 In a second study, we tested
skills training plus a version of intensive case management that may
also be effective for some clients, whereas for others standard DBT with
DBT individual therapy may be better.18 In DBT, "case management" refers
to helping the client manage his or her physical and social environment
so that overall life func-

tioning and well-being are enhanced, progress toward life goals is
facilitated, and treatment progress is expedited.3 Clients' individual
therapists often can serve as case managers, helping the clients to
interact with other professionals or agencies, as well as to cope with
problems of survival in the everyday world. In this study, however, case
management replaced individual DBT therapy. In this version of case
management, caseloads were very small (six clients). Case managers met
weekly with their teams; used the DBT Suicidal Behavior Strategies
Checklist (see Chapter 5, Table 5.2); were available for phone coaching
of clients during work hours, and had access to a community crisis line
at other times; and applied many of the acceptance elements of DBT
(validation, environmental intervention) that balanced the change focus
of many DBT skills. Therapists conducting skills training, however, may
not always have control over the type of individual psychotherapy their
clients get. This is especially likely in community mental health
settings and inpatient or residential units. In settings where DBT is
just being introduced, there may not be enough DBT individual therapists
to go around. Or a unit may be trying to integrate different approaches
to treatment. For example, a number of psychiatric inpatient units have
attempted an integration of DBT skills training with individual
psychodynamic therapy. Acute inpatient units may structure psychosocial
treatment primarily around milieu and skills training, with individual
therapy consisting of supportive therapy as an adjunct to
pharmacotherapy. The next chapter discusses issues for skills trainers
in managing non-DBT individual therapists.

Modifications of Cognitive and Behavior Therapy Strategies in DBT DBT as
a whole and DBT skills training in particular apply a broad array of
cognitive and behavior therapy strategies. Like standard
cognitive-­behavioral therapy (CBT) programs, DBT emphasizes ongoing
assessment and data collection on current behaviors; clear and precise
definition of treatment targets; and active collaboration between the
therapist and the client, including attention to orienting the client to
the intervention and obtaining mutual commitment to treatment goals.
Many components of DBT (e.g., problem solving, skills training,
contingency management, exposure, and cognitive modification) have been
prominent in cognitive and behavior therapies for years.

16 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

Although DBT borrows many principles and procedures from standard
cognitive and behavioral therapies, the development and evolution of DBT
over time came about as I tried---and in many ways failed---to get
standard CBT to work with the population of clients I was treating. Each
modification I made came about as I was trying to solve specific
problems I could not solve with the standard CBT interventions available
at the time. These modifications have led to DBT's emphasizing 10 areas
that, though not new, had not previously received as much attention in
traditional CBT applications. The treatment components that DBT has
added to CBT are listed below. Many, if not most, of these are now
common in many CBT interventions. 1. Synthesis of acceptance with
change. 2. Inclusion of mindfulness as a practice for therapists and as
a core skill for clients. 3. Emphasis on treating therapy-­interfering
behaviors of both client and therapist. 4. Emphasis on the therapeutic
relationship and therapist self-­disclosure as essential to therapy. 5.
Emphasis on dialectical processes. 6. Emphasis on stages of treatment,
and on targeting behaviors according to severity and threat. 7.
Inclusion of a specific suicide risk assessment and management protocol.
8. Inclusion of behavioral skills drawn primarily from other
evidence-based interventions. 9. The treatment team as an integral
component of therapy. 10. Focus on continual assessment of multiple
outcomes via diary cards. Whether these differences between DBT and
standard CBT approaches are fundamentally important is, of course, an
empirical question. In any event, CBT interventions have expanded their
scope since DBT first appeared, and components of DBT have made their
way into many standard interventions. The differences between them and
DBT have eroded. This is most clearly evident in the increasing
attention to the synthesis of acceptance and change and to the inclusion
of mindfulness in many current treatments (e.g., Mindfulness-Based
Cognitive Therapy, Acceptance and Commitment Therapy); it can also be
seen in the emphasis on attending to in-­ session behaviors, particularly
to therapy-­ interfering behaviors (e.g., Functional Analytic Psy-

chotherapy). Although researchers to date have not found that the
therapeutic relationship necessarily mediates outcomes in behavior
therapy, the field as a whole nonetheless puts a greater emphasis now on
developing and maintaining a collaborative interpersonal relationship.
Chapters 4 and 5 discuss the DBT strategies listed above, as well as how
to apply CBT strategies within DBT's skills training context.

Effectiveness of Standard DBT An overview of randomized controlled
trials (RCTs) examining the effectiveness of standard DBT is presented
in Table 1.2. As noted previously, standard DBT includes individual DBT
therapy, DBT skills training, between-­session coaching, and DBT team.
For updates on research go to the Linehan Institute
(www.linehaninstitute.org/resources/fromMarsha).

Standard DBT as a Treatment for BPD There have now been a large number
of studies evaluating the effectiveness of standard DBT as a treatment
for high-risk individuals with severe and complex mental disorders. Most
but not all of this research has focused on individuals meeting criteria
for BPD---primarily because individuals with BPD have high rates of
suicide and pervasive emotion dysregulation, and ordinarily present with
a complex range of serious out-of-­control behaviors. It is just the
complexity that arises from such dysregulation that DBT was originally
designed to treat. At present DBT is the only treatment with enough
high-­quality research to be evaluated as effective for this population
by the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, a highly regarded
independent review group in Great Britain.19

Standard DBT as a Treatment for Suicidal Behaviors In adults diagnosed
with BPD and at risk for suicide, standard DBT has yielded significantly
higher improvements on measures of anger outbursts, hopelessness,
suicidal ideation, and suicidal behavior, as well as reduced admissions
to emergency departments and inpatient units for suicidality, when
compared to treatment as usual (TAU)1, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 and to
treatment by community experts.23, 25 In the latter study, the expert
therapists were nominated by mental health leaders in Seattle as the
best

1. Rationale for DBT Skills Training • 17 TABLE 1.2. RCTs of Standard
DBT

Treatment/diagnosis/study population

Comparison group

Significant outcomes

DBT for BPD: 44 females

Treatment as usual (TAU)

DBT decreased risk for suicidal behavior, use of services, dropout DBT
and TAU decreased suicidal ideation, depression, hopelessness1, 17, 65

DBT for BPD: 58 females

TAU

DBT decreased suicide attempts DBT decreased nonsuicidal self-­injury
(NSSI); TAU increased NSSI DBT and TAU decreased substance use20, 21

DBT for BPD: 101 females

Community treatment by experts (CTBE)

DBT decreased suicide attempts, emergency department and inpatient
admissions for suicidality, dropout DBT produced significant reduction
in substance use disorders; significant changes in self-­affirmation,
self-­loving, and self-­protecting; and less self-­attacking throughout
treatment and follow-up DBT and CTBE decreased suicidal ideation,
depression DBT and CTBE increased remission from major depression,
anxiety, and eating disorders CTBE produced significant treatment
interaction for therapist affirmation/therapist projection DBT increased
introject affiliation42

DBT for BPD: 73 females

TAU + wait list

DBT and TAU decreased NSSI, hospital admissions or length of stay in
hospital, quality of life, disability64

DBT for veterans with BPD: 20 females

TAU

DBT decreased NSSI, hospitalizations, suicidal ideation, dissociation,
hopelessness, depression, anger suppression/expression 22

DBT for veterans with BPD: 20 females

TAU

DBT decreased NSSI, suicidal ideation, depression (self-­ report),
hopelessness, anger expression DBT and TAU decreased service use,
depression, anxiety, anger suppression 23

DBT for BPD with current drug dependence: 28 females

TAU

DBT decreased substance abuse DBT and TAU decreased anger outcomes34

DBT + levo-alpha-­acetylmethadol (LAAM; an opiod agonist medication) for
BPD with current opiate dependence: 23 females

Comprehensive validation therapy with 12-Step group (CVT12s) + LAAM

DBT and CVT-12s decreased psychopathology, opiate use; however,
participants in CVT-12s increased their use of opiates in last 4
months35

DBT for Cluster B personality disorders: 42 adults

TAU

DBT decreased self-­reported risk behavior DBT and TAU decreased NSSI
reductions, use of services, aggression anger expression, depression,
irritability24

DBT + medication for at least one personality disorder, high depression
score: 35 adults

Medication only

DBT produced faster remission from major depressive disorder37

DBT for BPD: 180 adults

General psychiatric management (GPM)

DBT and GPM decreased suicidal behavior, use of crisis services,
depression, anger, distress symptoms66 (cont.)

18 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING TABLE 1.2 (cont.)

Treatment/diagnosis/study population

Comparison group

Significant outcomes

DBT for 18- to 25-yearold college students with current suicidal
ideation: 63 individuals

Supervision by experts in psychodynamic treatment (SBE)

DBT decreased NSSI, use of psychotropic medication, suicidality,
self-­reported depression DBT increased life satisfaction31

Inpatient DBT for PTSD: 74 females

TAU + wait list

DBT increased PTSD remission32

Inpatient DBT for BPD: 60 females

TAU + wait list

DBT increased abstinence from NSSI, decreased depression and anxiety DBT
and TAU decreased anger26

DBT for any eating disorder and substance abuse/ dependence: 21 females

TAU

DBT decreased dropout rate, dysfunctional eating behaviors/attitudes and
severity of use of substances at post compared to pre DBT increased
ability to cope and regulate negative emotions at post compared to pre33

Note. Data from Neacsiu, A. D., & Linehan, M. M. (2014). Borderline
personality disorder. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.), Clinical handbook of
psychological disorders (5th ed., pp. 394--461). New York: Guilford
Press.

(nonbehavioral) therapists in the area. The aim of the research was to
find out whether DBT works because of its own unique characteristics or
because it is just a standard good therapy. In other words, the question
was "Are all treatments equal?" The answer was "No." In comparison to
treatment by community experts, DBT cut suicide attempts by half,
admissions to hospital emergency departments for suicidality by half,
and inpatient admissions for suicidality by 73%. Bohus and colleagues
obtained similar findings for a 12-week inpatient DBT adaptation for
females with BPD and a history of suicidal behavior.26 More patients
receiving DBT abstained from self-­injurious behaviors at posttreatment
than patients receiving TAU (62% vs. 31%).

Standard DBT as a Treatment for Mood and Other Disorders Among
individuals meeting criteria for BPD, outcomes across DBT studies
indicate that DBT is an effective treatment for a number of disorders
other than BPD. During 1 year of treatment, those in DBT have improved
significantly in reductions of depression, with remission rates from
major depression and substance dependence as good as those found in
evidence-based CBT and pharmacological interventions.27 DBT participants
also reported significant improvements in developing a more positive

introject (a psychodynamic construct we measured to test the view that
DBT only treats symptoms). Those in DBT developed significantly greater
self-­ affirmation, self-love, and self-­protection, as well as less
self-­attack, during the course of treatment; they maintained these gains
at a 1-year follow-up.42 DBT as a treatment for suicidality is not
limited to adults. Research with suicidal adolescents28, 29, 30 and
suicidal college students31 has also found significant reductions in use
of psychotropic medications, depression, and suicidal behaviors, as well
as increases in life satisfaction, when DBT is compared to control
conditions.

Standard DBT as a General Treatment Although DBT was originally
developed for highrisk, out-of-­control individuals with complex
difficulties, the modular makeup of the treatment allows therapists to
"rev up" or "rev down" the number of components actively used in
treatment at a given time. To date, adaptations of DBT have been shown
to be effective for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) due to
childhood sexual abuse;32 eating disorders comorbid with substance
abuse;33 drug dependence comorbid with BPD; 34, 35, 36 eating disorders
alone; 39, 40 Cluster B personality disorders;24 PTSD with and without
comorbid BPD;41 and depression in older adults. 37, 38 Taken as a whole,
these

1. Rationale for DBT Skills Training • 19

studies suggest that DBT is a broadly efficacious treatment. This
modular flexibility also allows us to bring into the treatment new
interventions and strategies to replace old strategies that are less
effective. Thus, as time goes on, it is likely that the utility of DBT
will expand as the research base expands.

DBT Skills Training as a Stand-Alone Treatment DBT skills training is
rapidly emerging as a standalone treatment. Although the majority of
research on DBT efficacy consists of clinical trials on standard DBT,
many sites over the years have provided DBT skills alone, usually
because of insufficient resources to provide the entire treatment. As
these programs multiplied, research to determine whether such programs
provided effective treatment got started. This growing area of research
is suggesting that skills training alone can be very effective in many
situations.

Evidence for the Effectiveness of DBT Skills as a Stand-Alone Treatment
An overview of RCTs examining the effectiveness of DBT skills training
without individual therapy is presented in Table 1.3. Additional non-RCT
studies examining the effectiveness of DBT skills alone are presented in
Table 1.4. As can be seen in Table 1.3, in clinical RCTs, DBT skills
training without concurrent individual therapy has been found effective
in a number of areas. It was found to reduce depression in nine separate
studies;38, 42, 45, 47, 48, 49, 51, 52, 54 anger in four studies;43, 46,
52, 53 and emotion dysregulation, 38, 51 including affective
instability43 and emotional intensity,44 in four studies. Adaptations of
DBT skills have also been found to be an effective treatment for eating
disorders in three studies, 39, 45, 46 as well as for drinking-­ related
problems51 and attention-­ deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). 50
Among incarcerated women, DBT skills have been effective at reducing
PTSD symptoms, depression, and interpersonal problems.54 Among men and
women in correctional facilities, DBT skills have been shown to decrease
aggression, impulsivity, and psychopathology.55 Skills have also reduced
intimate partner violence potential and anger expression among those
with histories of such violence. Among individuals

in vocational rehabilitation with severe mental disorders, DBT skills
have decreased depression, hopelessness, and anger, and have increased
number of hours working as well as job satisfaction.52 As can be seen in
Table 1.4, studies of DBT skills training in pre--post research designs
(where there is no control condition to which to compare outcomes) have
findings similar to the RCTs. These studies have shown decreased
depression 57, 58, 60, 61, 62 and ADHD symptoms,61 as well as increased
global functioning60 and social adjustment coping.62 Three studies have
been conducted of DBT skills training with families of troubled
individuals, 56, 57, 58 and all three showed reduction in grief and a
sense of burden. Very few studies have been published of skills training
for children; however, in the case of children with oppositional defiant
disorder (ODD), DBT skills training was associated with reductions in
externalizing and internalizing depression, a reduction in problematic
behaviors, and an increase in positive behaviors.60 The majority of
these studies offered only the skills training component of DBT. Two
exceptions were presented by Lynch and colleagues.37 In the first study,
DBT skills and DBT phone coaching were added to antidepressants and
compared to antidepressants alone for an elderly, depressed sample. In
the second study, standard DBT with medication was compared to
medication alone for an elderly, depressed sample with comorbid
personality disorders. In both studies, the authors found that the
depression remitted much faster when individuals were treated with DBT
and medication than when they were treated with medication alone The
eating disorder studies used skills-only adaptations of DBT. Several of
these studies did not report which DBT skills they used, making it
difficult to determine which skills were important in bringing about
clinical change. Although skills training has been linked to the
reduction of emotion dysregulation in general,63 we will need more
research to determine exactly which skills are necessary and which can
be discarded. The next chapter addresses key issues in planning to
conduct skills training, including suggestions for planning a skills
training curriculum.

References 1. Linehan, M. M., Armstrong, H. E., Suarez, A., All­ mon, D.,
& Heard, H. L. (1991). Cognitive-­ behavioral treatment of chronically
parasuicidal bor-

20 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING TABLE 1.3. RCTs of DBT
Skills Training Only

Diagnosis/study population

Comparison group

Significant outcomes

BPD: 49 women, 11 men

Standard group therapy

DBT skills decreased depression, anxiety, irritability, anger, affective
instability, treatment drop-out43

BPD: 29 women, 1 man

Control video

DBT skills increased DBT skills knowledge, confidence in skills DBT
skills decreased in emotional intensity44

Bulimia nervosa: 14 women

Wait-list control

DBT skills decreased bingeing/purging behavior, depression45

Binge eating disorder: 101 men and women

Active comparison group therapy

DBT skills decreased binge eating39

Binge-­eating disorder: 22 women

Wait-list control

DBT skills decreased anger, weight, shape and eating concerns DBT skills
increased abstinence from bingeing behavior46

Major depressive disorder: 24 men and women

Control condition

DBT skills decreased scores on depression DBT skills increased emotion
processing47

Major depressive disorder: 29 women and 5 men over 60

DBT + medication management vs. medication management only

DBT skills decreased self-rated depression scores DBT skills increased
full remission of depressive symptoms/dependency, adaptive coping38

Major depressive disorder: 18 women, 6 men

Wait-list control

DBT skills increased emotional processing associated with decreases in
depression48

Bipolar disorder: 26 adults

Wait-list control

DBT skills decreased depression, fear toward reward DBT skills increased
mindful awareness, emotion regulation49

ADHD: 51 adults

Loosely structured discussion group

DBT skills decreased ADHD symptoms50

Problem drinking: 87 women, 58 men (all college age)

BASICS a; control

DBT skills decreased depression, drinking-­related problems DBT skills
increased emotion regulation, positive mood51

Vocational rehab. for severe mental illness: 12 adults

TAU

DBT skills decreased depression, hopelessness, anger DBT skills
increased in job satisfaction, number of hours worked52

Intimate partner violence: 55 men

Anger management program

DBT skills decreased intimate partner violence potential, anger
expression53

Incarcerated women with histories of trauma: 24 women

No-­contact comparison

DBT skills decreased PTSD, depression, and problems in interpersonal
functioning54

Correctional facility inmates: 18 women, 45 men

Case management

DBT skills decreased aggression, impulsivity, and psychopathology DBT
skills increased coping55

a Brief Alcohol Screening and Intervention for College Students (a harm
reduction approach).

1. Rationale for DBT Skills Training • 21 TABLE 1.4. Non-RCTs of DBT
Skills Training Only

Diagnosis/study population

Comparison group

Significant outcomes

Family members of individuals with BPD: 44 men and women

No comparison group; pre--post design

DBT skills decreased grief, burden DBT skills increased mastery Changes
greater in women56

Family members of suicide attempters: 13 men and women

Pre--post design

DBT skills decreased anxiety, perceived family member burden, emotional
overinvolvement DBT skills increased global psychiatric health57

Self-­injurious behavior: 32 women, 2 men

Pre--post design

DBT skills decreased number of inpatient hospitalizations, outpatient
appointments, general psychopathology58

Convicted offenders with diagnosed intellectual disability: 7 women and
men

Pre--post design

DBT skills decreased dynamic risk DBT skills increased relative
strengths, coping skills, and global functioning59

ODD: 54 male and female adolescents

Pre--post design

DBT skills decreased depression, negative behaviors DBT skills increased
positive behaviors (e.g., productive behaviors)60

ADHD: 8 male and female adults?

Pre--post design

DBT decreased ADHD symptoms and depression61

Victims of interpersonal violence: 31 women

Pre--post design

DBT skills decreased depression, hopelessness, general distress DBT
skills increased in social adjustment62

derline patients. Archives of General Psychiatry, 48, 1060--1064. 2.
Kring, A. M., & Sloan, D. M. (2010). Emotion regulation and
psychopathology: A transdiagnostic approach to etiology and treatment.
New York: Guilford Press. 3. Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-­behavioral
treatment of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford Press.
4. Goldberg, C. (1980). The utilization and limitations of paradoxical
interventions in group psychotherapy. International Journal of Group
Psychotherapy, 30, 287--297. 5. Heller, A. S., Johnstone, T., Shackman,
A. J., Light, S. N., Peterson, M. J., Kolden, G. G., et al. (2009).
Reduced capacity to sustain positive emotion in major depression
reflects diminished maintenance of fronto-­striatal brain activation.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 106, 22445-- 22450.
6. Cisler, J. M., Olatunji, B. O., Feldner, M. T., & Forsyth, J. P.
(2010). Emotion regulation and the anxiety disorders: An integrative
review. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 32,
68--82. 7. Kring, A. M., & Werner, K. H. (2004). Emotion regulation and
psychopathology. In P. Philippot & R. S.

Feldman (Eds.), The regulation of emotion (pp. 359-- 408). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum. 8. Ekman, P. E., & Davidson, R. J. (1994). The nature of
emotion: Fundamental questions. New York: Oxford University Press. 9.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1990). The past explains the present:
Emotional adaptations and the structure of ancestral environments.
Ethology and Sociobiology, 11(4), 375--424. 10. Crowell, S. E.,
Beauchaine, T. P., & Linehan, M. M. (2009). A biosocial developmental
model of borderline personality: Elaborating and extending Linehan's
theory. Psychological Bulletin, 135(3), 495--510. 11. Ogata, S. N.,
Silk, K. R., Goodrich, S., Lohr, N. E., Westen, D., & Hill, E. M.
(1990). Childhood sexual and physical abuse in adult patients with
borderline personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 147(8),
1008--1013. 12. Wagner, A. W., & Linehan, M. M. (1994). Relationship
between childhood sexual abuse and topography of parasuicide among women
with borderline personality disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders,
8(1), 1--9. 13. Messman-Moore, T. L., & Long, P. J. (2003). The role of
childhood sexual abuse sequelae in the sexual revictimization of women:
An empirical review and

22 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

theoretical reformulation. Clinical Psychology Review, 23(4), 537--571.
14. Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Reich, D. B., Hennen, J., &
Silk, K. R. (2005). Adult experiences of abuse reported by borderline
patients and Axis II comparison subjects over six years of prospective
follow-up. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 193(6), 412--416. 15.
Maccoby, E. E. (1980). Social development: Psychological growth and the
parent--child relationship. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 16.
Neacsiu, A. D., Bohus, M., & Linehan, M. M. (2014). Dialectical behavior
therapy: An intervention for emotion dysregulation. In J. J. Gross
(Ed.), Handbook of emotion regulation (2nd ed., pp. 491--507). New York:
Guilford Press. 17. Linehan, M. M., Heard, H. L., & Armstrong, H. E.
(1993). Naturalistic follow-up of a behavioral treatment for chronically
parasuicidal borderline patients. Archives of General Psychiatry,
50(12), 971--974. 18. Linehan, M. M., Korslund, K. E., Harned, M. S.,
Gallop, R. J., Lungu, A., Neacsiu, A. D., McDavid, J., Comtois, K. A., &
Murray-­Gregory, A. M. (2014). Dialectical Behavior Therapy for high
suicide risk in borderline personality disorder: A component analysis.
Manuscript submitted for publication. 19. Stoffers, J. M., Vollm, B. A.,
Rucker, G., Timmer, A., Huband, N., & Lieb, K. (2012). Psychological
therapies for borderline personality disorder. Coch­ rane Database of
Systematic Reviews, 2012(8), CD005652. 20. van den Bosch, L., Verheul,
R., Schippers, G. M., & van den Brink, W. (2002). Dialectical behavior
therapy of borderline patients with and without substance use problems:
Implementation and long-term effects. Addictive Behaviors, 27(6),
911--923. 21. Verheul, R., van den Bosch, L. M., Koeter, M. W., de
Ridder, M. A., Stijnen, T., & van den Brink, W. (2003). Dialectical
behaviour therapy for women with borderline personality disorder:
12-month, randomised clinical trial in The Netherlands. British Journal
of Psychiatry, 182(2), 135--140. 22. Koons, C. R., Robins, C. J.,
Lindsey Tweed, J., Lynch, T. R., Gonzalez, A. M., Morse, J. Q., et al.
(2001). Efficacy of dialectical behavior therapy in women veterans with
borderline personality disorder. Behavior Therapy, 32(2), 371--390. 23.
Koons, C. R., Chapman, A. L., Betts, B. B., O'Rourke, B., Morse, N., &
Robins, C. J. (2006). Dialectical behavior therapy adapted for the
vocational rehabilitation of significantly disabled mentally ill adults.
Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 13(2), 146--156. 24. Feigenbaum, J.
D., Fonagy, P., Pilling, S., Jones, A., Wildgoose, A., & Bebbington, P.
E. (2012). A realworld study of the effectiveness of DBT in the UK
National Health Service. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 51(2),
121--141.

25. Linehan, M. M., Comtois, K. A., Murray, A. M., Brown, M. Z.,
    Gallop, R. J., Heard, H. L., et al. (2006). Two-year randomized
    controlled trial and follow-up of dialectical behavior therapy
    vs. therapy by experts for suicidal behaviors and borderline
    personality disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63(7),
    757--766.
26. Bohus, M., Haaf, B., Simms, T., Limberger, M. F., Schmahl, C.,
    Unckel, C., et al. (2004). Effectiveness of inpatient dialectical
    behavioral therapy for borderline personality disorder: A controlled
    trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 42, 487--499.
27. Harned, M. S., Chapman, A. L., Dexter-Mazza, E. T., Murray, A.,
    Comtois, K. A., & Linehan, M. M. (2009). Treating co-­occurring Axis
    I disorders in recurrently suicidal women with borderline
    personality disorder. Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and
    Treatment, (1), 35--45.
28. Katz, L. Y., Cox, B. J., Gunasekara, S., & Miller, A. L. (2004).
    Feasibility of dialectical behavior therapy for suicidal adolescent
    inpatients. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
    Psychiatry, 43(3), 276--282.
29. McDonell, M. G., Tarantino, J., Dubose, A. P., Matestic, P.,
    Steinmetz, K., Galbreath, H., & McClellan, J. M. (2010). A pilot
    evaluation of dialectical behavioural therapy in adolescent
    long-term inpatient care. Child and Adolescent Mental Health, 15(4),
    193--196.
30. Rathus, J. H., & Miller, A. L. (2002). Dialectical behavior therapy
    adapted for suicidal adolescents. Suicide and Life-­Threatening
    Behavior, 32(2), 146--157.
31. Pistorello, J., Fruzzetti, A. E., MacLane, C., Gallop, R., &
    Iverson, K. M. (2012). Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) applied to
    college students: A randomized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting
    and Clinical Psychology, 80(6), 982--994.
32. Bohus, M., Dyer, A. S., Priebe, K., Krüger, A., Kleindienst, N.,
    Schmahl, C., et al. (2013). Dialectical behaviour therapy for post-­
    traumatic stress disorder after childhood sexual abuse in patients
    with and without borderline personality disorder: A randomised
    controlled trial. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 82(4), 221--233.
33. Courbasson, C., Nishikawa, Y., & Dixon, L. (2012). Outcome of
    dialectical behaviour therapy for concurrent eating and substance
    use disorders. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 19(5),
    434--449.
34. Linehan, M. M., Schmidt, H., Dimeff, L. A., Craft, J. C., Kanter,
    J., & Comtois, K. A. (1999). Dialectical behavior therapy for
    patients with borderline personality disorder and drug-­dependence.
    American Journal on Addictions, 8(4), 279--292.
35. Linehan, M. M., Dimeff, L. A., Reynolds, S. K., Comtois, K. A.,
    Welch, S. S., Heagerty, P., et al. (2002). Dialectical behavior
    therapy versus comprehensive validation therapy plus 12-step for the
    treat-

1. Rationale for DBT Skills Training • 23 ment of opioid dependent women
meeting criteria for borderline personality disorder. Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 67(1), 13--26. 36. Linehan, M. M., Lynch, T. R., Harned, M.
S., Korslund, K. E., & Rosenthal, Z. M. (2009). Preliminary outcomes of
a randomized controlled trial of DBT vs. drug counseling for
opiate-­dependent BPD men and women. Paper presented at the 43rd Annual
Convention of the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies,
New York. 37. Lynch, T. R., Cheavens, J. S., Cukrowicz, K. C., Thorp, S.
R., Bronner, L., & Beyer, J. (2007). Treatment of older adults with
co-­morbid personality disorder and depression: A dialectical behavior
therapy approach. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 22(2),
131--143. 38. Lynch, T. R., Morse, J. Q., Mendelson, T., & Robins, C. J.
(2003). Dialectical behavior therapy for depressed older adults: A
randomized pilot study. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 11(1),
33--45. 39. Safer, D. L., & Jo, B. (2010). Outcome from a randomized
controlled trial of group therapy for binge eating disorder: Comparing
dialectical behavior therapy adapted for binge eating to an active
comparison group therapy. Behavior Therapy, 41(1), 106--120. 40. Safer,
D. L., & Joyce, E. E. (2011). Does rapid response to two group
psychotherapies for binge eating disorder predict abstinence? Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 49(5), 339--345. 41. Bohus, M., Dyer, A. S.,
Priebe, K., Krüger, A., Kleindienst, N., Schmahl, C., Niedtfeld, I., &
Steil, R. (2013). Dialectical behaviour therapy for post-­ traumatic
stress disorder after childhood sexual abuse in patients with and
without borderline personality disorder: A randomised controlled trial.
Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 82(4), 221--233. 42. Bedics, J. D.,
Atkins, D. C., Comtois, K. A., & Linehan, M. M. (2012). Weekly therapist
ratings of the therapeutic relationship and patient introject during the
course of dialectical behavioral therapy for the treatment of borderline
personality disorder. Psychotherapy, 49(2), 231--240. 43. Soler, J.,
Pascual, J. C., Tiana, T., Cebrià, A., Barrachina, J., Campins, M. J.,
et al. (2009). Dialectical behaviour therapy skills training compared to
standard group therapy in borderline personality disorder: A 3-month
randomised controlled clinical trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
47(5), 353--358. 44. Waltz, J., Dimeff, L. A., Koerner, K., Linehan, M.
M., Taylor, L., & Miller, C. (2009). Feasibility of using video to teach
a dialectical behavior therapy skill to clients with borderline
personality disorder. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 16(2),
214--222. 45. Safer, D. L., Telch, C. F., & Agras, W. S. (2001).
Dialectical behavior therapy for bulimia nervosa. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 158(4), 632--634.

46. Telch, C. F., Agras, W. S., & Linehan, M. M. (2001). Dialectical
    behavior therapy for binge eating disorder. Journal of Consulting
    and Clinical Psychology, 69(6), 1061--1065.
47. Harley, R., Sprich, S., Safren, S., Jacobo, M., & Fava, M. (2008).
    Adaptation of dialectical behavior therapy skills training group for
    treatment-­resistant depression. Journal of Nervous and Mental
    Disease, 196(2), 136--143.
48. Feldman, G., Harley, R., Kerrigan, M., Jacobo, M., & Fava, M.
    (2009). Change in emotional processing during a dialectical behavior
    therapy-based skills group for major depressive disorder. Behaviour
    Research and Therapy, 47(4), 316--321.
49. Van Dijk, S., Jeffrey, J., & Katz, M. R. (2013). A randomized,
    controlled, pilot study of dialectical behavior therapy skills in a
    psychoeducational group for individuals with bipolar disorder.
    Journal of Affective Disorders, 145, 386--393.
50. Hirvikoski, T., Waaler, E., Alfredsson, J., Pihlgren, C., Holmström,
    A., Johnson, A., et al. (2011). Reduced ADHD symptoms in adults with
    ADHD after structured skills training group: Results from a
    randomized controlled trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 49(3),
    175--185.
51. Whiteside, U. (2011). A brief personalized feedback intervention
    integrating a motivational interviewing therapeutic style and DBT
    skills for depressed or anxious heavy drinking young adults.
    Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Washington.
52. Koons, C. R., Chapman, A. L., Betts, B. B., O'Rourke, B., Morse, N.,
    & Robins, C. J. (2006). Dialectical behavior therapy adapted for the
    vocational rehabilitation of significantly disabled mentally ill
    adults. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 13(2), 146--156.
53. Cavanaugh, M. M., Solomon, P. L., & Gelles, R. J. (2011). The
    Dialectical Psychoeducational Workshop (DPEW) for males at risk for
    intimate partner violence: A pilot randomized controlled trial.
    Journal of Experimental Criminology, 7(3), 275--291.
54. Bradley, R. G., & Follingstad, D. R. (2003). Group therapy for
    incarcerated women who experienced interpersonal violence: A pilot
    study. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 16(4), 337--340.
55. Shelton, D., Sampl, S., Kesten, K. L., Zhang, W., & Trestman, R. L.
    (2009). Treatment of impulsive aggression in correctional settings.
    Behavioral Sciences and the Law, 27(5), 787--800.
56. Hoffman, P. D., Fruzzetti, A. E., Buteau, E., Neiditch, E. R.,
    Penney, D., Bruce, M. L., et al. (2005). Family connections: A
    program for relatives of persons with borderline personality
    disorder. Family Process, 44(2), 217--225.
57. Rajalin, M., Wickholm-­ Pethrus, L., Hursti, T., & Jokinen, J.
    (2009). Dialectical behavior therapy-based skills training for
    family members of suicide attempters. Archives of Suicide Research,
    13(3), 257--263.

24 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

58. Sambrook, S., Abba, N., & Chadwick, P. (2007). Evaluation of DBT
    emotional coping skills groups for people with parasuicidal
    behaviours. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 35(2),
    241--244.

59. Sakdalan, J. A., Shaw, J., & Collier, V. (2010). Staying in the
    here-and-now: A pilot study on the use of dialectical behaviour
    therapy group skills training for forensic clients with intellectual
    disability. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 54(6),
    568--572.

60. Nelson-Gray, R. O., Keane, S. P., Hurst, R. M., Mitchell, J. T.,
    Warburton, J. B., Chok, J. T., et al. (2006). A modified DBT skills
    training program for oppositional defiant adolescents: Promising
    preliminary findings. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44(12),
    1811--1820.

61. Hesslinger, B., van Elst, L. T., Nyberg, E., Dykierek, P., Richter,
    H., Berner, M., et al. (2002). Psychotherapy of attention deficit
    hyperactivity disorder in adults. European Archives of Psychiatry
    and Clinical Neuroscience, 252(4), 177--184.

62. Iverson, K. M., Shenk, C., & Fruzzetti, A. E. (2009). Dialectical
    behavior therapy for women victims of domestic abuse: A pilot study.
    Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 40(3), 242--248.

63. Neacsiu, A. D., Rizvi, S. L., & Linehan, M. M. (2010). Dialectical
    behavior therapy skills use as a mediator and outcome of treatment
    for borderline personality disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
    48(9), 832--839.

64. Carter, G. L., Willcox, C. H., Lewin, T. J., Conrad, A. M., &
    Bendit, N. (2010). Hunter DBT project: Randomized controlled trial
    of dialectical behaviour therapy in women with borderline
    personality disorder. Australian and New Zealand Journal of
    Psychiatry, 44(2), 162--173.

65. Linehan, M. M., Tutek, D. A., Heard, H. L., & Armstrong, H. E.
    (1994). Interpersonal outcome of cognitive behavioral treatment for
    chronically suicidal borderline patients. American Journal of
    Psychiatry, 151(12), 1771--1775.

66. McMain, S., Links, P., Gnam, W., Guimond, T., Cardish, R., Korman,
    L., & Streiner, D. (2009). A randomized trial of dialectical
    behavior therapy versus general psychiatric management for
    borderline personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry,
    166(12), 1365--1374.

Chapter 2

Planning to Conduct DBT Skills Training

Behavioral skills training is necessary when the skills needed to solve
problems and attain desired goals are not currently in an individual's
behavioral repertoire. That is, under ideal circum­stances (where
behavior is not interfered with by fears, conflicting motives,
unrealistic beliefs, etc.), the individual cannot generate or produce
the behaviors required. The term "skills" in DBT is used synonymously
with "abilities" and includes in its broadest sense cognitive,
emotional, and overt behavioral (or action) skills together with their
integration, which is necessary for effective performance. Effectiveness
is gauged by both direct and indirect effects of the behaviors.
Effective performance can be defined as those behaviors that lead to a
maximum of positive outcomes with a minimum of negative outcomes. Thus
"skills" is used in the sense of "using skillful means," as well as in
the sense of responding to situations adaptively or effectively. The
emphasis on integration of behaviors to produce a skillful response is
important. Very often (indeed, usually), an individual has the component
behaviors of a skill but cannot put them together coherently when
necessary. For example, an interpersonally skillful response requires
putting together words the person already knows into effective
sentences, together with appropriate body language, intonation, eye
contact, and so forth. The parts are rarely new; the combination,
however, often is. In the terminology of DBT, almost any desired
behavior can be thought of as a skill. Thus coping actively and
effectively with problems, and avoiding maladaptive or ineffective
responses, are both considered using one's skills. The central aim of
DBT as a whole is to replace ineffective, maladaptive, or nonskilled
behavior with skillful responses. The aim of DBT skills training is to
help the individual acquire the needed skills. The steps for planning to
conduct DBT skills training are outlined in Table 2.1 and

discussed in more detail next. How to integrate DBT skills into non-DBT
interventions is described at a later point in the chapter.

Forming (or Joining) a DBT Team1 DBT assumes that effective treatment,
including skills training, must pay as much attention to the behavior
and experience of providers working with clients as it does to the
clients' behavior and experience. Thus treatment of the providers is an
integral part of any DBT program. This is just as important for those
teaching skills as it is for all other DBT providers. No matter how well
adjusted clients may be, skills training can at times be enormously
challenging and/or stressful, and staying within the DBT frame can be
difficult. The roles of consultation are to hold the providers within
the DBT frame and to address problems that arise. The fundamental team
targets relevant to skills trainers are increasing adherence to DBT
principles and accuracy of teaching TABLE 2.1. Organizing DBT Skills
Training

in Your Practice

1.  Form (or join) a DBT team.
2.  Select skills training members of your team.
3.  Select skills modules and specific skill sets.
4.  Plan a skills training curriculum.
5.  Decide on:

<!-- -->

a.  Massed versus spaced practice in a 1-year program.
b.  Individual versus group skills training.
c.  Open versus closed groups.
d.  Heterogeneous versus homogeneous groups.

<!-- -->

6.  Clarify the roles of skills trainers, individual therapists, case
    managers, nurses and line staff, and pharmacotherapists in a skills
    training program. 25

26 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

and coaching skills; providing ideas for enhancing teaching of skills;
troubleshooting problems that arise in the course of skills training;
increasing and maintaining skills trainers' motivation; and giving
support when providers' limits are crossed (and even when these are not
crossed!). DBT consultation groups require at least two people who meet
weekly in person if both are in the same locality; when in-­person
meetings are not possible, team members may meet in an online learning
community or via Internet applications. Because the primary focus of a
DBT team is on the treatment providers, not the skills training
recipients, providers do not have to be treating the same clients. For
example, a client could be in individual treatment in one clinic and in
a skills training group taking place in another clinic, each clinic with
its own DBT team. Coordination of interventions, however, is greater if
individual therapists, case managers, pharmacotherapists, and skills
trainers are on the same team. (See Sayrs & Linehan, in press, for more
discussion of how to set up, run, and solve problems in a DBT
consultation team. 2)

Selecting Skills Training Members of Your Team: Necessary Qualifications
and Characteristics Skills training can be conducted by
psychotherapists, counselors, case managers, social workers, milieu
staff (in residential settings), and psychiatric nurses (in inpatient
settings). Prescribing psychiatrists and nurse practitioners can be very
effective skills coaches. For individuals without identified mental
disorders, skills training can also be conducted by anyone (teachers,
parents, family members, volunteers, and professional trainers) who is
well trained in the principles of skills training and in the skills
themselves. Clergy, pharmacotherapists, and other health care providers
(e.g., psychiatrists, physicians, nurse practitioners, nurses,
occupational therapists, and other medical staff in outpatient
settings), when trained in the skills, often make excellent skills
coaches. In addition, charismatic individuals who themselves have gone
through skills training and have overcome their own difficulties can
also make excellent co-­trainers and skills peer counselors, again, when
trained in the skills. We know in DBT that to do the treatment
effectively, skills trainers need to be well trained in what they are
doing. They must have a very good grasp of DBT skills, practice the
skills themselves, and know

how to teach them. They need to know and be able to use basic behavior
therapy techniques (such as behavior analysis, solution analysis,
contingency management, exposure procedures, and the basics of skills
building) and DBT treatment strategies (such as dialectical strategies,
validation and problem-­ solving strategies, irreverent and reciprocal
communication strategies, consultation to the patient, and environmental
intervention strategies) as well as DBT protocols, particularly the
suicide protocol. These strategies and protocols are described in full
in the main DBT text and are reviewed in Chapter 5 of this manual. At
this time, we have no evidence that type of academic degree is a
critical factor in improving skills training outcomes. Skill trainers'
attitudes toward clients are also very important. Clients who fail to
behave skillfully, and claim not to know how to behave differently, are
viewed by some therapists as resistant (or at least as governed by
motives outside awareness). These clinicians see giving advice,
coaching, making suggestions, or otherwise teaching new behaviors as
encouraging dependency and need gratification that gets in the way of
"real" therapy. Other therapists and skills trainers fall into the trap
of believing that clients can hardly do anything. At times they even
believe that the clients are incapable of learning new, more skillful
behaviors. Acceptance, nurturance, and environmental intervention
compromise the armamentarium of these clinicians. Not surprisingly, when
these two orientations coexist within a client's treatment team,
conflict and "staff splitting" often arise. A dialectical approach would
suggest looking for the synthesis, as I discuss more fully in Chapter 13
of the main DBT text. When a DBT team is being started, the criteria for
membership on the team are the same for all participants. Each
participant must be on the team voluntarily, must agree to attend team
meetings, must be committed to learning and applying DBT, and must be
equally vulnerable to team influence. The last criterion means that all
participants will bring to the team any difficulties and issues related
to their attempts to apply DBT principles and interventions (including
skills interventions) with the clients they are working with.

Selecting Skills Modules and Specific Skills to Teach As noted in
Chapter 1, there are four separate DBT skills modules: Mindfulness,
Interpersonal Effec-

2. Planning to Conduct DBT Skills Training • 27

tiveness, Emotion Regulation, and Distress Tolerance. Each module is
divided into core sections and supplementary sections with specialized,
optional, or advanced skills. The latter sections can be dropped if they
do not meet the needs of specific client populations or if time demands
it. Sections and specific skills can also be taught separately. (See
Table 1.1 for which skills are core and which are supplementary.) A set
of general handouts is given out during orientation before the start of
each Mindfulness skills module, if there are new members in the group. A
set of supplementary skills teaching behavioral analyses is also
included in the general skills. In standard DBT, skills training is
conducted in groups of 6--8 (10 at the most) participants plus 2 group
leaders, once a week for 2.5 hours (2 hours with adolescents).
Participants complete one full cycle of core skills through all the
modules in 6 months. In a 1-year treatment program, participants then
repeat the cycle for a total of 12 months. The core skills modules are
each designed to take from 5 to 7 weeks (Interpersonal Effectiveness, 5
weeks; Distress Tolerance, 6 weeks; Emotion Regulation, 7 weeks). The
Mindfulness module is designed to take two weeks and is repeated, along
with a brief orientation, before the start of each new module. This
basic cycle is outlined in Table 2.2. See the Appendices to Part I for a
more detailed outline, along with session-by-­session outlines of
different DBT skills training programs for various disorders, time
periods, and settings. There are no empirical data to suggest how to
order the modules. Since the core mindfulness skills are woven
throughout the other training modules, Mindfulness obviously has to be
the first module presented. In our current program, the Interpersonal
Effectiveness, Emotion Regulation, and Distress Tolerance modules follow
in that order, and that is their order in this manual. The Interpersonal
Effectiveness module focuses on how clients can decrease pain and
suffering by effectively interacting with their social environment both
to elicit changes in others and (when warranted) to resist unwanted
influence from others. The Emotion Regulation module assumes that even
though a situation (interpersonal or otherwise) may generate pain and
suffering, an individual's responses also have to change and can be
changed. The Distress Tolerance module assumes that even though there
may be a lot of pain and suffering, it can be tolerated, and life can be
accepted and lived in spite of pain. Surely this is a difficult lesson
for anyone. One can, however, make a reasonably good

TABLE 2.2. Standard Core DBT Skills Training Schedule: Cycling Twice
through All Modules over 12 Months

Orientation + Mindfulness module: Interpersonal Effectiveness module:
Orientation + Mindfulness module: Emotion Regulation module:
Orientation + Mindfulness module: Distress Tolerance module:

2 weeks 5 weeks 2 weeks 7 weeks 2 weeks 6 weeks (24 weeks, 6 months)

Orientation + Mindfulness module: 2 weeks Interpersonal Effectiveness
module: 5 weeks Orientation + Mindfulness module: 2 weeks Emotion
Regulation module 7 weeks Orientation + Mindfulness module: 2 weeks
Distress Tolerance module: 6 weeks (48 weeks, 12 months)

case for any order of modules. In many clinics, clients are given the
crisis survival strategies handouts (part of the Distress Tolerance
module) during the first meeting. These skills are more or less self-­
explanatory, and many clients find them extremely helpful. They are then
reviewed in detail when the Distress Tolerance module is taught. For
some clients, their dysregulation and lack of understanding of emotions
are so great that a case can be made for starting with the Emotion
Regulation module. This is often the case, for example, in our
multifamily adolescent groups.

Suggestions for Planning a Skills Training Curriculum Instructional
material in skills training, especially in a group context, should be
presented at a pace adapted to the level of participants' understanding.
Since the pace of each session will differ, as will the overall pace for
particular individuals or groups, the instructional content in Chapters
6--10 of this book is not divided into segments within particular
sessions. In my experience, however, the first time trainers teach these
skill modules, the amount of material feels overwhelming. New skills
trainers tend to spend too much time on early parts of a module and then
have too little time later to cover other material that may be more
important. What actually is important will necessarily vary with dif-

28 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

ferent individuals or groups, depending on their experience and skill
levels. In order to facilitate the coverage of all the material by the
end of the time scheduled for the particular module, the skills training
leaders should construct lesson plans for each session and should
attempt to cover the designated material during the session time
allotted. Curricula for 11 different skills programs are outlined in the
Appendices to Part I. Most of these are based on outlines that have been
used in various research studies using DBT skills. The best strategy the
first time through a module is to follow the steps below. 1. Decide how
many total weeks your skills training program will last, and how long
each session will be. The length of your program and of sessions will
depend on whether participants do or do not have mental disorders, the
severity of their disorders or other problems, the goals of your
treatment program (e.g., stabilization, treatment, skills building),
staff availability, financial resources, research data on outcomes of
various lengths of treatment, and factors unique to your treatment
setting. 2. Decide which skills you definitely want to teach and which
skills you want to include as ancillary. Content of skills should be
based on the research data for the disorders/problems you are addressing
and, when there are few research data to guide your choice, on your
beliefs about which skills are most appropriate for your clients. The
curricula in the Appendices are organized by the number of weeks each
program lasts and by the population each program is intended to treat.
Look these over and select the skills curriculum that fits your
situation best. 3. Decide which handouts and worksheets you want to use
(see www.guilford.com/skills-trainingmanual). Do not use them without
first reviewing them. Worksheets are associated with handouts; the
worksheets for each handout are listed after the number of each handout,
and vice versa. Descriptions of the relevant handouts and worksheets are
given in the overview box for each skill or set of skills in the
teaching notes. There are several types of worksheets. Overview
worksheets cover several skills and can be used when you want to focus
primarily on practice of a group of skills, rather than focusing
intensively on just the skills taught in a particular session. These
worksheets are the first ones in each section and are linked to the
handouts that overview each section.

Specific skills worksheets focus on a particular skill or small skills
set. In some cases, multiple worksheets focus on the same set of skills
(and are given the same worksheet number), but they differ in the amount
of practice they provide for. The letters a, b, and c following the
worksheet number generally indicate different demands the worksheets put
on participants. For example, some of these ask participants to practice
a particular skill once or twice between sessions; others ask that each
skill in a set be practiced between sessions; and still others ask for
daily practice of a skill or set of skills. There are also calendar
worksheets for some skills that ask the participants to write about the
skills they use each day between sessions. 4. The first time you teach
skills, divide each module arbitrarily into sections corresponding to
the exact number of weeks available, and try to get through as much of
each section as possible. This experience will dictate how to time the
modules the second time, and so on. When I teach therapists how to do
DBT skills training, I usually recommend that trainers copy the teaching
notes covering the skills they will teach in a specific session, and
then highlight the main points they plan to cover in that session. With
this strategy, it can be useful first to teach the material in the
skills modules in the order given in this manual. After the first
run-­through, modifications in content and order can be made to suit your
style or a particular situation.

Massed versus Spaced Practice in a 1-Year Program Although each training
module is designed to take 5--7 weeks to cover, up to a year could be
spent on each. The content for each skills area is comprehensive and
complex for such a short period of time. Covering the skills training
material in this brief number of weeks requires very strict time
management. Therapists also have to be willing to go on when some (or
even all) clients have not acquired the skills that are currently being
taught. Participants are sometimes overwhelmed by the amount of
information the first time they go through each module. In a 1-year
program, why not expand each module to a series of three 10- to 14-week
modules (starting each with 2 weeks of mindfulness skills),

2. Planning to Conduct DBT Skills Training • 29

rather than two sets of three 5- to 7-week modules? In other words, why
not go for massed practice (the first choice) rather than spaced
practice (the second choice)? There are several reasons for the present
format. First, all individuals---but particularly those who have trouble
regulating their emotions---can be variable in their mood and
functionality. They may go through periods of several weeks where they
may miss meetings or, when present, pay attention minimally (if at all).
Presenting material twice increases the probability that each person
will be present, both physically and psychologically, at least once when
a particular segment is covered. Second, different participants have
different needs; thus the modules are differentially relevant and
preferred by various individuals. Having to sit through a disliked
module for 10--14 weeks is very difficult. Sitting through 5--7 weeks of
a disliked module is also hard, but not as hard. Third, in a 10- to
14-week format, the modules scheduled second and third get less practice
time than in a 5- to 7-week format taught twice. If I could make a case
that one module is indeed the most important and needs the most
practice, this would not be a liability. However, I have no controlled
empirical data to use in choosing which module that would be. In
addition, it is doubtful that one module would be best for all clients.
The central premise of a behavioral skills-­oriented approach is that
acquisition of new skills requires extensive practice. Even though the
material often feels overwhelming the first time when presented in the
5- to 7-week format, clients nonetheless seem able to practice the
skills in their everyday lives. Thus presenting each module once during
the first 6 months of treatment leaves a minimum of 6 months for
continued practice before skill training ends. Fourth, going over the
material after clients have had a chance to practice the skills for
several months can be beneficial. The material makes more sense. And it
offers the chance for the participants to learn that problems that seem
really hard at one point may not always seem so hard if they persevere
in their attempts to overcome them. Finally, my experience has been that
when 10--14 weeks are allotted to cover a treatment module, it is far
easier to divert therapy time to attending to individual participants'
crises and process issues. It is easy for the leaders to start thinking
that they have plenty of time for digressive topics. Although some
attention must be given to these issues, it is easy to

drift out of skills training and toward supportive process therapy, when
time is not of the essence. In my experience, once this has happened, it
is extremely difficult to get back control of the therapy agenda.

Individual versus Group Skills Training Successful DBT skills training
requires discipline by both participants and skills trainers. In skills
training, the session agenda is set by the skills to be learned. In
typical psychotherapy and in DBT individual therapy, by contrast, the
agenda is usually set by a client's current problems. When current
problems are pressing, staying with a skills training agenda requires
the skills trainers to take a very active role, controlling the
direction and focus of the session. Many therapists and skills trainers
are not trained to take such a directive role; thus, despite their good
intentions, their efforts at skills training often peter out as
participants' problems escalate. Inadequate attention to the actual
teaching of skills, and the resulting drift in focus, are particularly
likely in individual as opposed to group skills training. Even trainers
who are well trained in directive strategies have great difficulty
keeping to a directive agenda when participants have pressing problems
or crisis situations and want immediate help or advice. The inevitable
crises and high emotional pain of such clients constitute a major and
continuing problem. It is difficult for the participants, and
consequently for their skills trainers, to attend to anything but the
current crises during sessions. It is particularly difficult to stay
focused on skills when a participant threatens to commit suicide or
otherwise quit if his or her current problem is not taken seriously.
Taking it seriously (from the participant's point of view) usually means
forgoing the day's skills training agenda in favor of resolving the
current crisis. Other participants may be less demanding of session time
and energy, but their passivity, sleepiness, fidgetiness, and/or lack of
interest in skills training may pose a formidable roadblock. It is easy
in such a case for a therapist or skills trainer to get worn out with
the client and just give up the effort, especially if a trainer is not a
firm believer in skills training anyway. Skills training can also be
relatively boring for those doing it if participants are nonresponsive,

30 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

especially for trainers who have done considerable skills training with
other participants. It is like a surgeon's doing the same operation over
and over and over. Clients' fluctuating moods from week to week and
within the skills training sessions (a characteristic of individuals who
have trouble regulating their emotions), together with therapists'
wavering interest, can create havoc with the best-laid skills training
plans. Skills training is difficult with clients who have multiple
problems, serious difficulties regulating their emotions, frequent
crises, or intense desire to change the behavior of another person.
Trying to conduct skills training with such an individual is like trying
to teach a person how to put up a tent in the middle of a hurricane.
Nonetheless, it is also the case that if participants had more effective
skills in their repertoires, they would be able to cope much better with
crisis situations. And this is the dilemma: How does a trainer teach the
skills necessary to cope, when a participant's current inability to cope
is so great that he or she is not receptive to acquiring new behavioral
responses? In individual treatment, there is often nothing beyond the
two participants to keep therapy on track. If both participant and
skills trainer want to switch to something else, they can do it easily.
Keeping skills training on track can also be extremely difficult when
the participants are friends and family members of other people who are
having very serious difficulties. This is particularly the problem when
participants are parents or spouses/ partners of individuals who are at
high risk for suicide or are engaging in dysfunctional behavior patterns
that the participants are having extreme difficulties tolerating. In
groups for friends and family members, it is very important for the
leaders to make it clear during orientation that the focus of skills
training is always on increasing the skills of the participants. The
focus is not on how to change other people. This can be a particular
problem for any relative who is in skills training principally to get
consultation on how to manage a family member, with the expectation that
the relative will be able to help the other person change. A similar
problem can occur when any group member insists on help with changing
another person (a boss, an employee, etc.). If the difficulty is
persistent or is interfering with skills training for others, we have
found that one or two individual consultation meetings can be helpful.
Clearly, some DBT skills are aimed at influencing others. The DBT
interpersonal effectiveness skills

focus on developing influential behavior with others, including
effective assertiveness with others and behavioral skills such as
reinforcement, extinction, flooding, and punishment aimed at increasing
or decreasing the behaviors of others. The line between this focus on
participants' interpersonal skills and ability to influence others on
the one hand, and a focus on changing specific others, may be thin---but
it is important nonetheless. Staying dialectical can be critical here in
managing these two polarities. For many of the reasons discussed above,
the standard mode of skills training in DBT is a group intervention. In
a group, other participants---or at least therapists' sense of
obligation to other participants---keeps skills trainers on track, even
when one participant wants to change course. When one participant in
group skills training is not in the mood for learning skills, others may
be. The reinforcement these other clients give the skills trainers for
continuing skills training can be more powerful than the punishment
delivered by the participant who is not in the mood. The crux of the
problem is this: Skills training with an individual who does not see its
benefits right away is often not immediately reinforcing for either the
participant or the person teaching the skills. For many individuals,
there is not a sense of immediate relief or problem solving. Skills
training is like teaching tennis: A student does not usually win the
first game after the first lesson. Winning takes practice, practice,
practice. Nor is behavioral skills training as interesting as having
"heart-to-­hearts," a topic I have discussed in Chapter 12 of the main
DBT text. Skills training requires much more active work for both client
and therapist. Thus, for individual skills training to work, special
precautions must be made for arranging events so that both therapist and
client will find it reinforcing enough to continue.

Individual Skills Training A number of circumstances may make it
preferable or necessary to conduct skills training with an individual
client rather than in a group. In a private practice setting or a small
clinic, there may not be more than one client needing skills training at
any one time, or you may not be able to organize more than one person at
a time for skills training. Some clients are not appropriate for groups.
Although in my experience this is very rare, a client who cannot inhibit
overt aggressive behavior toward other group members should not be put
into a group until

2. Planning to Conduct DBT Skills Training • 31

this behavior is under control. It is also usually preferable to treat
social anxiety disorder (social phobia) before asking a client to join a
skills training group. Some clients may have already participated in 1
year or more of a skills training group, but need further focused
attention to one category or set of skills. Finally, a client may not be
able to attend the offered group sessions. In primary care settings, or
when skills training is being integrated into individual therapy, skills
may be taught during individual therapy sessions. In these situations,
having the skills handouts and worksheets readily available will make it
easiest for the individual practitioners to slip skills training into
the fabric of ongoing individual care. In such a case, the therapist can
make continuous efforts to incorporate the skills training procedures in
every session. A problem with this approach is that the rules are not
clear: It is often not apparent to the client what contingencies are
operating at any given time in an interaction. The client who wants to
focus on an immediate solution to an immediate crisis, therefore, has no
guidelines as to when insisting on such attention is appropriate and
likely to be reinforced and when it is not. A problem for the therapist
is that it is extremely difficult to remain on track. My own inability
to do just this was one of the important factors in the development of
DBT as it is today. A second alternative is to have a second therapist
do individual skills training with each client. The rules for client and
therapist behavior in this case are clear. In this format, general
behavioral skills are learned with the skills trainer; crises management
and individual problem solving, including the application of skills
learned to particular crisis or problem situations, are the focus of
sessions with the primary therapist or case manager. This approach seems
especially advantageous in certain situations. For example, in our
university clinic a number of students are eager to obtain experience in
working with individuals with severe disorders who need long-term
therapy, but the students are not able to commit to longer-term
individual therapy. Conducting focused skills training for a period of
time is a good opportunity for these students, and in my experience it
has also worked out well for the clients. This would be an option in any
setting where residents, social workers, or nurses are in training. In a
group clinical practice, therapists may conduct skills training for each
other; a large practice may hire some therapists with specific talents
in this

area. The treatment model here is somewhat similar to a general
practitioner's sending a client to a specialist for specialized
treatment. Individual therapists who have no one to refer clients to for
skills training, or who want to do it themselves, should make the
context of skills training different from that of usual psychotherapy.
For example, a separate weekly meeting devoted specifically to skills
training may be scheduled, or skills training and individual therapy can
alternate weekly. The latter choice is particularly likely to work when
the client does not need weekly individual sessions focused on crises
and problem solving. If possible, the skills session should be conducted
in a room different from that used for individual psychotherapy. Other
possibilities include switching chairs; moving a table or desk near (or
between) the therapist and the client to put the skills training
materials on; using a blackboard; turning up the lighting; having skills
training sessions at a different time of day than psychotherapy
sessions, or for a shorter or longer time period; arranging for audio or
video recordings of the sessions if this is not done in individual
psychotherapy, or vice versa; and billing differently. For a therapist
with a particularly difficult client, participation in a
supervision/consultation group is important in keeping up motivation and
focusing on skills. Even for those individuals who are in group skills
training, a task of individual therapists is to reinforce the use of
skills and also to teach skills "ahead of time," so to speak, as needed.
Many therapists in our clinic also give clients skills homework
assignments related to current problems, using the DBT skills training
worksheets.

Group Skills Training The chief advantage of group skills training is
that it is efficient. A group can include as few as two people. In our
clinic, with very dysfunctional clients, we try to have six to eight
persons in each group. Group treatment has much to offer, over and above
what any individual therapy can offer. First, therapists have an
opportunity to observe and work with interpersonal behaviors that show
up in peer relationships but may only rarely occur in individual therapy
sessions. Second, clients have an opportunity to interact with other
people like themselves, and the resulting validation and development of
a support group can be very therapeutic. DBT encourages
outside-of-­session relationships among skills group clients, as long as
those relationships---­ including

32 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

any conflicts---can be discussed inside the sessions. Third, clients
have an opportunity to learn from one another, thus increasing avenues
of therapeutic input. Fourth, groups typically reduce the intensity of
the personal relationship between individual clients and the group
leaders; in dynamic terms, the transference is diluted. This can be very
important, because the intensity of therapy sometimes creates more
problems than it solves for clients who have problems regulating their
emotions. Fifth, if a norm of practicing skills between sessions can be
established, such a norm can increase skills practice in individuals who
on their own might be much less likely to do the skills homework
practice ordinarily assigned weekly. Finally, skills groups offer a
relatively nonthreatening opportunity for individual clients to learn
how to be in a group. In my ongoing DBT research programs, we have
offered a variety of different treatment programs. In our 1-year
standard DBT program, clients in individual therapy also participate in
group skills training. In our 1-year DBT case management program,
clients have a DBT case manager as well as group skills training. In our
adolescent program, each adolescent sees an individual therapist, and
the parents or other caregivers and the adolescent attend the skills
group. We also offer a 6-month skills training program for friends and
family members of individuals who either are difficult to be with or
have difficult mental disorders. We have offered a similar skills
training group for individuals with emotion dysregulation. A number of
issues need to be considered in setting up a skills group---­whether to
have open or closed groups; whether groups should be heterogeneous or
homogeneous; and how many group leaders or trainers there should be and
what these persons' roles should be. I discuss these issues next.

Open versus Closed Groups In an open group, new members can enter on a
continuing basis. In a closed group, the group is formed and stays
together for a certain time period; new members are not allowed once the
group composition is stable. Whether a group is open or closed will
often depend on pragmatic issues. In many clinical settings, especially
inpatient units, open groups are a necessity. In outpatient settings,
however, it may be possible to round up a number of people who want
skills training and who will agree to stay to-

gether for a period of time. If a choice is available, which type of
group works better? I have tried both types of groups and believe that
open groups work better for skills training. There are two reasons.
First, in a closed group it becomes progressively easier to deviate from
the skills training agenda. Process issues frequently become more
prominent as members get more comfortable with one another. The group as
a whole can begin to drift away from a focus on learning behavioral
skills. Although process issues may be important and cannot be ignored,
there is a definite difference between a behavioral skills training
group and an interpersonal process group. Periodically adding new skills
training group members, who expect to learn new behavioral skills,
forces the group to get back on task. Second, in an open group new
clients have the capacity to reenergize a group or allow a change of
norms when needed. In addition, for individuals with difficulty with
change and/or trust, an open group allows clients an opportunity to
learn to cope with change in a relatively stable environment. A somewhat
controlled but continual rate of change allows therapeutic exposure to
change in a context where clients can be helped to respond to it
effectively.

Heterogeneous versus Homogeneous Groups DBT skills training group
members in my clinic are largely (but not completely) homogeneous with
respect to diagnosis. Depending on the training needs of my students or
the research studies currently in progress, we have restricted entry to
individuals who (1) meet criteria for BPD; (2) have BPD and are highly
suicidal; (3) have BPD with serious anger problems; (4) have BPD and
substance use disorders; (5) have BPD and PTSD; (6) are suicidal
adolescents together with their parents; (7) have disordered emotion
regulation; or (8) are friends or family members of individuals with
serious disorders. In most groups, we will also allow in one or two
participants who are being treated in our clinic but meet criteria for
other disorders (e.g., depression, anxiety disorders). Group members are
not particularly homogeneous in other ways. Ages range from 13 to 18
years in the adolescent groups and from 18 up in other groups; some
groups include clients of both sexes. Socioeconomic, education, marital,
and parental statuses vary.

2. Planning to Conduct DBT Skills Training • 33

With the exception of groups designed for friends and families and for
adolescents and their families, we prohibit sexual partners from being
in the same skills training group. Sexual partners are placed into
different groups at intake. If a sexual relationship develops among two
members of a group, we have a rule that one must drop out. Such
relationships can create enormous difficulties for the partners. For
many of our clients so far, our group represents their first experience
of being with other individuals sharing very similar difficulties.
Although from my perspective a homogeneous group is an asset in doing
group skills training, the choice obviously has pros and cons.

Arguments against a Homogeneous Group There are a number of rather
strong arguments against a homogeneous group of clients who have severe
disorders, including severe emotion dysregulation, suicidal behaviors,
or behaviors that might elicit contagion. First, such a group for
suicidal and/ or highly impulsive individuals can be risky on an
outpatient basis. Any kind of therapy, individual or group, can be very
stressful for clients with disordered emotion regulation. Extreme
emotional reactivity all but ensures that intense emotions will be
aroused, requiring skillful therapeutic management. A therapist has to
be very good at reading and responding to nonverbal cues and indirect
verbal communications---a difficult task under the best of
circumstances. Therapeutic comments can be misinterpreted, or
interpreted in a way that the therapist did not mean, and insensitive
comments can have a strong impact. These problems are compounded in
group therapy. It is impossible for therapists to track and respond
individually to each group member's emotional responses to a therapy
session. With more clients and a faster pace than in individual therapy,
there are more opportunities for therapists to make mistakes and
insensitive remarks, as well as for clients to misconstrue what is going
on. In addition, it is more difficult for clients to express their
emotional reactions to a group therapist in front of other group
members. Thus the possibility for clients leaving in turmoil, with
emotional responses they cannot handle, is greatly increased in group
over individual therapy. A second, related drawback to homogeneous
groups has to do with the tendency of clients with high emotion
regulation problems to become emo-

tionally involved with one another's problems and tragedies. These
clients often become anxious, angry, depressed, and hopeless not only
about the problems in their own lives, but about the problems of those
close to them. Thus just listening to others' life descriptions can
precipitate intense, painful emotional responses. This has also been a
very difficult issue for our staff members; we also have to listen to
painful story after story from our clients. Imagine how much more
difficult it is for individuals who have little capacity to modulate
their responses to emotionally charged information. Another argument
against homogeneous groups of clients who have trouble regulating their
emotions or impulses is based on the notion that in such a group there
will be no one to model appropriate, adaptive behaviors---or, similarly,
that there will be extensive modeling of inappropriate behaviors. I have
simply not found this to be the case. In fact, I am frequently amazed at
the capacity of our clients to be helpful to one another in coping with
life's problems. In difficult therapy protocols such as exposure-based
procedures, it is not unusual for clients to help each other cope with
getting through the treatment. The one area where an absence of
appropriate modeling does seem to exist is in the area of coping with
extreme negative feelings. Especially with suicidal individuals at the
beginning of treatment, it is often necessary for the group leaders to
take much of the responsibility for modeling how to cope with negative
emotions in a nonsuicidal manner (see Chapter 5 of this manual). A
fourth argument against homogeneous groups---­ particularly with
individuals who have BPD or major depression---has to do with their
passivity, their ability to "catch" other's moods and behavior, and
their inability to act in a mood-­ independent fashion. Contagion of
suicidal behavior can be a particularly difficult problem. At times, if
one group member comes to a session in a discouraged or depressed mood,
all members of the group will soon be feeling the same way. If group
leaders are not careful, even they can sink down with the members. One
of the reasons why we have two leaders for each group in our clinic is
that when this happens, each therapist will have someone to keep him or
her functioning at an energetic level. It can be very difficult.
Finally, it is sometimes said that some client populations (e.g.,
adolescents or those with BPD) are more prone to "attention seeking"
than are other clients, and that this tendency will be disruptive to

34 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

any group process. Once again, I have not found this to be the case.

Arguments for a Homogeneous Group From my perspective, there are two
powerful arguments for a homogeneous group. First, homogeneity allows
the group leaders to tailor the skills and theoretical conceptions they
offer to the specific problems of group members. Most of the skills
taught are applicable for many client populations. However, a
heterogeneous group requires a much more generic presentation of the
skills, and the application of the skills to each person's central
problems has to be worked out individually. With a homogeneous group,
examples can be given that reflect their specific problems and
situations. A common conceptual scheme would be difficult to present in
a heterogeneous group unless it was very general. A second argument for
a homogeneous group is the opportunity for clients to be with a group of
individuals who share the same problems and concerns. In my experience,
this is a very powerful validating experience for our clients. Many have
been in other groups but have not had the experience of being around
others like themselves. For those with BPD and other severe disorders,
they may have finally found others who actually understand the often
inexplicable urges to injure themselves, the desire to be dead, the
inability to regulate anger, the power of urges to use drugs, the
inability to pop out of a depressed mood, the frustration of being
unable to control emotions and behavior, or the pain of emotionally
invalidating experiences. Adolescents have found others who understand
their difficulties with parents, the pain of being bullied, their
intense desire to be acceptable, and their beliefs that they are not. In
a group for friends and family members, clients share the pain of having
loved ones suffering and the frequent sense of desperation and
helplessness. A factor that can complicate the advantage of having an
entire group of individuals with the same disorder or problem has to do
with different rates of individual progress in treatment. When one
client is engaging in dysfunctional behaviors, it is very validating to
have other group members struggling with the same issue. However, once
the client has stopped such behaviors, it can be very hard if others are
still engaging in the same behaviors. Hearing about others'
out-of-­control behavior seems to cause a greater urge to do the same
thing; this is, of

course, a threatening experience for a person who is working hard at
avoiding dysfunctional patterns of behavior. In addition, we have found
that as clients progress in therapy, they often begin to change their
self-image from that of "person with a disorder" to that of "normal
person." Especially if they are very judgmental, they can find it very
hard to stay in a group defined as a group for disordered individuals.
These two issues---the urge to imitate dysfunctional behavior, and the
need to change one's self-image from "disordered" to "not
disordered"---must be dealt with effectively by the group leaders if an
individual is to continue with the group.

Clarifying Providers' Roles Skills Group Leaders In standard DBT groups,
we use a model of a primary group leader and a co-­leader. The functions
of the two leaders during a typical session differ. The primary leader
begins the meetings, conducts the initial behavioral analyses of
homework practice, and presents new material about skills. The primary
group leader is also responsible for the timing of the session, moving
from person to person as time allows. Thus the primary group leader has
overall responsibility for skills acquisition. The co-­leader's functions
are more diverse. First, he or she mediates tensions that arise between
members and the primary leader, providing a balance from which a
synthesis can be created. Second, while the primary group leader is
looking at the group as a whole, the co-­leader keeps a focus on each
individual member, noting any need for individual attention and either
addressing that need directly during group sessions or consulting with
the primary leader during breaks. Third, the co-­leader serves as a co-­
teacher and tutor, offering alternative explanations, examples, and so
on. The co-­leader may move his or her seating around the group as needed
to assist participants in finding the right handouts or worksheets or to
provide needed support. The co-­leader is often the person who keeps
track of the homework assignments. This is especially important when
special individual assignments are given to one or more participants in
the group. In these cases, it is also the co-­leader who is charged with
remembering the various assignments. Generally, if there is a "bad guy,"
it is the primary group leader, who enforces the group norms; if there

2. Planning to Conduct DBT Skills Training • 35

is a "good guy," it is the co-­leader, who always tries to see life from
the point of view of a person who is "down." More often than not in a
group meeting, though not always, the person who is "down" is a group
member; thus, the "good guy" image emerges for the co-­leader. As long as
both leaders keep the dialectical perspective of the whole, this
division of labor and roles can be quite therapeutic. Obviously, it
requires a degree of personal security on the part of both therapists if
it is to work. The DBT consultation strategies can be especially
important here. The DBT consultation team serves as the third point
providing the dialectical balance between the two co-­leaders, much as
the co-­leader does between the primary leader and a group member in a
group session. Thus the function of the DBT consultation team is to
highlight the truth in each side of an expressed tension, fostering
reconciliation and synthesis. Over the years, many DBT teams have tried
to convince me that one skills leader is all that is needed for most
groups. I remain unconvinced. With highly dysregulated and/or suicidal
individuals, a co-­leader is invaluable as a person who can leave the
room if needed to block a suicidal person from carrying out a suicide
threat, go and get an ice pack for a person with extreme arousal,
validate a person who feels attacked by the leader, or coach one person
during a break while the leader coaches another. In a multifamily group,
the co-­leader can coach the adolescent while the leader nudges a parent
to practice his or her skills with the adolescent. In groups for friends
and family members, as well as other groups where participants have no
identified mental disorders, it is surprising how helpful a co-­leader
can be in attending to the process issues that often arise. In sum,
managing a group in skills training is a complex task. Finally, there is
no substitute for having an observer of one's own behavior and skills as
a group leader or co-­leader. For example, due to my work schedule and
one skills training group's meeting in the evening, I was coming into
group sessions as the primary leader with very little energy, looking
tired and sounding uninteresting. Naturally, this did not bode well for
a successful skills training session. My co-­leader brought it up with
me, and we decided on a plan to "rev me up" each week (drinking a cold
cola right before group). Now my co-­leader not only reminds me each
week, but also gives me feedback at break if I need to make a greater
effort at "coming alive."

Individual Skills Trainers In individual skills training, the skills
trainer plays the role of both the skills leader and the co-­leader as
described above. It is extremely important in individual work that the
skills trainer stick to the role of teaching skills, while balancing
teaching with necessary troubleshooting of problems in learning skills
and skills use that arise. Although an individual skills trainer is not
an individual therapist, it is appropriate for such a trainer to suggest
specific skills for problems that clients present, such as opposite
action when a client is avoiding something or cope ahead when a client
is afraid of failing at something. That said, it is important for an
individual skills trainer not to fall into the role of being an
individual therapist. The best way to avoid this is always to keep in
mind the mantra of "What skills can you use?"

DBT Individual Therapists An individual therapist for a person in skills
training is the primary treatment provider and as such is responsible
for overall treatment planning; for management of crises, including
suicidal crises; for taking as-­needed coaching and crisis calls or
arranging for another provider to take these calls; and for making
decisions on modifications to treatment, including how many complete
rounds of skills training the individual should be in, whether admission
to a higher level of care is necessary, and so forth. Except in a crisis
to avoid serious injury or death, skills trainers turn crisis management
over to individual therapists. The task of the therapist with an
individual in skills training also includes applying the lens of
behavioral skills to helping clients generate solutions to their
problems. Indeed, when confronted with a client's problem, a
well-­trained clinical provider can find an approach to problem solving
by using skills from each skills module. Thus, when Distress Tolerance
is the current treatment module (or a distress tolerance skill is what
the therapist wishes the client to practice), problems may be viewed as
ones where distress tolerance is needed. If interpersonal effectiveness
is the focus, then the individual provider may ask how the problem (or
the solution) might be related to interpersonal actions. Generally,
problems become "problems" because the events are associated with
aversive emotional responses; one solution

36 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

may be for the client to work on changing emotional responses to a
situation. An effective response may also be cast in terms of radical
acceptance or core mindfulness skills.

DBT Case Managers If a client has no individual psychotherapist, a DBT
case manager is the primary provider and is responsible for all the
tasks outlined above for the individual therapist. In addition, although
both psychotherapists and case managers focus on clinical assessment,
planning, and problem solving, case managers are ordinarily more active
in facilitating care in the client's living environment. Thus the case
manager's role also includes identification of service resources, active
communication with service providers, care coordination, and advocacy
for options and services to meet an individual's and family's needs. In
this role, the case manager not only helps identify appropriate
providers and facilities throughout the continuum of services, but also
actively works with the client to ensure that available resources are
being used in a timely and cost-­effective manner. In sum, in contrast to
a DBT therapist, a case manager does much more environmental
intervention. As a DBT case manager, however, the task is to move more
to the center and increase use of "consultation-tothe-­patient"
strategies (see below). The idea here is to coach clients to actively
engage in the tasks that the case managers ordinarily do for the
clients---in other words, to teach the clients to fish rather than catch
the fish for them. This then involves coaching the clients in the
interpersonal, emotion regulation, distress tolerance, and mindfulness
skills necessary to be successful.3

DBT Nurses and Line Staff The primary role of DBT nurses and line staff
is to manage contingencies on inpatient and residential units, to coach
clients in the use of skills, and to use DBT skills to problem-solve
difficulties. Their role in skill strengthening and generalization is
often critical in milieu-based treatment programs. These providers often
make extensive use of the chain analysis skill (described in Chapter 6),
as assisting patients with understanding the factors that prompt and
drive their behaviors is typically accomplished with more accuracy in
the situation where the behaviors occur. From this analysis, a nurse or
line staff mem-

ber can more effectively provide suggestions for a more skillful
response or can more clearly intervene in the contingencies surrounding
the behavior.

DBT Pharmacotherapists The primary duties of a pharmacotherapist
(whether a psychiatrist or a nurse practitioner) are to provide
evidence-based medications matched to the needs of each client, and to
monitor compliance with the prescribed medication regimen as well as
outcomes and side effects. For a DBT pharmacotherapist, a further
essential task is to coach the client whenever possible in relevant DBT
skills. DBT skills aimed at treating physical illness,
insomnia/nightmares, poor nutrition, effects of drugs and alcohol, and
lack of exercise may seem to fit the role best, but it is equally
important to focus on the wide array of other DBT skills as well. Like
other providers, the pharmacotherapist (except in emergencies) also
turns crisis intervention over to the primary provider (therapist or
case manager), but until then often asks, "What skills can you use until
you get hold of him \[or her\]?" In some settings, when there is no
individual therapist or case manager, the DBT pharmacotherapist assumes
the role of primary provider responsible for the tasks outlined above.
In other settings, particularly when contact with the pharmacotherapist
is infrequent and clients are not known to have serious disorders, the
skills leader assumes the role of primary therapist. It is important
that these roles be discussed and clarified within the DBT team.

Skills Trainers' Responsibilities with Primary Care Providers The
ability to apply any one of the behavioral skills to any problematic
situation is at once important and very difficult. Individual providers
must themselves know the behavioral skills inside and out, and must be
able to think quickly in a session or a crisis. Given this role of the
individual therapist, it is the responsibility of the skills trainers to
be sure that the individual therapist has access to skills the client is
being taught. When an individual provider is not familiar with the
skills being taught, the solution is to do what is possible to inform
the therapist. Generally this information, along with attendance and any
other important clinical information, is provided to all DBT therapists
at the weekly DBT team meetings. Strategies for this are discussed
below.

2. Planning to Conduct DBT Skills Training • 37

Consultation between DBT Individual Providers and Skills Trainers
Communication between individual DBT providers and skills trainers is
exceptionally important. If the expectations of each group of providers
for the other are not spelled out and frequently reviewed, it is very
likely that the two treatments will not enhance each other. Among the
most important aspects of DBT are the DBT consultation team strategies
(described in Chapter 13 of the main DBT text). These strategies require
all DBT therapists to meet on a regular basis. The goals of these
meetings are to share information and to keep therapists within the
framework of DBT. In my clinic, a consultation meeting is held each week
for 1--1.5 hours. During the meeting, skills trainers review for the
team which skills are the current focus of group sessions. When
necessary, the skills trainers actually teach the other team members the
skills. In this context, it is helpful for clients if their primary
providers and skills trainers share a common language in discussing
application of behavioral skills. This also decreases the potential for
confusion. Although consistency and conformity between various treating
agents are not particularly valued in DBT, such consistency here can be
useful, since the number of new skills to be learned is quite large. The
weekly meetings increase this communality. In addition, any problems
individual clients may be having in applying skills and/or interacting
in skills training group meetings are mentioned. A client's primary
provider consults with the skills trainers and takes such information
into account in planning the individual treatment. My emphasis on the
importance of meetings between individual therapists and skills trainers
may seem to contradict "consultation-to-the-­ patient" strategies, which
are also integral to DBT. First, I must point out that these
consultation strategies do require DBT therapists to walk a very fine
line. The issues are somewhat complex. When the therapeutic unit is
defined as a group of people, such as a DBT team, a clinic, an inpatient
unit, or some such entity where multiple therapists interact with and
treat particular clients in a single coordinated treatment program, then
consultation between therapists is essential, provided that the clients
are informed of and consent to such collaboration. Applying the
consultation strategies in these cases simply requires that therapists
refrain from intervening with each other

on behalf of a client. Thus therapists must be careful not to fall into
the trap of serving as intermediaries for a client. (See Chapter 13 of
the main DBT text for a discussion of consultation-to-the-patient
strategies; they are also discussed briefly in Chapter 5 of this
manual.)

When the Primary Provider Is a Skills Trainer It is not uncommon that
skills trainers are also individual therapists or case managers for some
of the clients in a skills training group. Less often, a
pharmacotherapist may also be a skills trainer for his or her clients.
When either of these is the case, it is important to keep roles clear.
In other words, when one is teaching skills it is important to focus on
skills, and to wait until after the skills session ends to revert to
one's other role. This is not only because of time constraints in a
skills class, but also because as soon as skills trainers start managing
crises, individual clients (particularly those whose lives involve
constant crises) are likely to bring up more crises to discuss and
problem-solve. Focusing on learning new behaviors can take a lot more
effort than sitting back and discussing the crises of life.

DBT Skills Training outside Standard DBT Standard DBT combines skills
training with individual therapy or intensive case management, plus
phone coaching by the individual provider and weekly treatment team
meetings. When DBT skills training is offered without the individual
provider component, some modifications in the conduct of skills training
may be necessary. For example, without an individual therapist, skills
trainers may decide to provide phone, text, or e-mail coaching between
sessions. There may also be a greater emphasis on use of DBT smartphone
coaching apps and other DBT apps and websites. (To locate these, type
"DBT self-help" in your search engine.) At times, skills trainers may
offer individual consultation sessions to group members. This may be
particularly necessary in groups for friends and family members, at
times when group members are extremely distraught about a friend or
relative and want and need more coaching in use of skills than can occur
in a single group session.

38 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

Clarifying Individual Therapists' versus Skills Trainers' Roles in
Suicidal Crises Standard DBT---including individual therapy, skills
training, as-­needed phone coaching/crisis intervention, and the DBT
consultation team---was designed specifically for highly suicidal
individuals with high emotion dysregulation. Reduction of suicidal and
other maladaptive behaviors is not the immediate goal of DBT skills
training. Instead, skills training is focused on teaching general skills
that the clients can apply to current problems in living. Application of
these skills to current suicidal behavior, to behaviors interfering with
therapy progress (except on occasion behaviors interfering with skills
training), and to other severely dysfunctional behaviors is not
necessarily attempted by skills trainers. In fact, as I discuss later,
discussion of current self-­ injurious behavior, substance use, and other
contagious behaviors is actively discouraged in skills training. Reports
of suicidal ideation, prior self-­ injury, and other maladaptive
behaviors/behaviors interfering with therapy---­including extreme
problems with skills training---are ordinarily relegated to individual
therapists, primarily because of time constraints in conducting skills
training. Problems maintaining this skills training orientation arise
when an individual therapist sends his or her clients to DBT skills
training because of the strong data on DBT as an effective intervention
for highly suicidal individuals. Our non-DBT therapist colleagues know
that therapists trained in DBT are also trained in assessment and
management of suicidal behavior. Thus a non-DBT therapist may start
mistakenly relying on a DBT skills trainer to manage high-risk suicidal
behavior, at least when the skills trainer is present or available by
phone. Unfortunately, a skills training therapist in DBT is relying on
an individual therapist in a similar manner. In some cases a DBT skills
trainer, if not trained in DBT as a whole treatment, may not even be
trained in management of suicidal behaviors. And therein lies the
problem: Skills trainers teach skills.

Managing Working with Clients of Non-DBT Individual Therapists When a
DBT skills client is in therapy (or case management) with a non-DBT
therapist, it is particularly important for the skills trainer(s) to
have a very clear agreement with the individual therapist. In my clinic,
we only agree to accept a client with high sui-

cidality and/or severe disorders if the client's individual therapist
agrees to the following: 1. The provider or a designated backup
individual therapist must agree to resist the temptation to rely on the
skills trainer to conduct interventions aimed at reducing current
suicidal and other severely dysfunctional behaviors. This means that the
individual therapist must agree to be available for crisis calls from
the skills trainer and/or the client during and following skills
training sessions. This agreement is intended to ensure that the
individual therapist, rather than the skills trainer, makes treatment
decisions about the client when problems or crises arise. In essence, a
skills trainer calls the individual therapist if a crisis arises, and
then follows treatment directions. This policy is based on the
presumption that the individual therapist knows the client much better
than the skills trainer, and that this knowledge is essential in making
decisions about crisis management. The individual therapist must be made
aware of this policy, and must also be willing to be responsible for
treatment management and decision making about treatment. Although a
skills trainer may make sure that a client actually gets to the local
hospital emergency department, this is very different from deciding that
such a move should be made in the first place. An exception to this
policy is made when a client is highly suicidal, and the skills trainer
believes medical treatment or emergency evaluation for inpatient
treatment is needed, but the individual therapist either disagrees
without an adequate rationale or refuses to make the necessary treatment
management decision. Individual therapists should be advised also that
skills therapists are not available for crisis calls from their clients.
2. The individual therapist must agree to coach the client on use of DBT
skills in everyday life. We ordinarily give second copies of all the DBT
skills handouts and worksheets to our clients and ask them to give these
copies to their individual therapists. To be successful, an individual
psychotherapist needs to elicit from a client sufficient information
about the skills taught in skills training to be able to help the client
apply the skills in troublesome areas. The therapist also needs to know
(or learn) the skills and be able to apply the skills him- or herself;
this is not as simple as it might seem. It is important also to advise
therapists that skills trainers do not do telephone coaching on skills,
as that is viewed as the role for the individual therapist.

2. Planning to Conduct DBT Skills Training • 39

3.  Therapists must understand and agree that skills trainers will not
    give them reports about their client's behaviors in group sessions
    or reports on group attendance. If a therapist wants such reports
    and a client agrees, a skills trainer may agree to give periodic
    reports to the client, who can then give such reports to the
    therapist. The principle here is contained within the
    consultation-to-the-­patient strategy, which promotes the patient as
    a credible source of information who can intervene effectively on
    his or her own behalf within the health care network. (See Chapter
    13 of the main DBT text.) In our clinic, we use the agreement in
    Figure 2.1 and ask each non-DBT individual therapist to sign it. The
    experience in my clinic has been that most individual therapists in
    private practice will agree to these stipulations to get their
    clients into our skills groups. However, we have had some therapists
    who initially agreed to these points but, when serious crises arose,
    insisted that we make the clinical decisions about their clients. We
    have also had clients who were seeing therapists who refused to take
    after-hours calls themselves, and instead used our area crisis line
    as their "backup therapist." Unfortunately, many crisis clinics are
    staffed by volunteers with little or no formal clinical training,
    and so a skills trainer cannot usually turn client responsibility
    over to a crisis line volunteer. It is critical, therefore, that
    skills trainers who do not want to take responsibility for managing
    crises (particularly suicidal crises) discuss crisis management with
    clients' individual therapists before beginning skills training, and
    also

Client Name:                      Provider Name:                    

clarify who will be on call for the clients during and after skills
training sessions. Thus we also ask each client's primary therapist to
fill out a crisis plan. A form for obtaining a crisis plan and other
essential information from a primary therapist is shown in Figure 2.2.

When Individual Psychotherapists Do Not Incorporate Skills Coaching into
Psychotherapy Active intervention and skills coaching may not be
compatible with the individual psychotherapy a particular therapist is
willing to engage in. Some therapists, for example, view helping clients
learn new skillful behaviors as treating the "symptoms" instead of the
"illness." In one setting, individual psychotherapists (who were
physicians) told clients to get coaching from the nurses in how to
replace maladaptive behaviors with skills. This sent the message that
the new skills were not important, since the "real therapy" was taking
place with their individual therapists. Clients with such therapists
will need extra help in using the skills they are learning. Skills
trainers can make a number of optional modifications to address these
issues. They might set up an extra weekly skills training meeting where
clients can get help in figuring out how to use their skills in
troublesome life situations. But people often need help at the moment
they are in crisis. Skills training is like teaching basketball: Coaches
not only conduct practice sessions during the week, but also attend the
weekly game to help the players

Date (yyyy/mm/dd):           

I am the primary individual  psychotherapist  case manager 
pharmacotherapist for the client referred to above. I understand that my
client will not be eligible to participate in the DBT Skills Training
Program at                 unless he or she attends regular individual
treatment sessions on an ongoing basis. As the primary provider for this
client, I agree that I will: 1. Assume full clinical responsibility for
my client. 2. Handle or provide backup services to manage client
clinical emergencies. 3. Be available by phone or provide a backup
provider phone number to call during skills training sessions of my
client. 4. Provide and keep updated the Crisis Plan and Information from
Primary Therapist form \[Figure 2.2\] attached. 5. Help my client apply
DBT skills to his or her clinical problems. FIGURE 2.1. Primary
individual provider agreement for clients in DBT skills training.

This must be completed with your client's full awareness of all parties
with whom this information may be shared. Please fill this form out on
paper and have client return to the group leaders, or fill out digital
copy at:                  and e-mail to one of the group leaders at:
Group Leader's Name:                      E-mail: Date (yyyy/mm/dd):
           Client's Name:                  Clinical ID:        DOB
(yyyy/mm/dd): Your client's group meets on:                         at:
Primary Therapist: Name:               Phone (Office):        Phone
(Cell):        Fax: E-mail:                        Available Hours:
Address: If your client is at high suicide risk or in crisis requiring
immediate intervention and you are unavailable, who should be called?
Your Backup Therapist (when you are in town): Name:             Phone
(Day):        Phone (Eve):        Phone (Cell): Address: Your Backup
Therapist (when you are in town): Name:             Phone (Day):       
Phone (Eve):        Phone (Cell): Address: Pharmacotherapist/Primary
Care Physician/Nurse Practitioner (if applicable): Name:            
Phone (Day):        Phone (Eve):        Phone (Cell): Case Manager (if
applicable): Name:             Phone (Day):        Phone (Eve):       
Phone (Cell): Significant Others (to call in an emergency): Name:
                     Phone:           City: Name:                     
Phone:           City:

CRISIS PLAN How can you be reached during a crisis if disposition
planning is needed?

Who should be called for disposition planning if you are unavailable?

(cont.) FIGURE 2.2. Crisis plan and information from primary therapist
(confidential). 40

1. Brief history of client's suicidal behavior.

2.  Recent status of client's suicidal behavior (last 3 months). Please
    describe the most recent and most severe self-injury/suicide
    attempt. Describe the form, date, circumstances and what
    intervention resulted, if any (e.g., ER, medical ward, ICU).

3.  Crisis plan: Describe crisis plan you and client have agreed to for
    management of suicidal behavior. Describe the typical emotions,
    thoughts, and behaviors that may precede self-­injury/suicide
    attempts, and the strategies that a client has used successfully in
    the past. (EXAMPLE: My client states that if she gets angry or feels
    helpless, this causes emotion dysregulation. This then triggers the
    urge to hurt herself by burning herself. She states that if she has
    this urge, she has successfully coped with these by using these
    distraction strategies: calling her mother, playing with her dogs,
    going for a walk to the park, crocheting, having a bath, doing
    vigorous physical exercise, listening to loud music, or praying. As
    a last resort, she will call me or my backup therapist and discuss
    ways for her to get through the moment. When she calls, she says
    that she finds it really helpful when I help her to find a means of
    distraction, remind her that she has tolerated urges like this
    before, and help her try to solve the problem that may be leading to
    her feeling this way. This plan was developed with my client.)

4.  If your client is assessed as in imminent risk of suicidal behavior,
    self-­injury, or violence, and neither you nor your backup can be
    immediately contacted, how should the skills trainers or other
    professional staff manage your client?

5.  Describe any history of violence and use of weapons. Also
    specifically describe any occasions of violence and use of weapons
    in the last 3 months. Describe any current plans that you and the
    client have to deal with this behavior.

6.  Describe any history of substance use. Also specifically describe
    substance misuse history in the last 3 months. Describe any current
    plans that you and the client have to deal with this behavior.

7.  Client medications: Weight (lbs/kg)     Height (inches/cm)    
    Medications Dose For Medications                                   
                                      

Dose For                                

FIGURE 2.2 (cont.) 41

42 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

use what they were practicing all week. With outpatients, this is
usually best done via telephone calls. In standard DBT, where clients
have individual DBT psychotherapists, phone calls to skills training
therapists are severely limited; almost all calls for help are directed
to the clients' individual therapists. If an individual therapist does
not take calls or give coaching, however, a skills trainer may decide to
accept them, at least when the reason for calling is to get such
coaching. On an inpatient unit, milieu staff members should learn the
behavioral skills along with the clients. The staff members can then
serve as coaches for the clients. One inpatient unit offers weekly
skills consultation meetings. The meetings are run like academic office
hours; clients can come at any time during office hours for coaching.
Ideally, clients can also call on one another for help. In another
inpatient setting, one therapist teaches new skills; nursing staff
members conduct regular homework review groups, where clients meet
together to go over their attempts to practice new skills and get help
with areas of difficulty; and individual therapists reinforce the
clients' use of skills. In residential settings, it can be useful to
offer advanced skills groups where group members help each other apply
skills in daily situations. Skills generalization can also be greatly
enhanced if individuals in a client's environment---such as family
members---also learn the skills and then help with coaching the client
every day.4 A skills trainer or individual therapist can then assist a
family member in coaching the client. Adolescent skills training
ordinarily includes both an adolescent and at least one parent, so each
can coach the other. Parole officers can be taught the skills so they
can coach the parolees on their caseloads. Primary care providers can be
taught skills so they can coach their patients. A skills curriculum has
been developed for use in school settings, where teachers and school
counselors can coach students.4, 5

Integrating Skills Training into Non-DBT Individual Therapy Many non-DBT
psychotherapists, counselors, case managers, pharmacotherapists, other
mental health providers, nurses, doctors, and other professionals in
general medical practice will find it useful at times to integrate DBT
skills into their treatment of clients. Providers may want to use only
one skill or a variety of skills across different modules. Strategies
for incorporating skills into ongoing therapy are as

follows. First, carefully read the treatment notes for each of the
skills to be used. What is important here is that providers know the
skills and know what skills go with what problem or set of problems.
Second, decide whether to use a handout and/or worksheet in teaching the
skill, or to teach it orally without these materials. If you are
planning on occasionally using handouts and/or worksheets, copy them and
keep them handy in your office or nearby. When the occasion arises to
teach a particular skill, discuss the idea of learning a new skill with
the client. Use the orienting strategies discussed in Chapter 6 of this
manual, if necessary, to sell the skill you want to teach. Giving a copy
of the handout to the client and keeping one yourself, review the skill
using the skills training procedures described in Chapter 6. Practice
the skill with the client if possible, and give an assignment or
suggestion that the client practice the skill before the next visit. As
far as possible, be open to the client's calling you between sessions
for skills coaching. Be sure to ask about the client's practice in the
next visit. Periodically check in with the client to see whether he or
she is still using the skills you have taught. Encourage continued
skillful behavior. Although it may seem that the directive quality of
DBT skills training would be incompatible with psychoanalytic and
supportive treatments, the fact that so many nonbehavioral and analytic
therapists teach and/or integrate DBT skills into their therapies
suggests that this is not the case (enter "psychoanalytic DBT skills" in
your search engine for examples).

References 1. Neacsiu, A. D., & Linehan, M. M. (2014). Borderline
personality disorder. In D. Barlow (Ed.), Clinical handbook of
psychological disorders (5th ed., pp. 394--461). New York: Guilford
Press. 2. Sayrs, J. H. R., & Linehan, M. M. (in press). Developing
therapeutic treatment teams: The DBT model. New York: Guilford Press. 3.
Case Management Society of America. (n.d.). Retrieved from
www.cmsa.org/Home/CMSA/­ WhatisaCaseManager/tabid/224/Default.aspx 4.
Miller, A. L., Rathus, J. H., & Linehan, M. M. (2007). Dialectical
behavior therapy with suicidal adolescents. New York: Guilford Press. 5.
Mazza, J. J., Dexter-Mazza, E. T., Murphy, H. E., Miller, A. L., &
Rathus, J. H. (in press). Dialectical behavior therapy in schools. New
York: Guilford Press.

Chapter 3

Structuring Skills Training Sessions

In this chapter, I discuss how to structure various types of DBT skills
training sessions, including the pretreatment sessions that should be
accomplished before an individual starts skills training. These initial
sessions cover preliminary orientation and commitment to DBT training.
Once these sessions are completed, several specific types of skills
training sessions follow, including (1) sessions that build alliance and
orient new participants to skills training; (2) ongoing skills training
sessions; and (3) last sessions when one or more individuals are ending
their DBT skills training program.

Pretreatment Sessions: Tasks to Complete before Skills Training Begins
"Pretreatment" in DBT refers to all sessions and conversations occurring
between a client and a provider until both parties have agreed that DBT
is an appropriate intervention for the client's goals and wishes, and
both parties have agreed to work together. There are five pretreatment
tasks (outlined in Table 3.1): (1) conducting a pretreatment assessment
and deciding the appropriateness of skills training for the client; (2)
deciding on the intensity of treatment and type of skills training
needed for this particular client; (3) orienting the client to the
specifics of skills training; (4) developing a collaborative commitment
to do skills training together; and (5) beginning to develop an
alliance. Each of these steps should be gone through during the initial
individual interviews with each client before he or she is admitted to
skills training, and Steps 3--5 should be

repeated during skills orientation, which precedes each iteration of the
Mindfulness module.

Conducting a Pretreatment Assessment Evaluation for skills training
should begin with a clinical assessment, including assessment of
presenting problems and goals, past and present life-­ threatening
behaviors, diagnostic evaluation as needed, and evaluation of reading
and language deficits (if the client's skills in these areas seem
questionable). The assessor should also take a general history and ask
about history of previous DBT and DBT skills training. These assessments
can be done either informally, or formally with structured behavioral
assessments. Depending on your setting, it might be advisable to conduct
a phone screening interview before scheduling an in-­person interview. We
have found this particularly important for our friends-and-­ family
groups and for groups aimed at treating individuals with specific
problems (e.g., substance use disorders) or diagnoses. The assessor
should also decide whether skills training, either individually or in a
group, appears appropriate for this client.

TABLE 3.1. Pretreatment Tasks: Tasks to Complete

before Skills Training Begins

• Conduct pretreatment assessment. • Determine intensity and treatment
type needed. • Orient client to specifics of skills training. • Develop
collaborative commitment. • Begin developing alliance. 43

44 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

Determining the Intensity of Treatment and Type of Skills Training
Needed A major function of the assessment sequence described above is to
determine whether the individual client needs a more comprehensive
treatment than stand-alone DBT skills training. In other words, does the
person need something more than DBT skills? Many options and intensities
of care can be considered, such as standard outpatient DBT; DBT skills
training plus intensive case management; DBT skills integrated into
individual DBT; DBT added to non-DBT case management or psychotherapy;
and inpatient, residential, and day treatment DBT. (See Dimeff and
Koerner's book for descriptions of various models of DBT intervention.1)
The number and type of additional treatment components will depend for
the most part on the client's "level of disorder," which is defined by
the current presence of mental disorder and (if present) the severity,
pervasiveness, and complexity of the disorder, as well as the disability
and imminent threat to life it creates for the client. The level of
disorder is linked to one of four stages of treatment in DBT. Stages of
treatment are, in turn, linked to goals and specific targets of behavior
to increase and decrease. Table 3.2 is a guide to making this series of
decisions. Generally, the criteria for putting a client in Stage 1 are a
current severe mental disorder, behavioral dyscontrol, and/or imminent
threat to life. Any of these conditions will prohibit working on any
other goals before behavior and functioning come under better control.
As Mintz suggested in discussing treatment of the suicidal client, all
forms of psychotherapy are ineffective with a dead client. 2 In the
subsequent stages (2--4), the treatment goals are to replace "quiet
desperation" with nontraumatic emotional experiencing (Stage 2); to
achieve "ordinary" happiness and unhappiness, and to reduce ongoing
disorders and problems in living (Stage 3); and to resolve a sense of
incompleteness, and to achieve a sense of freedom and joy (Stage 4). Not
all clients enter therapy at the same stage of disorder; not all clients
go through all of the stages; and clients can vacillate between stages.
As noted in Chapter 1, DBT skills training is now being offered as a
stand-alone treatment for several mental disorders and for an array of
other specific problems; as a preventive intervention in school sys-

tems; and as a set of interpersonal, mindfulness, and resiliency skills
for the general public. Thus assessment is critical to selecting the
right kind of skills program for the client. At this writing, however,
there is very little research on how to match individuals seeking DBT to
level of care needed. Thus the recommendations in Table 3.2 are based on
my own clinical experience and that of others rather than on firm data.
Once the level of care is determined, the next thing that has to be
decided is what skills training curriculum best fits the client. As far
as possible, this decision should be based on the research that has been
conducted to date and the problems presented by the clients.
Unfortunately, many research reports do not list the specific skills
used. In our clinics we always teach the DBT core skills, and other
components, such as the addiction skills, are based on the specific
problems of the clients we are treating. I have tried to offer some
assistance with these choices in the Part I Appendices, following
Chapter 5. Finally, it is important to decide how you will evaluate
progress in treatment. Many people use the DBT diary card (see Chapter 4
of this manual) as a method of tracking increases and decreases in
problem behaviors, as well as changes in mood, self-­ efficacy, use of
skills, and the client's beliefs that skills are helping. However,
because the diary card was developed as a means for a client and
therapist to track behavior on a weekly basis to inform weekly therapy,
the diary is not set up in a way that is optimal for data analysis.
Using the diary card as a way to track progress over time ordinarily
means transferring the data to some sort of database or recording system
and then analyzing them for changes over time in each variable you are
interested in. This can be done by using statistics and/or by drawing
graphs that depict change over time. In our clinics, and in many clinics
providing behavioral interventions, we also use assessment measures that
are free or inexpensive and that have acceptable psychometric
properties. A list of the measures we use is provided in Table 3.3. If
you use assessments from this list, it will be important to select those
that will measure outcomes that are important to your client population.
In a 6-month treatment, it can be useful to give questionnaires at
pretreatment, at 3 months, and at 6 months. For a 1-year treatment, you
might want to give them at pretreatment and at 4, 8, and 12 months.

TABLE 3.2. Determining Treatment Intensity and Type of Treatment Needed

Client characteristics/treatment targets

Suggested interventionsa DBT Stage 1

1.  Life-­threatening behaviors---for example:

<!-- -->

a.  Suicide attempts
b.  Suicide crisis behaviors
c.  Deliberate self-harm
d.  Other imminent life-­threatening behavior

<!-- -->

2.  Serious therapy-­interfering behaviors---for example:

<!-- -->

e.  Noncollaborative behaviors
f.  Noncompliance
g.  Nonattending behaviors
h.  Behaviors that interfere with other patients
i.  Behaviors that interfere with therapists' ability to treat

<!-- -->

3.  Severe quality-of-life-­interfering behaviors---for example:

<!-- -->

j.  Incapacitating and/or severe mental disorder
k.  Extreme poverty/deprivation/homelessness
l.  Criminal behaviors with high imminent risk of jail
m.  Domestic violence
n.  Behavior dyscontrol with serious consequences

<!-- -->

4.  Severe Skills Deficits

Standard DBT: Outpatient DBT skills training + Skills coaching between
sessions + DBT consultation team + DBT individual therapy . . . or
Intensive case management + DBT suicide protocol + Crisis plan with area
crisis line . . . or Standard DBT: Inpatient, residential, day treatment
programs DBT skills training + Skills coaching between sessions + DBT
individual therapy + DBT team . . . or DBT skills training while on
waiting list + DBT consultation team

DBT Stage 2 1. PTSD 2. Residual mental disorders with moderate severity
not treated in Stage 1---for example: a. Anxiety disorders b. Eating
disorders c. Mood disorders 3. Emotion dysregulation/dysfunctional
intensity or duration of emotions---for example: d. Shame, guilt,
sensitivity to criticism e. Anger, disgust, envy, jealousy
f. Loneliness, inhibited grieving g. Emptiness, excessive sadness h.
Fear

Standard DBT: Outpatient (see above) + DBT PTSD protocol + prolonged
exposure or other evidence-based PTSD treatment DBT skills training
curriculum for: Eating disorders Emotion dysregulation
Treatment-­resistant depression

DBT Stage 3 1. Problems in living---such as: a. Mild-­severity disorders
b. Difficulties in setting and/or achieving life goals c. Difficulties
with problem solving d. Low self- ­efficacy/self- ­esteem e. Inadequate
quality of life f. Relationship/marital distress g. Employment
difficulties/distress h. Mild emotion dysregulation i. Indecision/desire
for consultation j. Need for check-ins, checkups, tuneups

DBT skills training + DBT team + as-­needed individual treatment (DBT or
non-DBT) and/or as-­ needed skills coaching

DBT Stage 4 1. Incompleteness---for example: a. Desire for spiritual
fulfillment/spiritual direction b. Desire for peak
experiences/experience of reality as it is c. Boredom d. End of life
issues

DBT reality acceptance and mindfulness skills training + DBT team and/or
mindfulness retreats with participants (under development)

a It is important to recognize that the suggestions I give here are
based both on my experience and on research to date. Research on DBT,
however, is expanding at a rapid rate, and it is important for the
reader to keep up with research as it is reported. These recommendations
are likely to change over time and as new research findings are
obtained.

45

46 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING TABLE 3.3. Assessment
Instruments Used with Potential DBT Participants at the Behavioral
Research and Therapy Clinics, University of Washington

Measures for adults Borderline Symptom Checklist--23 (BSL-23) Bohus, M.,
Kleindienst, N., Limberger, M. F., Stieglitz, R., Domsalla, M., Chapman,
A. L., et al. (2009). The short version of the Borderline Symptom List
(BSL-23): Development and initial data on psychometric properties.
Psychopathology, 42(1), 32--39. http://blogs.uw.edu/brtc/publications-­a
ssessment-­ instruments DBT Diary Card a (See Chapter 4)
http://blogs.uw.edu/brtc/ publications-­a ssessment-­instruments/
Demographic Data Scale (DDS)a Linehan, M. M. (1994). Unpublished
measure, University of Washington.
http://blogs.uw.edu/brtc/publications-­a ssessment-­ instruments/
Dialectical Behavior Therapy Ways of Coping Checklist a Neacsiu, A. D.,
Rizvi, S. L., Vitaliano, P. P., Lynch, T. R., & Linehan, M. M. (2010).
The Dialectical Behavior Therapy Ways of Coping Checklist (DBTWCCL):
Development and psychometric properties. Journal of Clinical Psychology,
66(1), 1--20. http://blogs.uw.edu/brtc/publications-­a ssessment-­
instruments/ Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale (DERS) Gratz, K.
L., & Roemer, L. (2004). Multidimensional assessment of emotion
regulation and dysregulation: Development, factor structure, and initial
validation of the Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale. Journal of
Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 26, 41--54.
chipts.ucla.edu/downloads/299 Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES)
Bernstein, E. M., & Putnam, F. W. (1986). Development, reliability, and
validity of a dissociative scale. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
174, 727--735. serene.me.uk/tests/des.pdf Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAM-A)
Hamilton, M. (1959). The assessment of anxiety states by rating. British
Journal of Medical Psychology, 32, 50--55.
www.psychiatrictimes.com/clinical-­scales-anxiety/
clinical-­scales-anxiety/ham-­hamilton-­anxiety-scale Hamilton Depression
Scale (HAM-D) Hamilton, M. (1960). A rating scale for depression.
Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 23, 56--62.
healthnet.umassmed.edu/mhealth/HAMD.pdf

Lifetime Suicide Attempt Self-­I njury Count (S-SASI)a Linehan, M. M., &
Comtois, K. A. (1996). Unpublished manuscript, University of Washington.
http://blogs.uw.edu/brtc/publications-­assessment-­ instruments Patient
Health Questionnaire--9 (PHQ-9) Kroenke, K., & Spitzer, R. L. (2002).
The PHQ-9: A new depression and diagnostic severity measure. Psychiatric
Annals, 32, 509--521. www.integration.samhsa.gov/images/res/PHQ%20
-%20Questions.pdf Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Checklist Weathers, F.
W., Litz, B. T., Herman, D. S., Huska, J. A., & Keane, T. M. (1993). The
PTSD Checklist (PCL): Reliability, validity, and diagnostic utility.
Paper presented at the 9th annual conference of the International
Society for Traumatic Stress Studies, San Antonio, TX.
www.bhevolution.org/public/document/pcl.pdf Reasons for Living Inventory
(RFL) Linehan, M. M., Goodstein, J. L., Nielsen, S. L., & Chiles, J. A.
(1983). When you are thinking of killing yourself: The Reasons for
Living Inventory. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 51(2),
276--286. http://blogs.uw.edu/brtc/publications-­assessment-­ instruments
Suicidal Behaviors Questionnaire (SBQ)a Linehan, M. M. (1981).
Unpublished manuscript, University of Washington.
http://blogs.uw.edu/bttc/publications-­assessment-­ instruments Suicide
Attempt Self-­I njury Interview (SASII)a Linehan, M. M., Comtois, K. A.,
Brown, M. Z., Heard, H. L., & Wagner, A. (2006). Suicide Attempt Self-­I
njury Interview (SASII): Development, reliability, and validity of a
scale to assess suicide attempts and intentional self-­injury.
Psychological Assessment, 18(3), 303--312.
http://blogs.uw.edu/brtc/publications-­assessment-­ instruments
State--Trait Anger Expression Inventory (STAXI) Spielberger, C. D.,
Jacobs, G. A., Russell, S., & Crane, R. S. (1983). Assessment of anger:
The State--Trait Anger Scale. Advances in Personality Assessment, 2(2),
1--47. Contact Psychological Assessment Resources, 800331-8378,
www4.parinc.com

a Developed at the University of Washington; copying and distribution to
clients allowed.

(cont.)

3. Structuring Skills Training Sessions • 47 TABLE 3.3 (cont.)

Measures for adults (cont.) Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV,
Axis I (SCID) First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J.
B. W. (1995). Structured Clinical Interview for Axis I DSM-IV
Disorders---­Patient Edition (SCID-I/P). New York: Biometrics Research
Department, New York State Psychiatric Institute. Contact Biometrics
Research for a research version of the SCID, 212-960-5524 Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-IV, Axis II Personality Disorders (SCID-II)
First, M. B., Gibbon, M., Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B. W., &
Benjamin, L. (1996). User's guide for the Structured Clinical Interview
for DSM-IV Axis II Personality Disorders (SCID-II). New York: Biometrics
Research Department, New York State Psychiatric Institute. Contact
American Psychiatric Press, Inc., 800-3685777, www.appi.org/index.html
UCLA Loneliness Scale Russell, D., Peplau, L. A.. & Ferguson, M. L.
(1978). Developing a measure of loneliness. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 42, 290--294.

www.fetzer.org/sites/default/files/images/stories/
pdf/selfmeasures/Self_Measures_for_Loneliness_and\_
Interpersonal_Problems_UCLA_LONELINESS.pdf University of Washington Risk
Assessment Protocol (UWRAP)a Reynolds, S. K., Lindenboim, N., Comtois,
K. A., Murray, A., & Linehan, M. M. (2006). Risky assessments:
Participant suicidality and distress associated with research
assessments in a treatment study of suicidal behavior. Suicide and Life-­
Threatening Behavior, 36(1), 19--33.
http://blogs.uw.edu/brtc/publications-­assessment-­ instruments University
of Washington Risk Assessment & Management Protocol (UWRAMP)a Linehan,
M. M., Comtois, K. A., & Ward-­ Ciesielski, E. F. (2012). Assessing and
managing risk with suicidal individuals. Cognitive and Behavioral
Practice, 19(2), 218--232.
http://blogs.uw.edu/brtc/publications-­assessment-­ instruments

Measures for adolescents Brief Reasons for Living Inventory for
Adolescents (BRFL-A) Osman, A., Kopper, B. A., Barrios, F. X., Osman, J.
R., Besett, T., & Linehan, M. M. (1996). The Brief Reasons for Living
Inventory for Adolescents (BRFL-A). Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 24(4), 433--443.
https://depts.washington.edu/brtc/files/Osman,%20
A.%20(1996)%20The%20Brief%20RFL%20for%20 Adolescents%20(BRFL-A).pdf
Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age
Children (Kiddie-SADS) Endicott, J., & Spitzer, R. L. (1978). A
diagnostic interview: The Schedule for Affective Disorders and
Schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 35(7), 873--844.
www.wpic.pitt.edu/ksads

Suicidal Behaviors Interview (SBI) Reynolds, W. M. (1990). Development
of a semi-­ structured clinical interview for suicidal behaviors in
adolescents. Psychological Assessment, 2(4), 382--390. Contact:
william.reynolds@ubc.ca Suicide Ideation Questionnaire---­Junior Siemen,
J. R., Warrington, C. A., & Mangano, E. L. (1994). Comparison of the
Millon Adolescent Personality Inventory and the Suicide Ideation
Questionnaire---­Junior with an adolescent inpatient sample.
Psychological Reports, 75(2), 947--950. Contact Psychological Assessment
Resources, 800331-8378, www4.parinc.com

Note. I use the DSM-IV to assess for borderline personality disorder but
am moving to DSM-V to measure other disorders.

Orienting the Client to the Specifics of Skills Training Following
assessment, the therapist should briefly present the skills deficit
model of emotional and behavioral dysregulation, which is discussed
briefly in Chapter 1 of this manual and in detail in Chapter 2 of the
main DBT text. If diagnostic interviewing and commitment to skills
training have been

thoroughly covered at intake or by the individual therapist in standard
DBT, the pretreatment meeting with the skills leader or co-­leader can be
much briefer. In my clinic, each individual in our standard DBT program
first has a thorough intake (including diagnostic interviews), and then
meets with the individual DBT therapist for a thorough discussion of DBT
skills training. Clients then meet with the skills leader or co-­leader
for 15 or so minutes before their

48 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

first skills session. Individuals in our skills training groups (with no
individual therapy) have an intake session first and then meet with the
skills leader or co-­leader to evaluate whether skills training is
appropriate for each client's goals. Initial commitment for skills
training is obtained at this meeting. The individual pretreatment
interview with the skills trainer should orient the client to the
specifics of skills training. This includes how the group (if there is a
group) will function, what the client's and the trainer's roles in
skills training are, and how skills training is different from other
types of therapy In standard DBT (which includes an individual
provider), these discussions ordinarily take place between a client and
an intake coordinator (if there is one), and then between the client and
the individual provider. In standard DBT, the skills trainer usually
calls and then meets new clients for 5--15 minutes before their first
skills training session. If skills training is a stand-alone
intervention or if skills are being integrated into ongoing individual
therapy, then the skills trainer performs all the tasks that an
individual provider would normally provide.

Orienting Clients to Skills Training versus Other Types of Therapy It is
essential that the leaders discuss the difference between a skills
training group and other group or individual psychotherapies. Many
individuals look forward to a group where they can share with
individuals like themselves. Although there is much sharing in the
group, it is not unlimited---and it is focused on practicing skills, not
on whatever crises may have occurred during the week. Many participants
have never been in any kind of behavior therapy, much less a
skills-­oriented group. My experience is that the difference cannot be
stressed too much. Often clients have had an enormous amount of
nonbehavioral therapy in which they have been taught various "necessary
ingredients" for therapeutic change---­ ingredients that skills training
often does not address extensively. In every group we have conducted so
far, one or more clients have gotten angry about their inability to talk
about "what is really important" in the group. For one client, talking
about whatever comes to mind was so firmly associated with the process
of therapy that she refused to acknowledge that skills training could be
a form of therapy. Needless to say, there was much friction with her in
the group. I discuss orienting to skills training in more detail in this
manual's Chapters 4 and 6.

Developing a Collaborative Commitment to Do Skills Training Once you
have decided to accept a person into skills training, it is important
that you yourself make a commitment to treating the individual. Entering
a treatment with reluctance, reserve, or antagonism, or on unwanted
commands from others, can markedly impair your chances of developing a
strong and collaborative relationship with your skills training
participants. It is also important to talk with potential clients about
any pressures from family members that may be the main impetus for their
coming to DBT or to skills training specifically---­ particularly with
adolescents coming to treatment with their parents. Because standard DBT
requires both individual therapy and skills training, it is altogether
possible that an individual therapist is also pressuring a client to
attend skills training. For DBT to be effective, individuals must
participate voluntarily; thus, you may need to work with the potential
clients to see the pros and not just the cons of coming to skills
training and learning the DBT skills offered. Remember, participation
can be pressured and voluntary at the same time. At this point, if you
accept a reluctant but mostly willing client for treatment, the practice
of radical acceptance and opposite action will be particularly
important. Working with your DBT team will also be important for
strengthening your personal commitment to the task. Follow all of the
DBT guidelines on obtaining an initial therapy commitment from skills
training participants. These are outlined and discussed in Chapters 9
and 14 of the main DBT text. It is impossible to get too much
commitment! A skills trainer should not assume that other therapists
(e.g., the individual psychotherapist or the intake interviewer in a
clinic setting) have gotten the commitment needed. This is a mistake my
colleagues and I made early in our program, and we paid a dear price for
it. The pretreatment session is also a good opportunity to begin
developing a personal therapeutic alliance with the client (the fifth
pretreatment task; see Chapters 14 and 15 of the main DBT text for more
on this topic).

Beginning to Develop the Alliance Use of standard DBT therapeutic
relationship strategies, such as relationship acceptance and
relationship enhancement, is particularly important at the start of
skills training (see below). In a group con-

3. Structuring Skills Training Sessions • 49

text, one of the first tasks of the group leaders is to enhance the
bonding between group clients and the leaders, and to begin the process
of building group cohesion. We have found it useful to have the leaders
call each new group member a few days before the first skills training
meeting to remind him or her of the session, clarify directions, and
communicate looking forward to meeting him or her. It is also a good
time for the leaders to address last-­minute fears and plans to drop out
before even starting. Individuals joining an ongoing group are also
invited to come early to their first session for a brief orientation to
the basics of DBT skills training. At the session before new members
join, we usually discuss the importance of encouraging and welcoming new
members. Clients starting a module late are, in addition, given a brief
review of skills already taught. The leaders should arrive a few minutes
early before each group meeting, especially the first meeting of a new
group, to greet clients and interact briefly with group members. For
reluctant and/or fearful clients, this can be a soothing experience. It
also offers an opportunity for leaders to hear concerns and refute plans
to leave early. We try to confine individual interactions to the context
of group mingling, in order to keep the essential identity of group
rather than individual therapy. This issue is discussed further below.
As might be expected, group members are very timid and fearful during
the first meeting. Appropriate behavior is not clear, and the
trustworthiness of group clients is doubtful. We generally begin by
going around the group and asking each person to give his or her name,
to say how he or she heard about the group, and to give any information
about him- or herself the person cares to share. The group leaders also
give information about themselves and how they came to be leading the
group. The next task of skills trainers is to help clients see the
relevance of a skills training model to their own lives. An overview of
the skills training treatment year is given (see Table 2.2 in Chapter
2); a theory of disordered emotion regulation that stresses the role of
inadequate skills is presented; and the format for the upcoming sessions
is described. If the group is homogeneous with regard to disorder or
problem type (e.g., substance use disorders, suicidal behavior, eating
disorders), then a similar skills deficit model of the specific problem
behavior is also provided. Discussion is elicited at each point about
the relevance of the material to the client's own experiences. A handout
(General Handout 1) illustrat-

ing the relationship between the characteristics of disordered emotion
regulation and the goals of skills training is distributed and discussed
(see Chapter 6 of this manual for details); usually I also write this on
the whiteboard in the therapy room. It is essential here for the skills
trainer to communicate an expectancy that the treatment will be
effective at helping the clients improve the quality of their own lives.
The treatment must be "marketed" to clients. (See Chapters 9 and 14 of
the main DBT text for further discussion of marketing therapy to clients
and eliciting commitments.) At this time I usually make the point that
DBT is not a suicide prevention program (or substance abstinence or
symptom improvement program), but a life enhancement program. It is not
our idea to get people to live lives not worth living, but rather to
help them build lives they actually want to live. Dialectical and
validation strategies (see Chapters 8 and 9 of the main DBT text, and
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handouts 15--19a) are the primary treatment
vehicles here.

Relationship Acceptance Relationship acceptance strategies in group
skills training require that leaders experience and communicate
acceptance of group members in several different spheres. First, the
clinical progress of each client must be accepted as it is.
Relationships between leaders and group members, between members and
other therapists, between and among individual members, between the
group leaders themselves, and between the group as a whole and the group
leaders must also be accepted. The sheer complexity of the situation can
make acceptance difficult, because it is easy to get overwhelmed;
rigidity and nonacceptance usually follow. It is essential to try not to
pave over or quickly truncate conflict and difficult emotions in the
group. Many clients who have trouble regulating their emotions also have
great difficulty with group skills training. Some are in it only because
it is required, and they feel uncomfortable and are unable to interact
effectively in this atmosphere. For others, skills seem unimportant,
juvenile, or silly. Still others quickly become demoralized by
unsuccessful attempts to master the skills. Group skills training with
clients who have difficulties regulating their emotions does not have
the naturally occurring reinforcement for leaders that most groups have.
Skills training leaders are faced with dead silences; noncompliance;
inappropriate

50 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

and sometimes extreme responses to the slightest deviation from perfect
sensitivity; and a group atmosphere that at times can be
uncommunicative, hostile, unsupportive, and unappreciative. The
potential for mistakes in leading such a group is vast. A leader can
expect not only to make many mistakes, but also to be acutely aware of
the many mistakes the other group leader makes. Reality acceptance
skills are crucial if mistakes are to be responded to in a
nondestructive manner. Leaders' attacking group members or threatening
them is almost always a result of a failure in relationship acceptance.
Acceptance requires a nonjudgmental attitude that sees all problems as
part of the therapeutic process---"grist for the mill," so to speak.
Leaders simply have to see that most problematic responses on the part
of the group derive from emotionally dysregulated response patterns. In
other words, if clients didn't present with the problems that drive
leaders crazy, they wouldn't need a skills training group. To the extent
that leaders fail to recognize this fact, they are likely to engage in
rejecting, victim-­bashing behaviors that may be too subtle to be seen
for what they are, but nonetheless have an iatrogenic effect. In other
words, an "easy" leader disposition has to be either innate or
cultivated.

Relationship Enhancement Relationship enhancement strategies involve
behaviors by skills trainers that increase the therapeutic values of the
relationship. In other words, they are behaviors that make the
relationship more than simply a helpful friendship. A positive,
collaborative interpersonal relationship is no less important in skills
training than it is in any other type of therapy. However, the
development of such a relationship is considerably more complex in group
skills training, because of the increased number of individuals involved
in the relationship. The question for the group leaders is how to
establish such a relationship between group members and leaders, as well
as among the members themselves. All of the DBT strategies are designed
in one way or another to enhance the collaborative working relationship.
The strategies discussed here are those intended primarily to establish
the group leaders as experts, as creditable, and as efficacious. Thus
the goal of these strategies is to communicate to the group members that
the leaders indeed know what they are doing and have something to offer
that will

probably be helpful to the group members. This is no easy task. The task
is made even more difficult by the fact that group members often share
with one another their previous failures in individual and other group
therapies, and comment about the hopelessness of their situations and
the meagerness of any help that can be offered. Group members often
portray their problems as Goliath and the treatment as David, but
without David's Old Testament success. The task of the leaders is to
convey the story as it indeed occurred. Expertise, credibility, and
efficacy can be conveyed in a variety of ways. Skills trainers'
neatness, professionalism, interest, comfort, self-­confidence, speech
style, and preparation for therapy sessions are no less useful in skills
training than in individual psychotherapy. It is especially important in
conducting groups to have the group room prepared before the group
members arrive: Handouts and worksheets should be distributed; chairs
should be in place; and the refreshments should be made and available
(if refreshments are provided). The key to the credibility problem, in
my experience, is that many clients---­ particularly those with severe
and chronic disorders---simply do not believe that learning the skills
presented will in fact be helpful. This disbelief detracts from any
positive motivation to learn the skills, and unless clients learn the
skills and obtain positive rewards, it is difficult to change this
attitude. Indeed, this dynamic can become a vicious circle. Leaders must
come up with a way to break this vicious circle if the clients are to
move forward. The most helpful approach is for the leaders to tell group
members that in their experience, these skills have been helpful to some
people some of the time. This, of course, can only be said if it is
indeed the leaders' experience; leaders who have never taught these
skills must rely on others' experience. (Our outcome data can form a
database for inexperienced skills trainers.) In addition, leaders can
share their own experience with skills. For some clients, the most
powerful inducement to learn the skills is the knowledge that the
leaders have found the skills helpful for themselves. Credibility is
damaged when leaders promise that a particular skill will solve a
particular problem. In fact, DBT is something of a shotgun approach:
Some of the skills work some of the time for some of the people. I have
not had any clients to date who could not benefit from something, but no
one benefits from everything. It is crucial to present this in-

3. Structuring Skills Training Sessions • 51

formation; otherwise, the leaders' credibility is on the line
immediately. Another key issue to address is that of trust and
confidentiality. Opportunities to display trustworthiness occur when one
member is absent from a group session. At all times, confidences must be
kept, and unnecessary information about a group member should not be
conveyed when that group member is absent. The absence of a group
member, however, can serve as a powerful opportunity for enhancing other
group members' trust in the leaders. The manner in which the absent
member is discussed conveys information to all other members about how
they will be treated when they are absent. Generally, the policy should
be to protect group members from negative judgments. For example, if a
group member blows up, walks out of a session, and slams the door, the
leaders can respond to the event with sympathetic explanations rather
than with critical judgments. This same strategy, of course, can be used
when all group members are present. It is not unusual for one group
member to behave in a fashion that the leaders know will result in
negative judgments by other group members. Or other group members may be
quite critical of one another. The leaders' role here is that of
protectors of the accused and the judged. This leadership task cannot be
overemphasized, especially during the clients' first modules in skills
training. Not only does this approach serve to model nonjudgmental
observation and description of problematic behavior for group members;
but it also conveys to all of the members that when they are attacked,
they too will be protected. The most useful way to convey expertness and
credibility is, of course, to be helpful. Thus the leaders need to think
through skills that have a high likelihood of working with a particular
group member. A skill that is working should be highlighted so that the
member will also see the benefits. Skills trainer credibility in
standard DBT group skills training is further complicated by the fact
that there are two group leaders. In my clinic, the co-­leader is usually
a trainee who, in fact, does not have the expertise of the primary
leader. It is essential that the primary leader not undermine the
credibility and expertness of the co-­leader. It is important for the
inexperienced co-­leader to find his or her emotional center and act from
there. It is this inner-­centeredness, rather than any particular set of
therapeutic skills, that is most important. The primary leader and
co-­leader do not need to have the

same set of skills or to convey expertise in the same areas. The
dialectical perspective as a whole is what counts.

Presenting Skills Training Guidelines Make the rules of skills training
explicit at the very beginning. Their presentation is an important part
of the treatment process, not a precursor to the process and it offers
an opportunity for the skills trainers to specify and obtain agreement
to the treatment contract from each client. My experience is that the
presentation and discussion of rules can usually be accomplished at the
beginning of each iteration of the mindfulness module. In an open group,
the guidelines should be discussed each time a new member enters the
group. Guidelines I have found useful are outlined in General Handout 3
and described below. 1. Participants who drop out of skills training are
NOT out of skills training. Only clients who miss 4 weeks of scheduled
skills training sessions in a row have dropped out of therapy and cannot
reenter for the duration of the time in their treatment contract. For
example, if a client has contracted for 1 year, but misses 4 weeks in a
row during the sixth month, then he or she is out for the next 6 months
or so. At the end of the contracted time, he or she can negotiate with
the skills trainer(s) (and the group, if he or she was in one and it is
continuing) about readmission. There are no exceptions to this rule. The
rule for skills training is thus the same as the rule for individual DBT
psychotherapy. Across multiple studies using this rule, our dropout
rates in 1-year DBT programs have been reasonably low. I suspect that
our emphasis on a time-­ limited commitment and the clarity of the rules
about how to drop out are crucial to our low dropout rate. 2.
Participants who join the skills training group support each other.
There are many ways to be a supportive person in skills training
sessions. It is important that skills leaders review what is needed to
be supportive. This includes preserving confidentiality, attending
regularly, practicing skills between sessions, validating others, giving
noncritical feedback, and being willing to accept help from a person (a
leader or a fellow client) from whom help is requested. A good group
norm of coming on time and practicing skills between sessions is
essential---but ad-

52 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

mittedly hard at times to develop. Discussing the importance of building
norms at the start of each new module can be very helpful. My experience
is that most skills training members want such norms to develop. (We
have found it very effective to give out stickers to each person who
comes to skills training on time that week.) 3. Participants who are
going to be late or miss a session call ahead of time. This rule serves
several purposes. First, it is a courtesy to let skills trainers know
not to wait for latecomers before starting. Second, it introduces an
added response cost for being late and communicates to clients that
promptness is desirable. Finally, it gives information as to why a
client is not present. 4. Participants do not tempt others to engage in
problem behaviors. This rule asks clients not to come to skills sessions
under the influence of drugs or alcohol. However, if drugs or alcohol
have already been used, clients are to come to the sessions acting clean
and sober. Particularly for those with substance use disorders, a rule
saying not to come to skills sessions when using substances just gives
individuals with poor self-­regulation a good excuse for not coming.
Instead, my position is that skills learning is context-­dependent, and
thus for persons with substance use disorders, learning and practicing
skills while under the influence of drugs or alcohol are particularly
important. This is definitely the time when skills are needed. This rule
also outlaws descriptions of dysfunctional behaviors, which can be
contagious. In my experience, communications about self-­injury,
substance use, bingeing or purging, and similar behaviors elicit strong
imitation effects among individuals with disordered emotion regulation.
These urges to imitate can be very difficult to resist. Therefore, just
as in individual DBT, clients in skills training must agree not to call
or communicate with one another after a self-­injurious act. At every
point in DBT, a major objective is to diminish the opportunity for
reinforcement of dysfunctional behaviors. This is particularly true for
discussions of suicidal behaviors. 5. Participants do not form
confidential relationships outside of skills training sessions. The key
word in the fifth rule is "confidential." Clients may not form
relationships outside the sessions that they cannot discuss in the
sessions. DBT encourages outside-of-­session relationships among group
clients. In fact, the support that members can give one another with
daily problems in living is one

of the strengths of group DBT. The model here is similar to that of
Alcoholics Anonymous and other self-help groups, where calling one
another between meetings, socializing, and offering mutual support are
viewed as therapeutic. Encouragement of such relationships, however,
provides the possibility for interpersonal conflict that is inherent in
any relationship. The key is whether interpersonal problems that arise
outside the sessions can be discussed in the sessions (or, if that is
too difficult or threatens to get out of hand, with the leaders). To the
extent that such issues can be discussed and appropriate skills can be
applied, a relationship can be advantageous. Troubles arise when a
relationship cannot be discussed and problems increase to such an extent
that one member finds it difficult or impossible to attend meetings,
either physically or emotionally. Group leaders should assign current
sexual partners to different groups at the onset. This rule also
functions to alert group members that if they enter into a sexual
relationship, one member of the pair will have to drop out. To date we
have had several sexual relationships begin among group members; each
created enormous difficulties for the partners involved. In one case,
the initiating partner broke off the relationship against the wishes of
the other, making it very hard for the rejected partner to come to group
sessions. Generally, this rule is clear to everyone involved. Without
the rule, however, dealing with an emerging sexual relationship between
clients is very tricky, since post hoc application of rules is
unworkable with individuals who have dysregulated emotions. There are
two exceptions to the rule. In skills training groups for friends and
families, where couples, partners, and multiple family members often
join the group, it is not reasonable or feasible to outlaw private
relationships. A similar situation arises in the multifamily skills
groups commonly held with adolescents. In these situations, however, it
is important to note that when relationship conflicts threaten the
group, the leaders will approach it in a manner similar to that
described above. 6. Participants who are suicidal and/or have severe
disorders must be in ongoing individual treatment. This rule is
ordinarily discussed with clients during pretreatment (rather than
during a group session), and the requirement to be in individual
treatment is laid out at that time. Of note here is that these clients
must actually meet with their individual therapists on a regular basis
to stay in skills training. If the clients are in individual DBT
treatment,

3. Structuring Skills Training Sessions • 53

then they cannot miss four scheduled individual sessions in a row. If
they are in another form of individual therapy, then the attendance
guidelines of that treatment must be followed. The exception to this
rule is when clients are on a waiting list for therapy. Data collected
by a Canadian research team found that skills training alone was
effective in reducing suicide attempts in suicidal individuals on a
treatment waiting list.3 This early emphasis on the likely need of
highly dysregulated and/or suicidal participants for extra help in
mastering the skills is very important later when the clients run into
difficulty. It is all too easy for the skills trainers to overestimate
the ease of learning skills; such overestimation sets the clients up for
later disillusionment and hopelessness. DBT skills training does not
require that the individual therapist be a DBT therapist. Nonetheless,
the requirement for individual therapy can still be quite formidable at
times. In our experience, it is not uncommon for individual therapists
in the community to get pushed past their limits by clients with
dysregulated emotions, and then to terminate therapy precipitously with
these clients. When this happens, it can be extraordinarily difficult to
find an individual therapist willing to work with such clients,
especially with those who are mourning the loss of previous therapists.
This is especially problematic when the clients cannot afford to pay the
high fees often charged by professionals who are experienced enough to
be helpful. Unfortunately, many public health clinics are so
understaffed that they cannot provide individual psychotherapy, or
clients may have already burned out their local clinics. In these cases,
the skills training leaders often must function as short-term backup
crisis therapists and assist the clients in finding appropriate
individual therapists.

Presenting DBT Assumptions The assumptions underlying treatment are
outlined in General Handout 4 and described below. Along with the skills
training guidelines, they are presented and discussed with skills
participants during orientation (which is repeated before the start of
each Mindfulness skills module) and in person with clients who join a
skills group after the first session of a module. An "assumption" is a
belief that cannot be proved, but group members agree to abide by it
anyway. DBT across the board is based on the following assumptions.

1.  People are doing the best they can. The idea here is that all people
    at any given point in time are doing the best they can, given the
    causes of behavior that have occurred up to this moment.
2.  People want to improve. The common characteristic of all people is
    that they want to improve their lives. As noted by the Dalai Lama at
    a meeting I was part of, a common characteristic of all people is
    that they want to be happy.
3.  \*People need to do better, try harder, and be more motivated to
    change. The fact that someone is doing the best he or she can and
    wants to do even better does not mean that this is enough to solve
    the problem. (The asterisk here means that this is not always true.
    In particular, when progress is steady and is occurring at a
    realistic rate, with no let-up or episodic drop in effort, doing
    better, trying harder, and being more motivated are not needed.)
4.  \*People may not have caused all of their own problems, but they
    have to solve them anyway. People have to change their own
    behavioral responses and alter their environment for their lives to
    change. (The asterisk here indicates that with children or disabled
    persons, others might be needed to solve some problems. For example,
    young children cannot get themselves to treatment if parents or
    others refuse to take them.)
5.  New behavior has to be learned in all relevant contexts. New
    behavioral skills have to be practiced in the situations where the
    skills are needed, not just in the situation where the skills are
    first learned.
6.  All behaviors (actions, thoughts, emotions) are caused. There is
    always a cause or set of causes for actions, thoughts, and emotions,
    even if people do not know what the causes are.
7.  Figuring out and changing the causes of behavior is a more effective
    way to change than judging and blaming. Judging and blaming are
    easier, but anyone who wants to create change in the world has to
    change the chains of events that cause unwanted behaviors and
    events.

Format and Organization of Ongoing Skills Training Sessions The
structuring of session time is the major factor differentiating formal
DBT skills training from DBT individual psychotherapy. In individual DBT
psychotherapy, the agenda is set by a client's behavior since the last
session and within the current session; the agenda is open until the
client shows up for the

54 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

session. In skills training, the therapy agenda is set by the behavioral
skill to be taught; the agenda is set before a client shows up for the
session. Skills training sessions require at least four sections: (1) a
beginning ritual, (2) review of homework practice since the last
session, (3) presentation of new material, and (4) a closing
"wind-down." In my clinic, skills training sessions for individuals with
severe disorders (including BPD) last for 2½ hours, generally with a
15-minute break in the middle. The format is reasonably consistent for
the whole year. The sessions begin with a mindfulness exercise, followed
by group members' sharing their attempts (or lack of attempts) to
practice behavioral skills during the preceding week, followed by a
break. The second hour is devoted to presenting and discussing new
skills. The last 15 minutes are allotted to a session wind-down, which
involves going around the room and having each person share one
observation about the session (a practice of the mindfulness skills of
observing and describing). This format varies slightly for the final
session of each module. Instead of presenting new material, that
session's second half is devoted to a review of all the skills from that
module; a review of skills from the previous modules; and a discussion
of pros and cons of using the skills and skill generalization across
situations and contexts in participants' lives. The session concludes
with a wind-down, which can consist of observations about the module as
a whole and how the weeks and sessions on the module went. If any
individuals are leaving the skills training group, there is time set
aside to say goodbye and discuss termination issues. Generally, we ask
those leaving for ideas on snacks for the last meeting, and also let
them choose the mindfulness practice at the beginning of the group. We
give (standing with the participant by our side) each graduating person
a graduation certificate signed by the two co-­leaders and a graduation
card with personal notes from each leader. Unless there is a good reason
for not doing so, we end the session with each person given an
opportunity to say a personal good bye. In sum, you want to give
departing participants a positive sendoff. In our friends-and-­family
program and in skills training for participants with less severe
disorders, groups last from 90 minutes to 2 hours. Adolescent groups
also last from 90 minutes to 2 hours. Individual skills training
sessions ordinarily last 45--60 minutes. In each case, however, the
general fourpart structure of sessions is the same as outlined in

Table 3.4. Each of the four sections is discussed in more detail below.
Some inpatient settings have split this format in two, holding two
weekly sessions---one devoted to homework review and one devoted to new
skills. This is a reasonable model on inpatient and day treatment units,
where staff members have some ability to persuade clients to attend both
weekly sessions. In an outpatient setting, however, there is a danger
that clients will not attend homework review sessions when they have not
practiced any of their skills during the preceding week. Skills trainers
will want to prevent that from occurring. Other settings have shortened
the session time, usually from 2½ to 1½ hours. In my clinic's experience
with adults with severe behavioral and emotional dyscontrol, 1½ hours is
not enough time for a group session. Even with 2½ hours, 50--60 minutes
for homework review with eight group members gives each member about
6--8 minutes of group attention---not very much. Nor is 50--60 minutes
for new material much time, either. Although group leaders can present a
lot of material in that time, they also need time to do in-­session
practice of new skills, to discuss questions about the week's new
content, to check skill comprehension with each member, and to go over
new homework sheets to be sure that clients understand how to do the
practice and how to record it. Individual skills training can be
accomplished in weekly 45- to 50-minute sessions.

Session Room Setup and Materials It is important to set up the room for
skills training sessions differently from what is usually done for
traditional group or individual therapy. To the degree possible, the aim
should be to elicit a sense of being in a classroom. We conduct our
group sessions in a conference room around a table, with a whiteboard
for the skills trainers to write on. For

TABLE 3.4. Standard Skills Training Session Format

• Beginning ritual (mindfulness exercise) • Review of homework practice
• Break • Presentation of new material/skills • Closing wind-down

3. Structuring Skills Training Sessions • 55

individual skills training, we bring in a small desk for the client to
sit at; if this is not possible, we teach individual skills in a room
different from the individual therapy room. Skills training handouts and
worksheets for all modules to be taught are given out in three-ring
binders with pockets in front and back. Handouts are printed on one
color of paper, and worksheets on another color. Generally, we try not
to use white paper, as it makes it more difficult for those with
dyslexia to read. We also use labeled dividers between sections and
between handouts and worksheets within sections. In the front binder
pockets, we put forms to track weekly practice assignments; in the back
pockets, we put a supply of DBT diary cards. The diary card lists the
most important DBT skills taught. Next to each skill on the card is a
space for recording whether or not the client actually practiced the
skill on each day during the week. (See Chapter 4 and Figure 4.1 for
more details about the diary card, as well as Chapter 6 of the main DBT
text.) Pencils/pens for taking notes are available on the table. Clients
are instructed to bring in their binders each week. Loaner binders are
available if they forget their own. Other materials to bring to the
session include a small bell that can be rung to start and end
mindfulness practices, and a selection of distress tolerance tools
(e.g., cold gel pack, rubber ball with spikes, balance board) for use by
people who may be in danger of dissociating during the sessions. It can
also be useful to record sessions on video, if the necessary equipment
is available. (For more on this, see the discussion in Chapter 4 on
managing the homework review.) At our group sessions, we serve
decaffeinated coffee and tea (and usually snacks as well). Before the
beginning ritual, members get coffee or tea and a snack and get settled.
In our groups, if people want to bring their own snacks, then they have
to bring enough to share with everyone.

Session-­Beginning Ritual We begin with the session leader or co-­leader
leading a mindfulness practice. An effort is made to vary the practices
so that over the weeks we practice each of the mindfulness skills.
Mindfulness practices are listed on Mindfulness Handouts 4a--4c and
5a--5c. We start each practice by ringing the mindfulness bell three
times, and end it by ringing the bell once. Then we go around the room
and ask each participant (including the leader and co-­leader) to share

his or her experience with the group. This sharing is very important, as
it does not take much time and gives the leader or co-­leader a chance to
provide corrective feedback if needed. If members have missed one or
more previous sessions, they are given a chance to tell the group where
they have been. If missing sessions is a problem for a person, attention
(no more than 5 minutes or so) can be paid to analyzing what interferes
with coming and how to overcome it. If there are group issues (e.g.,
announcements; not calling when missing; or coming late), they are dealt
with at the beginning of the session. This brief attention to
therapy-­interfering behaviors is very important and should not be
dropped. A therapist who is conducting individual skills training should
follow the session-­beginning guidelines in Chapter 14 of the main DBT
text---­greeting the client with warmth; attending, if only briefly, to
the client's current emotional state; and repairing relationship
difficulties at the beginning of a session if needed. Only a limited
amount of time should then be spent on beginning strategies. If
possible, the therapist should help the client use his or her distress
tolerance crisis survival strategies (see Chapter 10 of this manual) to
manage current emotions if extreme and distract from the need for
further repair, do skills training, and get back to repair at the end of
the session or at the next individual psychotherapy meeting.

Review of Homework: Sharing of Homework Practice Efforts The next phase
of treatment is the sharing of between-­session efforts to practice the
specific behavioral skills (mindfulness, interpersonal effectiveness,
emotion regulation, distress tolerance) being taught. In our group
sessions, the primary group leader goes around the circle and asks each
member to share with the group what he or she has practiced during the
preceding week. In my experience, waiting for members to volunteer takes
up too much time. However, I may let members decide who to start with in
going around the circle. Vocabulary can be very important here.
Behaviorists are used to calling practice "homework," and therefore to
asking clients about their "homework practice." Some of our clients like
this terminology and prefer to think of skills training as a class they
are taking, much like a college course. Others feel demeaned by the
words, as if they are being treated like children in school and once
again having to report to adults.

56 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

A discussion of the semantics at the very beginning of treatment can be
successful in defusing this issue. The weekly sharing of homework
practice efforts is an essential part of skills training. The sure
knowledge that not only will each client be asked about his or her
efforts to practice skills, but that not practicing will be analyzed in
depth, serves as a powerful motivation for at least attempting to
practice skills during the week. The norm of weekly in vivo practice is
set and maintained during the sharing. Every client should be asked to
share his or her experiences, even those who communicate extreme
reluctance or aversion to the task. This part of the session is so
important that its completion takes precedence over any other group
task. To finish the sharing in the 50--60 minutes allotted takes very
good time management skills on the part of the primary leader, as noted
above. However, the usual absence of one or more clients, together with
the equally usual tendency of one or two each week to refuse to interact
more than briefly, adds considerably to the time per person available
for sharing. Managing homework practice is discussed further in Chapter
4 of this manual.

Break Most clients get restless after about an hour of a group session.
We usually take a 10- or 15-minute break at about the halfway mark.
Members can get a refill of coffee or tea, and a snack if snacks are
provided. Most clients go outside for fresh air. This part of the
session is important, because it provides an unstructured period of time
for group clients to interact. Generally the group leaders stay near but
somewhat apart from group clients during the break. Group cohesion,
independent of the leaders, is thus fostered. If a member needs
individual attention from a leader, however, it is given at this point.
One of our main problems has been that clients having a hard time at a
session often leave during the break. We have found it advisable to be
particularly alert to anyone who may be leaving, so that intervention
can be attempted before he or she walks out.

Presentation of New Material The hour after the break is devoted to the
presentation and discussion of new skills or, if necessary, the review
of ones already covered. The material in

Chapters 7--10 is presented in this part of the session. The first 30
minutes of each new skills training module (remember that there are
four) is spent in discussing the rationale for that particular module.
(In an ongoing group, the time devoted to homework review is cut short
during the first session of each iteration of the Mindfulness module.)
The leaders' task here is to convince the clients that the skills to be
covered in the upcoming module are relevant to their lives; that if they
improve these particular skills their lives will improve; and, most
importantly, that they can actually learn the skills. The leaders often
have to be creative in demonstrating how particular sets of skills apply
to particular problems. The specific rationales for each module are
described in Chapters 7--10.

Closing Wind-Down Allotting time at the end of a group skills training
session for winding down is very important for clients with emotion
dysregulation. These sessions are almost always emotionally charged and
painful for some. Individuals who have difficulties regulating their
emotions are acutely aware of the negative effects of their own skill
deficits. Without emotion regulation skills of their own, clients can be
in great emotional difficulty after a session, especially if nothing is
done to help them regulate their affect and end or "close up" the
session, so to speak. A wind-down period also provides a time for
clients who have dissociated during the session, usually because of
painful memories, to come back into the session before parting. I was
alerted to this need during my first DBT skills training group. After
several months, it came up in a group discussion that almost every
member of the group was going out drinking after the meetings as a means
of affect control. Skills trainers will often find that topics that seem
very innocuous are actually very stress-­ provoking for individuals with
disordered emotion regulation. For example, a group member once became
extremely emotional and disorganized as I was introducing the
Interpersonal Effectiveness module and the fact that one task of the
module would be to learn to say no effectively. She was currently
enmeshed in a group of drug dealers who frequently raped her. She didn't
say no because the group was her meal ticket. Wind-downs should last
from 5 to (at most) 15

3. Structuring Skills Training Sessions • 57

minutes. I have used several wind-down methods. The most popular with
our group members is the "observe and describe" wind-down. Each member
describes one thing he or she observed during the session. The
observation can be of liking or disliking an event that occurred during
group (e.g., "I liked the mindfulness exercise today"), something
someone else did (e.g., "Suzy came on time and stayed the whole time"),
or a description of a self-­observation (e.g., "I felt really sad when
talking about my father"). The idea in this exercise is for the leaders
to coach the clients in how to describe just the facts they observed,
without adding assumptions and interpretations to the facts. For
example, instead of saying, "I noticed I did better this week than
last," a client might be coached to say, "The thought arose in my mind
that I did better this week than last." Instead of "I noticed that Bill
was really angry this week," the client might say, "I noticed thinking
that Bill was really angry this week." A therapist who is conducting
skills training individually should follow the session-­closing
strategies in Chapter 14 of the main DBT text. With more advanced
groups, a process-­observing wind-down can be used. In this method, we
spend between 5 and 15 minutes sharing our observations of how things
went in the session. Members may offer observations about themselves,
one another, the leaders, or the group as a whole. Although the leaders
may have to model such observations at the beginning, members usually
pick up on the method rapidly. As time passes and the group progresses,
we find that members usually become quite astute observers and
describers of one another's behavior, progress, mood changes, and
apparent difficulties. At times, the leaders may facilitate more
in-depth observations and comments by asking general questions about
observations (e.g., "What do you make of that?"). Or the leaders may
encourage a member to check out an observation, especially when an
observation involves an inference about another's feelings, mood state,
or opinion. Another important leader task is to draw out members who do
not spontaneously offer an observation. During winddown, each member
should be encouraged to offer at least one observation, even if that
observation is simply that it is difficult to offer an observation. An
observing wind-down is also an opportunity to utilize insight
(interpretation) strategies in a group setting. It is particularly
useful for the group leaders to comment on patterns of group
interactions and

group changes that they have noticed. Such insights highlight and foster
the growth of dialectical thinking. In a group context, comments about
group members' behavior not only communicate to the individuals in
question, but give information to all members about how they can
evaluate and interpret their own behavior. Although the
process-­observing wind-down may be very useful, it is also the type of
wind-down with the most potential for creating problems. These problems
almost always happen when the observation period gets out of the
leaders' control and ends in overly critical observations, in escalating
responses to critical feedback, and occasionally in members' storming
out and refusing ever to come back. This can be a particular problem
when more experienced or advanced clients (e.g., those who have gone
through several skills training modules) are mixed with those who are
just beginning skills training. The more advanced clients may be ready
for much more process than new clients can tolerate. The
process-­observing wind-down is a natural place for advanced clients to
begin to try out more confrontational comments. I discuss the problems
of too much process work in first-year skills training groups more
thoroughly in Chapter 5 of this manual. In both these types of "observe
and describe" wind-downs, it is important that the group leaders go
last. When necessary, this gives the leaders a chance to make an
observation that pulls the group together and repairs any damage that
might have been done by others' observations. Other wind-downs might
consist of clients' bringing in music that is soothing and uplifting.
(No music extolling drug use or suicide!) Each member can say what he or
she is going to be doing for the next week. Any current news or sports
event can be discussed if it is relevant to most if not all the group
members. Any topic (favorite movies, animals, movie stars, books, foods,
etc.) can be discussed. The list of topics is up to group leaders'
imagination and common sense.

Observing Limits DBT does not generally believe in setting limits, but
instead favors observing naturally occurring limits. In skills training,
however, a number of limits are set by the therapy itself. These limits
are arbitrary, in that I could conceivably have developed different

58 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

rules. Other limits that must be observed are those of the skills
trainers as individuals and (in a group context) of the group as a
whole.

Limits of Skills Training Itself The key limitation of DBT skills
training is that the skills trainers do not function as individual
therapists during skills training sessions. The role of skills trainers
is clearly defined and limited to teaching behavioral skills and dealing
with the interpersonal relationships that arise in sessions. A skills
trainer is like a university professor or a high school teacher.
"Personal" calls texts, or e-mails to skills training leaders are
acceptable only under certain conditions: Clients may contact the skills
trainers if they will not be able to attend a group session for some
reason, or if they have a serious interpersonal problem with a trainer
or group member that cannot be resolved in a session. There are three
exceptions to these coaching limits. The first is when a skills training
client is also receiving DBT individual psychotherapy from another
therapist in the same clinical setting. In these instances, a skills
training leader serves as a backup therapist for the individual
therapist. Thus, when the individual psychotherapist is out of town, it
is appropriate for the client to call the skills trainer under the same
circumstances that he or she would call the individual therapist. When
the reason for the call is to discuss interpersonal relationships in the
skills training, there are some limits. These limits are the natural
limits of the skills training leader, and thus the ordinary strategies
of observing limits in individual therapy apply. It is essential that a
skills training leader in this situation understand these phone limits
and communicate them clearly to the clients. The second exception is in
multifamily skills training for adolescents who are also in individual
DBT. In these situations, the adolescent calls the individual therapist
for coaching, and the parent or other family member in skills training
can call the skills trainer for coaching. The reason for this is that
often coaching is needed for managing the relationship with one of the
other persons in the treatment (i.e., the adolescent with a parent, or
vice versa). A conflict arises when the same person is coaching both
parties and disagreements arise. The third exception is when a skills
trainer is teaching skills on an inpatient or residential unit and is
also a milieu skills coach before and after sessions. In these
situations, the skills trainer may give ad hoc coach-

ing as needed during his or her shift, or (as is done in some settings)
may have regular office hours for skills coaching on the unit. In my
experience, the best way to communicate phone limits is by discussing
the important role of the individual psychotherapist in the total DBT
program, and pointing out that skills trainers do not duplicate the
individual psychotherapist's job. In our experience, clients grasp this
rule very quickly and rarely violate it. If a client is in a skills-only
program and does not have an individual therapist, then calling the
local crisis line should be recommended, as these services are
ordinarily very good. If necessary and possible, you might want to
provide the crisis line personnel with a coaching plan for specific
clients. We have done that in our clinic with very good results. Most
phone calls, texts, and e-mails other than session cancellations revolve
around their relationships with skills trainers or (in a group context)
with other group members. At times, a client may make contact to find
out whether a trainer hates him or her and wants the client out of
skills training. At other times, a client may call to discuss how it is
completely impossible to continue in skills training any longer, since
sessions are so painful. Relationship problem-­solving strategies must be
implemented by the skills training leaders during such phone calls.
These are discussed in detail in Chapter 15 of the main DBT text and in
Chapter 5 of this manual. In a skills-only group, such as the
friends-and-­family group in our clinic, phone calls to the skills
trainers to discuss life problems and repeated requests for individual
time with the skills trainers surrounding skills training sessions
should alert the skills trainers that such clients may need more help
than can be given in skills training. In these cases, individual therapy
may be recommended and referrals given. A second limit during the first
year of DBT skills training is that personal crises are generally not
discussed in skills training sessions. This limit is made crystal clear
for the first several sessions and is reclarified thereafter when
clients wish to discuss their current crises. If a crisis is extreme, of
course, skills training leaders may choose to violate the rule. To cite
a very extreme example, when a group member in our clinic was raped on
her way to a group session, we of course discussed it. A death in the
family, a divorce, a breakup of a relationship, or a rejection by a
therapist may be reported and briefly discussed at the beginning of
sessions. The key to getting individuals with disordered emotion
regulation to follow this rule is the way in

3. Structuring Skills Training Sessions • 59

which crises are dealt with. Generally, any topic can be discussed if
the focus is on how the client can use the skills being learned to cope
with the crisis. Thus, although at first glance it would appear that the
"crisis of the week" cannot be discussed, at second glance it is obvious
that it can be, as long as it is discussed within the context of DBT
skills. This orientation, however, is not always the orientation that a
person is hoping for. Rather than giving clients free rein to discuss
their problems and to share all the details, skills training leaders
very quickly intervene to highlight the relationship of these problems
to the particular skill module of the moment. For example, if an
individual psychotherapist has terminated a client or a client has been
fired, this can be dealt with in terms of the interpersonal
effectiveness skills the client can use to find out why, to find a new
therapist or new job, or to get the therapist or job back. It can also
be approached from the standpoint of how hurt the client is feeling in
response to the rejection and how the client can use emotion regulation
skills to feel better. If core mindfulness skills are the focus, the
client can be encouraged to observe and describe the event and his or
her responses. The client can also be helped to notice any judgmental
thoughts and how to focus on what works rather than on revenge. Finally,
the problem can be approached in terms of how the person is going to
survive it or tolerate it without engaging in impulsive destructive
behaviors. Most problems lend themselves to an analysis in terms of each
of the skill modules. Noninterpersonal situations, which at first glance
may seem inappropriate for the Interpersonal Effectiveness module, can
be looked at as opportunities for finding friends to share with and for
obtaining the social support the client needs to cope with the problem.
Skills trainers must be vigilant in always bringing the crisis back to
the skills. When the skills seem ineffective or insufficient for the
problem, clients in individual therapy should be encouraged to talk with
their therapists. A third limit is that skills training sessions are
focused on increasing the skills of the individuals attending the
sessions. The focus is not and cannot be on how to change other people
in clients' lives. Although interpersonal effectiveness skills are often
aimed at changing what other people do, the focus even there is on the
clients' learning the skills and being able to use them, not on how
effective they are at changing people the clients want to change. This
is a particularly critical limit in our friends-and-­ family groups. Here
the individuals come to skills

training because they have very difficult people in their lives. It is
natural for them to think that a skills class can teach them how to get
those difficult persons to be less difficult. Although this very likely
may be a result of the individuals' learning the skills taught in skills
training, it is not the focus. It is often helpful here to tell the
"rainmaker" story. A Native American tribe was in the fifth year of a
terrible drought. All the crops were failing, and the people were in
danger of starving. The tribe invited a rainmaker to come to bring the
rain. When the rainmaker arrived, he went into the tepee set up for him.
After the first night had passed, the people expected him to come out
and start his rainmaking, but he did not. After 3 days, he still had not
come out. The elders of the tribe then went into the tepee and asked,
"When are you going to start making the sky bring down rain?" The
rainmaker said, "I am bringing myself into order. When I come into
order, the tribe will come into order. When the tribe comes into order,
the fields will come into order. When the fields come into order, the
sky will come into order. And when the sky comes into order, it will
rain." This story has always reminded me of a woman who took our skills
training class. She had a daughter who had very severe BPD. The mother
met me some time later and said, "When I learned the DBT skills, I was
transformed, and when I was transformed, my daughter was transformed."
It is this point of view that skills trainers must continue to explain
and support. Finally, the limits of structured skills training may have
to be observed in regard to process issues. The group leaders need to
carefully communicate the limits on process issues, individual crises,
and general life discussions in a skills training program versus a
psychotherapy process group. (The tendency to favor process discussions
and work on individual crises is, as I have noted previously, much more
pronounced when skills training is conducted individually; this is a
principal reason for conducting skills training in groups.)

Personal Limits of Skills Training Leaders The observing-­limits approach
with respect to the skills training leaders is no different in DBT
skills training than it is in other components of DBT. Essentially, it
is the task of the leaders to observe their own limits in conducting the
treatment. In my experience, the crucial limit that must be observed has
to

60 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

do with phone calls. Skills trainers must track their own ability to
handle lengthy interpersonal discussions with clients and must
communicate their limits clearly to the clients.

Limits of a Group as a Whole The key limit of DBT skills training groups
when clients have severe problems with emotion regulation is that they
cannot tolerate hostile attacks in sessions. My colleagues and I have
had to make it very clear to group members that behaviors such as
throwing things, destroying property, and attacking or harshly
criticizing other group members are proscribed. When a group member
engages in hostile behavior, the group member is encouraged to work on
the problem with his or her individual psychotherapist (if the person
has one) or with a skills trainer after the group session. However, it
is preferable for an individual to leave a group session (even if only
temporarily) than to engage in these behaviors. The group leaders, of
course, have to be

careful in this situation not to punish the member for leaving on the
one hand, and to punish him or her for staying on the other. Dialectical
balance is crucial, since the leaders also want to encourage the member
to stay at a session and inhibit maladaptive behaviors as long as
possible.

References 1. Dimeff, L. A., & Koerner, K. (Eds.). Dialectical behavior
therapy in clinical practice. New York: Guilford Press. 2. Mintz, R. S.
(1968). Psychotherapy of the suicidal patient. In H. L. P. Resnik (Ed.),
Suicidal behaviors: Diagnosis and management (pp. 271--296). Boston:
Little, Brown. 3. McMain, S. F., Guimond, T., Habinski, L., Barnhart,
R., & Streiner, D. L. (2014). Dialectical behaviour therapy skills
training versus a waitlist control for self harm and borderline
personality disorder. Manuscript submitted for publication.

Chapter 4

Skills Training Treatment Targets and Procedures

As discussed in Chapter 3, DBT organizes treatment by levels of disorder
and stages of treatment. Within each stage of treatment, DBT focuses on
a hierarchy of behavioral targets highlighting behaviors to increase and
behaviors to decrease. The hierarchy helps ensure that the most
important behaviors are attended to first. When clients enter skills
training in standard DBT, and when DBT skills training is combined with
other modes of treatment (such as milieu treatment), treatment targets
are divided among the modes of treatment. For example, when a Stage 1
client presents with life-­threatening behaviors, severe
therapy-­interfering behaviors, and/ or severe
quality-of-life-­interfering behaviors, then decreasing these behavioral
patterns would be the primary treatment targets of the individual
therapist or case manager. PTSD and other serious mental disorders would
ordinarily be treated also by an individual provider. In all stages of
treatment (see Table 3.2), the task of the skills trainer is to increase
skillful behavioral patterns. This chapter begins with a discussion of
skills training targets and continues with a discussion of skills
training strategies used to achieve those targets. A detailed discussion
of how to manage the homework review portion of the session ends the
chapter. "Strategies" are coordinated activities, tactics, and
procedures that a skills trainer employs to achieve treatment goals---in
this case, the acquisition and use of behavioral skills. "Strategies"
also include coordinated responses that the provider should give to a
particular problem presented by a client. These, along with other DBT
procedures, are how skills trainers address skills training targets. In
the context of DBT as a whole, skills training procedures constitute one
of four sets of change procedures; the other three are contingency man-

agement, exposure-based, and cognitive modification procedures. Skills
training procedures, as their name suggests, will be the "meat" of
interventions in behavioral skills training. However---and this is
important---it is impossible to do a competent job in skills training
without an understanding of how to make contingencies work with a client
(contingency procedures); how to manage exposure to threatening material
and situations (exposure-based procedures); and how to deal with
maladaptive expectancies, assumptions, and beliefs (cognitive
modification procedures). In most senses, these procedures cannot be
pulled apart from the implementation of skills training procedures; I do
so here in this chapter only for the sake of exposition. The next
chapter describes the other three sets of change procedures, along with
other DBT strategies.

Skills Training Behavioral Targets Skills training behavioral targets,
in order of importance, are (1) stopping behaviors that are very likely
to destroy therapy; (2) skill acquisition, strengthening, and
generalization; and (3) reducing therapy-­ interfering behaviors. The
agenda for skill acquisition, strengthening, and generalization is
presented in Chapters 7--10 of this manual. Although this agenda is the
impetus for skills training in the first place, it must be set aside
when behaviors emerge that are likely to destroy the treatment, either
for a specific person or (in a group context) for the group as a whole.
In contrast to DBT individual psychotherapy, however, behaviors that
slow down progress in therapy (rather than threaten to destroy it
altogether) are last rather than second in the hierarchy. As noted in
Chapter 3, the primary target behaviors for 61

62 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

individual psychotherapy in DBT are (1) decreasing suicidal and other
life-­threatening behaviors; (2) decreasing therapy-­interfering
behaviors; (3) decreasing quality-of-life-­ interfering behaviors; and
(4) increasing behavioral skills. A comparison of this hierarchy with
that for skills training indicates the role of skills training in the
total scheme of things. A therapist who is conducting both the
individual psychotherapy and skills training for a particular client
must be very clear about which targets take priority in which treatment
modes. Maintaining the distinction between skills training and
individual therapy is one of the keys to successful DBT. Successfully
addressing skills training behavioral targets requires an integration of
almost all the DBT treatment strategies. This can be extremely difficult
in Stage 1 of DBT (see Chapter 3 of this manual and Chapter 6 of the
main DBT text for a discussion of stages), because often both clients
and trainers do not want to attend to skills training. Work on the
therapeutic process, having "heart-to-heart" talks, resolving real-life
crisis, and so forth can all be more reinforcing (for both trainers and
clients) than the sometimes mundane task of working on general
behavioral skills. However, a trainer who ignores the target hierarchy
is not doing DBT skills training. That is, in DBT what is discussed is
as important as how it is discussed. Difficulties in getting a client to
go along with the targets should be treated as problems to be solved. A
trainer who is having trouble following the target hierarchy (a not
unlikely problem) should bring up the topic in the next therapist
consultation team meeting. The following discussion addresses each
target in the skills training hierarchy.

Priority 1: Stopping Behaviors Likely to Destroy Skills Training The
highest-­ priority target is stopping client behaviors that, when and if
they occur, pose a serious threat to the continuation of therapy. The
emphasis here is a simple matter of logic: If therapy is destroyed,
other targets cannot be achieved. The object is to maintain the skills
training sessions. The behavior has to be very serious to be considered
this high in priority. Included in this target are violent behaviors,
such as throwing objects, pounding loudly or destructively on things,
and hitting or verbally attacking other clients during group therapy
sessions. (Verbal attacks on the skills trainers are not considered
therapy-­destroying behavior.) Other

target behaviors are self-­ injurious acts (e.g., cutting or scratching
wrists, picking off scabs so that bleeding starts, taking excessive
medications) and suicide crisis behaviors during group sessions,
including breaks (e.g., threatening suicide in a credible manner and
then storming out of the session). Also included are behaviors that make
it impossible for anyone to concentrate, focus, or hear what is going on
(e.g., yelling, hysterical crying, loud moaning, or constant out-of-turn
talking). At times, an interpersonal problem among group members or
between members and leaders, or a structural problem in the way skills
training is delivered, may be so serious that skills training will fall
apart if it is not attended to. For example, one member may not be able
to come back to skills training because of an interpersonal clash, hurt
feelings, excessive hopelessness, or the like. In these cases, repairing
the problem should be the priority. A therapist may attend to an
individual problem by phone between sessions or before or after
sessions, if not in the session itself. Finally, a united rebellion of
the clients against the trainers is also considered a top-­priority
target, as is a rebellion of the trainers against the clients. The
skills trainer's goal is to stop therapy-­ destructive behaviors and
repair "rips" in the therapeutic "fabric" as quickly and efficiently as
possible. For clients in standard DBT, further work on the destructive
behaviors is left for the individual therapist to handle. With or
without an individual therapist, an individual meeting before or after a
skills training session may be called for. Although teaching clients
interpersonal effectiveness, emotion regulation, distress tolerance, or
mindfulness skills may be useful in reducing the destructive behavior, a
number of other treatment strategies may be necessary to bring these
behaviors under control quickly (e.g., use of both positive and aversive
contingencies). When a client is engaging in behaviors that are clearly
destructive to skills training, the skills trainers must respond
promptly and vigorously. A modified version of the therapy-­interfering
behavior protocol described in Chapter 15 of the main DBT text can be
applied here; the strategies, modified for use in a skills training
setting, are listed in Table 4.1.

Managing Suicidal Behaviors When suicide crisis behaviors occur (which
by definition suggest a high likelihood of impending suicide), skills
trainers do the absolute minimum crisis intervention necessary and then,
as quickly as pos-

4. Skills Training Treatment Targets and Procedures • 63 TABLE 4.1.
Therapy-­Destroying Behavior Strategies Checklist

   If client does not have an individual primary provider, skills
trainer considers either requiring client to obtain a primary provider,
or---in extreme cases---putting client on vacation from skills training
until there is evidence that behavior has come under control.

ing should not be interrupted to attend to a suicidal crisis. Attention
to suicidal ideation and communications during skills training is
limited to helping the client figure out how to apply the DBT skills
currently being taught to the suicidal feelings and thoughts. During
mindfulness training, the focus may be on observing and describing the
urge to engage in self-­injury or thoughts of suicide as these come and
go. During distress tolerance training, the emphasis may be on
tolerating the pain or using crisis intervention skills to cope with the
situation. During emotion regulation training, the focus may be on
observing, describing, and trying to change the emotions related to
suicidal urges. In an interpersonal effectiveness framework, the
emphasis may be on saying no or asking for help skillfully. The same
strategy is used when the client discusses life crises, problems
interfering with quality of life, or previous traumatic events in his or
her life. Everything is grist for the skill application mill, so to
speak. Strategies for assessment and management of suicide risk when
individual therapists are not available are outlined in Chapter 5 of
this manual (see especially Table 5.2).

Note. Adapted from Table 15.5 in Linehan, M. M. (1993).
Cognitive-­behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New
York: Guilford Press. Copyright 1993 by The Guilford Press. Adapted by
permission.

Managing Skills Trainers' Desire to Get Rid of Difficult Clients

sible, turn the problem over to the individual therapist or to area
crisis services. Except to determine whether immediate medical care is
needed, reports of previous self-­injurious acts are given almost no
attention during a skills training session. "Remember to tell your
therapist" is the modal response for those in individual psychotherapy.
(As noted in Chapter 3, suicidal individuals and those with severe
disorders must have an individual therapist to participate in skills
training.) The one exception, as noted above, is when these behaviors
become destructive to the continuation of therapy for other group
members. They are then targeted directly in the skills training group
sessions. The general principle is that skills trainers treat a client
in a suicidal crisis like a student who gets deathly ill in school. The
nearest relative (in this case, the individual therapist or case
manager) is called. A skills trainer who is also the individual client's
therapist should turn to the problem after the skills training session.
Unless it is impossible to do otherwise, skills train-

It is not infrequent that skills trainers decide that the solution to
dealing with difficult clients is to kick them out of skills training.
In a very friendly group, for example, you may have a new member who is
loudly grumpy or sulks most weeks, taking up a lot of your time. A
person may be hostile to you and other group members, or may routinely
say insensitive and mean things to others. In a group where most do
homework, one person may refuse to do homework and complain about the
need to do homework, requiring you to analyze the missing homework on a
weekly basis. Others may routinely insist on talking about complicated
personal problems, and may accuse you of being insensitive or uncaring
when you try to reframe the problem in terms of skills that could be
used. A client may frequently sob, yell, or bang the table so loudly in
group sessions that it is difficult to proceed. Clients may put their
feet on the table and refuse to put them down, loudly empty purses or
backpacks on the table every week to clean them out, bring in alcohol
disguised as cola, and argue vehemently with every point you try to
make. In over 30 years of conducting DBT

   Skills trainer behaviorally defines what client is doing to destroy
therapy.    Skills trainer conducts a brief analysis of destructive
behavior.    Skills trainer makes contingencies very clear for continued
destructive behaviors.    Skills trainer adopts a problem-­solving plan
with client.    When client refuses to modify behavior:    Skills
trainer discusses goals of skills training with client.    Skills
trainer avoids unnecessary power struggles.    If client has an
individual primary provider, skills trainer refers client to primary
provider for an in-depth behavioral analysis of the destructive
behavior.

64 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

skills groups, I have never kicked out a group member. I have
nevertheless many times felt sure that a group would go better if I
could just get rid of one or two participants. When a troublesome person
finally does leave a group, however, someone else in the group usually
then becomes a problem. In other words, I have never seen a group
improve by getting rid of a member. In the majority of cases, I have
found that my ability to manage a difficult group participant with
equanimity and a lightness of tone has allowed other group members not
only to cope with disturbance, but also to find ways of appreciating the
contributions that the difficult member often does manage to make.

Managing Skills Trainers' Desire to Attack Difficult Clients Skills
trainers often have an intense desire for group skills training to go
well for everyone. When one person threatens this desire, it is natural
for group leaders' anxiety to increase, along with their attempts to
control the offending group member. When efforts to control disruptive
behaviors fail, it is easy to become overprotective of the other
participants. When that happens, anger and judgmentalness can increase,
and when this happens, you suddenly are at risk of therapy-­interfering
behavior yourself. There have been many groups where I have held onto
the table legs to keep myself from storming out of the room, or cursing
group members for being so ungrateful for my hard work. In these
difficult situations, it can be very hard to teach without being
judgmental, and "emotion mind" is easy to fall into. What to do at these
points? Attack or withdraw? If ever there is a time for skills trainers
to use their own DBT skills, this is the time. All of your skills can be
helpful. Here are just a few examples: 1. Observe what a difficult
client is actually doing, and describe it nonjudgmentally in your own
mind before commenting on the behavior. 2. Practice radical acceptance
of clients who engage in repetitively annoying behaviors, but who are
corrigible if you make the effort. 3. Practice opposite action with a
matter-of-fact or light tone of voice when you want to withdraw. 4.
Practice opposite action, using irreverence or humor with a light tone
of voice, to avoid at-

tacking and to lower tension between you and the individual and in the
room. 5. Use the DEAR MAN, GIVE FAST skills (see Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 5, 6, and 7) to ask a person to stop behaviors
that distract you or others. Use the "broken record" and negotiate
(Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 5) if necessary. 6. Put problem
behaviors on an extinction schedule (see Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 21), and plunge in where angels fear to tread by acting as if
clients are cooperating even when they are not.

Priority 2: Skill Acquisition, Strengthening, and Generalization With
very few exceptions, most of the skills training time is devoted to
acquisition, strengthening, and generalization of the DBT behavioral
skills: core mindfulness, distress tolerance, emotional regulation, and
interpersonal effectiveness. Active practice and use of behavioral
skills are extremely difficult for individuals with highly disordered
emotion regulation, since these require them to regulate their own
behavior in the service of practicing skills. Thus, if passive and/or
dysregulated behavior is followed by a group leader's shifting attention
to another member (in a group context) or by a discussion of how the
client is feeling or why he or she doesn't want to participate, this
risks reinforcing the very behavior (passivity or dysregulation) that
skills training is intended to reduce. At times, trainers can simply
drag clients through difficult moments in skills training; such an
approach, however, requires the trainers to be very sure of their
behavioral assessments. The key point is that such an approach should be
strategic rather than simply insensitive. For example, there are times
when it is more skillful to leave a skills participant alone for a
while. This is particularly true for brand-new group members; for
individuals with known social anxiety disorder (social phobia); or at
times for individuals who have asserted skillfully that they are willful
now, intend to be willful throughout the group, and clearly are sticking
to their guns. Some effort to engage such clients may be useful, but
excessive efforts may backfire. If necessary, skills trainers can meet
with distressed clients during break or after sessions to discuss and
problem-solve the clients' dysregulated or interfering behaviors.

4. Skills Training Treatment Targets and Procedures • 65

Priority 3: Reducing Therapy-­Interfering Behaviors Behaviors that
interfere with therapy, but do not destroy it, are not ordinarily
addressed systematically in skills training. This decision is based
primarily on the fact that if therapy-­interfering behaviors were a
high-­priority treatment target for individuals with high emotion
dysregulation, trainers might never get around to the designated skills
training. Skills training does not address the therapy process itself,
except as an avenue for teaching and practicing the skills being taught.
When therapy-­ interfering behaviors are occurring, effective strategies
are (1) to ignore the behavior, if it is brief; or (2) in a
matterof-fact but firm tone, ask the client to stop the behavior and
then resolutely focus (no matter what) on teaching the skills in the
module at hand. This is almost always the strategy employed with the
less serious therapy-­ interfering behaviors. Sometimes these behaviors
offer a particularly good opportunity for practicing the skills
currently being taught. At most, these behaviors are commented on in a
way that communicates the desirability of change, while at the same time
letting the client know that very little time can be devoted to problems
unrelated to the skills being taught. Thus mood-­dependent passivity,
restlessness, pacing around the room, doodling, sitting in odd
positions, attempts to discuss the week's crisis, oversensitivity to
criticism, or anger at other clients will be ignored at times. The
client is treated (ingeniously, at times) as if he or she is not
engaging in the dysfunctional behaviors. At other times, a skills
trainer may instruct or urge such a client to try to apply behavioral
skills to the problem at hand. For example, a client who gets angry and
threatens to leave may be instructed to try to practice distress
tolerance skills or the emotion regulation skill of opposite action
(i.e., acting opposite to the action urge of anger). A client who is
refusing to participate may be asked whether he or she is being willful.
If the response is "yes," the trainer may ask whether the client is
willing to practice the skill of willingness. I often ask, "Any idea of
when you will be willing to practice willingness?" A client who is
withdrawn and dissociating may be urged to practice crisis survival
skills (e.g., cold gel pack across the eyes, paced breathing). In our
groups, we keep a number of rubber balls with spikes, a balance board,
and cold gel packs available for use by people who are in danger of
dissociating during skills train-

ing sessions. Skills trainers matter-of-­factly suggest their use when
appropriate. The key point here is that if skills trainers allow skills
training sessions to become focused on the therapy process or on
clients' life crises---­including suicidal behaviors and
quality-of-life-­interfering behaviors---then training in skills will be
forfeited. As I have discussed in Chapter 3 of this manual, there is a
wind-down period at the end of each skills training session. This is an
appropriate time to observe therapy-­ interfering behaviors or, even more
importantly, improvement in previous interfering behaviors. As long as
everyone gets a chance to voice an observation, this time can be used as
therapy process time. One of the advantages of an observing wind-down is
that it provides a time and place for discussing behaviors that are
interfering with therapy. (Cautions about process-­ observing wind-downs
have also been discussed in Chapter 3.)

Skills Training Procedures: How to Meet Skills Training Targets During
skills training, and more generally throughout DBT, skills trainers and
clients' individual treatment providers must insist at every opportunity
that clients actively engage in the acquisition and practice of skills
needed to cope with life as it is. In other words, they must directly,
forcefully, and repeatedly challenge the passive problem-­solving style
of individuals with emotion dysregulation. The procedures described
below are applied by every DBT provider across all modes of treatment
where appropriate. They are applied in a formal way in the structured
skills training modules. There are three types of skills training
procedures. Each type focuses on one of the Priority 2 target behaviors:
(1) skill acquisition (e.g., instructions, modeling); (2) skill
strengthening (e.g., behavioral rehearsal, feedback); and (3) skill
generalization (e.g., homework assignments and homework review,
discussion of similarities and differences in situations). In skill
acquisition, a trainer is teaching new behaviors. In skill strengthening
and generalization, the trainer is trying both to fine-tune skilled
behaviors and to increase the probability that the person will use the
skilled behaviors already in his or her repertoire in relevant
situations. Skill strengthening and skill generalization, in turn,
require the application of contingency procedures, exposure, and/or

66 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

cognitive modification. That is, once the trainer is sure that a
particular response pattern is within the client's current repertoire,
then other procedures are applied to increase the client's effective
behaviors in everyday life. It is this emphasis on active, self-­
conscious teaching, typical of many approaches to CBT, that
differentiates DBT from many psychodynamic approaches to treating
clients with disordered emotion regulation. Some skills training
procedures, however, are virtually identical to those used in supportive
psychotherapy. The targets of skills training are determined by the
parameters of DBT; the emphasis on certain skills over others is
determined by behavioral analysis in each individual case.

Skill Acquisition The second half of each skills training session is
primarily focused on teaching new material, generally through lectures,
discussions, practice, and roleplays. Each skills training module
contains a number of specific behavioral skills. One or sometimes two
skills are taught in each session, or three if some of the skills are
very easy to learn. Although it is usually not a good idea to present a
lot of individual skills to be learned (the idea being that it is better
to learn a few skills well than a lot of skills poorly), I have found
that presenting many skills counteracts two problems with individuals
who have difficulties regulating their emotions. First, presenting many
skills suggests that the trainer is not oversimplifying the problems to
be solved. Second, teaching a large quantity of skills works against
clients' being able to say credibly that absolutely nothing works. If
one thing doesn't work, the trainer can always suggest trying a
different skill. With many skills to draw from, the client's resistance
usually runs out before the trainer's ability to offer new skills to try
does.

Orienting and Committing to Skills Training: Task Overview Skills
acquisition begins with orienting and commitment strategies. Orienting
is a skills trainer's chief means of selling the new behaviors as worth
learning and likely to work. Skills training can only be accomplished if
a person actively collaborates with the treatment program. In addition,
knowing exactly what the task is, what one's role is, and what one can
expect from the other person facilitates learning enormously.
Orientation is called for with each specific skill and with each
homework assignment.

Some clients have skill deficits and are fearful about acquiring the new
skills. It can be useful to point out here that learning a new skill
does not mean actually having to use the skill. That is, a person can
acquire a skill and then choose in each situation whether to use it or
not. Sometimes clients do not want to learn new skills because they feel
hopeless that anything will really help. I find it useful to point out
that every skill I teach has helped either me or people I know. However,
a skills trainer cannot prove ahead of time that particular skills will
actually help a given individual. Thus I also point out that no skill is
likely to be useful to every person. Before teaching any new skill, the
trainer should give an overall rationale (or draw it in Socratic fashion
from the client) for why the particular skill or set of skills might be
useful. At times, this may only require a comment or two; at other
times, it may require extensive discussion. At some point, the skills
trainer should also explain the rationale for his or her methods of
teaching---that is, a rationale for the DBT skills training procedures.
The most important point to make here, and to repeat as often as needed,
is that learning new skills requires practice, practice, practice.
Equally important is that practice has to occur in situations where the
skills are needed. If these points do not get through to a client, there
is not much hope that he or she will actually learn anything new. Once
oriented, the client needs to make a recommitment to learning each skill
and each skill module, as well as a commitment every week to practice
new skills between sessions.

Assessing Clients' Abilities Skill acquisition procedures are aimed at
remediating skill deficits. DBT does not assume that all, or even most,
of the problems that a person with emotion dysregulation has are
motivational in nature. Instead, the emphasis is on assessing the extent
of the person's abilities in a particular area; skill acquisition
procedures are then used if skill deficits exist. It can, however, be
very difficult to determine whether clients with high emotion
dysregulation are incapable of doing something, or are capable but
emotionally inhibited or constrained by environmental factors. Although
this is a complex assessment question with any client population, it can
be particularly hard with these individuals because of their inability
to analyze their own behavior and abilities. For example, they often
confuse

4. Skills Training Treatment Targets and Procedures • 67

being afraid of doing something with not being able to do it. In
addition, there are often powerful contingencies mitigating against
their admitting having any behavioral capabilities. (I have reviewed
many of these in Chapter 10 of the main DBT text.) Clients may say that
they do not know how they feel or what they think, or that they can't
find words, when in reality they are afraid or too ashamed to express
their thoughts and feelings. As many of them say, they often do not want
to be vulnerable. Some clients have been taught by their families and
therapists to view all of their problems as motivationally based, and
have either bought that story entirely (and thus believe they can do
anything, but just do not want to) or have rebelled completely (and thus
never entertain the possibility that motivational factors might be as
important as ability-­related factors). These therapy dilemmas are
discussed more fully in the next chapter. To assess whether a behavioral
pattern is within a client's repertoire, the skills trainer has to
figure out a way to create ideal circumstances for the client to produce
the behavior. For interpersonal behaviors, an approximation to this is
role playing during the skills training session---or, if the client
refuses, asking the client to indicate what he or she would say in a
particular situation. Alternatively, one client can be asked to coach
another during a role play. I am frequently amazed to find that
individuals who appear very interpersonally skilled cannot put together
reasonable responses in certain role-play situations, whereas
individuals who seem passive, meek, and unskilled are quite capable of
responding skillfully if the role play can be made comfortable enough.
In analyzing distress tolerance, the trainer can ask what techniques the
client uses or thinks helpful in tolerating difficult or stressful
situations. Emotion regulation can sometimes be assessed by interrupting
an exchange and asking whether the client can change his or her
emotional state. Self-­management and mindfulness skills can be analyzed
by observing clients' behavior in sessions, especially when they are not
the focus of attention, and questioning them about their day-to-day
behavior. If a client produces a behavior, the skills trainer knows it
is in the person's repertoire. However, if the client does not produce
it, the trainer cannot be sure; as in statistics, there is no way to
test the null hypothesis. When in doubt, it is usually safer to proceed
with skill acquisition procedures just in case, and then observe any
consequent change in behavior. Generally there is no harm in doing so,
and most

of the procedures also affect other factors related to skilled behavior.
For example, they may work because they give the individual "permission"
to behave in a certain way, and thus reduce inhibitions, rather than
because they add to the individual's behavioral repertoire. The
principal skill acquisition procedures are instructions and modeling.

Instructions In DBT, "instructions" are verbal descriptions of the skill
components to be learned. This direct teaching constitutes didactic
strategies. Instructions can vary from general guidelines ("When you are
checking whether your thoughts fit the facts, be sure to check out the
probability that the dire consequences will occur") to very specific
suggestions as to what the client should do ("The minute an urge hits,
go get a cold gel pack and hold it in your hand for 10 minutes") or
think ("Keep saying over and over to yourself, 'I can do it' ").
Especially in a group setting, instructions can be presented in a
lecture format with a blackboard or whiteboard as an aid. Instructions
can be suggested as hypotheses to be considered, can be set forth as
theses and antitheses to be synthesized, or can be drawn out in a
Socratic method of discourse. In all cases, a trainer must be careful
not to oversimplify the ease of behaving effectively or of learning the
skill. With adolescents, it can be very useful to let them read sections
of the skills handouts out loud before you launch into specific
instructions and examples. In my groups, hands ordinarily shoot up when
I suggest this. With individuals who have already learned a skill once,
you can ask for volunteers to describe it, including how it might be
used and for what. You can add comments and examples as necessary. As
the skills are taught, it is critical to attempt to link each skill to
its intended outcome. For example, in teaching relaxation, skills
trainers should describe not only how relaxation works but when it
works, why it works, and what it works for. It is also useful to discuss
when it doesn't work, why it may not work, and how to make it work when
it seems not to be working. The more trouble trainers can predict in
advance, the better clients are likely to learn the skill. It is
particularly important to remember that immediate emotional relief is
not the goal of every skill taught in DBT skills training. This
distinction is often not grasped by either clients or new skills
trainers. In fact, when clients say that something

68 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

didn't work, they almost always mean that it didn't make them feel
better immediately. Thus the relationship of skills to long-term goals
versus shortterm goals, and to long-term relief versus immediate relief,
has to be discussed over and over. It is particularly important not to
be pulled into always trying to show how a skilled behavior will make a
person feel better right away. First, it isn't usually true; second,
even if it were true, it is not necessarily beneficial. Using the
Handouts

The skills training handouts available on the special website for this
manual (www.guilford.com/skillstraining-manual) provide written
instructions. It is important, however, to note that you do not have to
repeat every word on each handout during a skills session. The written
handouts function as cues for your teaching and as reminders for clients
of what and how to practice the skillful behaviors when they are not in
skills sessions. For example, many participants have commented that they
carry their skills binders with them, so that when they forget what
skill to use or how to use a skill, they can look it up on the handouts.
One of our clients once told his wife during an argument that she had to
wait a minute while he went out to check his skills book. Within
sessions, many of the handouts are designed to encourage participants to
check off goals and the new behaviors they plan to practice. Handouts
also provide a place for clients to take notes. For many clients, this
latter function is particularly important. When I have updated handouts
and tried to replace old handouts with new ones, clients routinely want
to keep their old ones (as well as their old, filledout worksheets).

Modeling Modeling can be provided by trainers, other clients, or other
people in a client's environment, as well as by audio or video
recordings, films, or printed material. Any procedure that provides a
client with examples of appropriate alternative responses is a form of
modeling. The advantage of a skills trainer's providing the modeling is
that the situation and materials can be tailored to fit a particular
client's needs. There are a number of ways to model skilled behavior.
In-­session role playing (with the skills trainer as a participant) can
be used to demonstrate appro-

priate interpersonal behavior. When events between a trainer and the
client arise that are similar to events the client encounters in his or
her natural environment, the trainer can model handling such situations
in effective ways. The skills trainer can also use self-talk (speaking
aloud) to model coping self-­statements, self-­instructions, or
restructuring of problematic expectations and beliefs. For example, the
trainer may say, "OK, here's what I would say to myself: 'I'm
overwhelmed. What's the first thing I do when I'm overwhelmed? Break
down the situation into steps and make a list. Do the first thing on the
list.' " Telling stories, relating historical events, or providing
allegorical examples (see Chapter 7 of the main DBT text) can often be
useful in demonstrating alternative life strategies. Finally,
self-­disclosure can be used to model adaptive behavior, especially if a
skills trainer has encountered problems in living similar to those a
client is currently encountering. Particularly useful are well-told
dramatic and/or humorous teaching stories based on a skills trainer's
running into a problem and then figuring out how to use skills to solve
the problem. In our experience, clients love these stories, tell them to
others, and---­because they often remember a skills trainer's stories
better than the handouts---use the stories to remind themselves of how
to use the skills. As I have said many times in my program, "If you want
to get to know our skills trainers really well, just watch them teach
skills. You will find out how they used skills to overcome almost all
problems in their lives." This tactic is discussed at length in Chapter
12 of the main DBT text, and careful attention to the guidelines listed
there is recommended. All of the modeling techniques described above, of
course, can also be used in a group context by members modeling for one
another. The ideal is for one group member to demonstrate in front of
the whole group how to handle a situation skillfully. The more
comfortable group members are with one another and with the group
leader, the easier it is to induce them to act as models. Humor and
flattery can be great aids here. In addition to in-­session modeling, it
can be useful to have clients observe the behavior and responses of
competent people in their own environments. The behaviors that they
observe can then be discussed in sessions and practiced by everyone. The
skills training handouts provide models of how to use specific skills.
Biographies, autobiographies, and novels about people who have coped
with similar problems provide new ideas as well. It is always important
to

4. Skills Training Treatment Targets and Procedures • 69

discuss with the clients any behaviors modeled by the skills trainers or
other clients, or presented as models outside of therapy, to be sure
that the clients are observing the relevant responses. One goal of the
skills training sessions is to impart information about particular
coping strategies to participants. A second, equally important goal is
to elicit from the participants rules and strategies for effective
coping that they have learned in the particular situations they
encounter. Thus skills training should be taught so that the
instructional material is augmented as a result of each discussion.
Participants should be encouraged to take notes and to expand the
handouts and worksheets furnished during sessions with their own and
other participants' ideas. Whenever a particularly good strategy is
presented in a session, all (including the skills training leaders)
should be instructed to write it down in the appropriate space on their
handouts or worksheets. The strategy should then be included in practice
and review, just as are strategies presented initially by the leaders.

Skill Strengthening Once skilled behavior has been acquired, skill
strengthening is used to shape, refine, and increase the likelihood of
its use. Without reinforced practice, a skill cannot be learned; this
point cannot be emphasized too much, since skill practice is effortful
behavior and directly counteracts the tendencies of individuals with
disordered emotion regulation to employ a passive behavior style.

Behavioral Rehearsal "Behavioral rehearsal" is any procedure in which a
client practices responses to be learned. This can be done in
interactions with trainers or other clients, and in simulated or in vivo
situations. Any skilled behaviors---verbal sequences, nonverbal actions,
patterns of thinking or cognitive problem solving, and some components
of physiological and emotional responses---can, in principle, be
practiced. Practice can be either "overt" or "covert." Covert practice
is practicing the requisite response in imagination and is discussed
further below. Overt practice is behavioral rehearsal; various forms are
possible. For example, in a group context, group members may role-play
problematic situations (together or with the leaders), so that each
member can practice responding appropriately. To learn to

control physiological responses, clients may practice relaxing during a
session. When clients are learning the skill of checking the facts, the
leaders can start a round robin and ask each client to generate a new
interpretation of facts about an event. When specific problems are
presented, clients can be encouraged to problem-solve and/or to describe
how they would cope ahead with the problem situation. When clients are
learning radical acceptance, they can be instructed to write down the
important and less important things in their lives they need to accept
on the worksheet provided, and then share what they have written with
the group. Covert response practice may also be an effective form of
skill strengthening. It may be more effective than overt methods for
teaching more complex skills, and it is also useful when a client
refuses to engage in overt rehearsal. Whereas clients can be asked to
practice emotion regulation generally, "emotional behavior" cannot be
practiced directly. That is, clients cannot practice getting angry,
feeling sad, or experiencing joy. Instead, they have to practice
specific components of emotions (changing facial expressions, generating
thoughts that elicit or inhibit emotions, changing muscle tension,
etc.). In my experience, adults with emotion dysregulation rarely like
behavioral rehearsal, especially when it is done in front of others.
Thus a fair amount of cajoling and shaping will be needed. If a client
won't role-play an interpersonal situation, for example, a skills
trainer can try talking him or her through a dialogue ("Then what could
you say?"). The client can also be asked to try practicing just part of
a new skill, so that it is not overwhelming. The essence of the message
is that in order to be different, people must practice acting
differently. Some trainers do not like behavioral rehearsal either,
especially when it requires them to role-play with the clients. For
trainers who feel shy or uncomfortable, the best solution is for them to
practice role playing with members of their DBT therapist consultation
team. At other times, trainers resist role playing because they do not
want to push rehearsal on clients. These trainers may not be aware of
the wealth of data indicating that behavioral rehearsal is related to
therapeutic improvement.

Response Reinforcement Trainers' reinforcement of clients' responses is
one of the most powerful means of shaping and strengthening skilled
behavior. Many individuals have lived

70 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

in environments that overuse punishment. They often expect negative,
punishing feedback from the world in general and their therapists in
particular, and apply self-­punishing strategies almost exclusively in
trying to shape their own behavior. Over the long run, skill
reinforcement by trainers can modify the clients' self-image in a
positive manner, increase their use of skilled behavior, and enhance
their sense that they can control positive outcomes in their lives. One
of the benefits of group therapy over individual therapy is that when a
group leader actively and obviously reinforces a skilled behavior in one
group member, the same behavior is vicariously reinforced among all
other group members (if they are attending). In other words, this
provides "more bang for the buck." Moreover, group therapy can be very
powerful when group members become adept at reinforcing skilled
behaviors in one another. The techniques of providing appropriate
reinforcement are discussed extensively in Chapter 10 of the main DBT
text. Those principles are very important and should be reviewed
thoroughly. Note that "reinforcement" refers to all consequences or
contingencies that increase the probability of a behavior. Although
reinforcers are typically thought of as generally positive, desirable,
or rewarding events, they need not be. A reinforcer is anything an
individual will change his or her behavior to get or to have removed. A
positive reinforcer is a positive event that is added, and a negative
reinforcer is a negative event that is taken away. Reinforcers can be
naturally occurring consequences of behavior, or arbitrary events
determined by the individual providing the reinforcement, or (better
yet) negotiated with the individual who is being reinforced.
Identification of concrete reinforcers is necessary for each individual
client. In our groups, we use both natural and arbitrary reinforcers.
For example, individuals who complete worksheets between sessions get
one sticker (an arbitrary positive reinforcer) per page, and if they use
the skill but don't write it down on the worksheet they get half of a
sticker; two half stickers get one complete sticker. If they complete
all of the worksheets assigned for homework, they also avoid being asked
assessment questions about the missing homework. In our experience, many
clients will work at homework just to avoid being questioned about how
it was that they did not do the homework. We also reinforce participants
with one sticker if they arrive on time for skills training. Generally
we keep on hand a large number of stickers of all kinds; we provide
favored stickers if

financially feasible. We have no research data on our sticker strategy,
but we have definitely noticed an improvement in homework completion
since we put the policy in place. What is important is that once you
have outlined specifically and clearly what behaviors are required for
specific reinforcers, you must stick to your decisions and not reinforce
behavior that does not meet the criteria you have clearly identified. It
is equally important not to skip analyzing failures to do homework
because you are worried about how an individual will react. See the
section on managing homework review later in this chapter for more on
this topic. If no one or only a few individuals consistently meet
criteria for reinforcement, then you need either to change your criteria
for it or to consider switching to shaping as a strategy. Skills
trainers need to stay alert and notice client behaviors that represent
improvement, even if these make the trainers rather uncomfortable. For
example, teaching clients interpersonal skills to use with their
parents, and then punishing or ignoring those same skills when the
clients use them in a training session, is not therapeutic. Encouraging
clients to think for themselves, but then punishing or ignoring them
when they disagree with a trainer, is not therapeutic. Stressing that
"not fitting in" in all circumstances is not a disaster and that
distress can be tolerated, and then not tolerating clients when they do
not fit comfortably into a trainer's schedule or preconceived notions of
how individuals with emotion dysregulation act, is not therapeutic.

Feedback and Coaching "Feedback" is the provision of information to
clients about their performance. Feedback should pertain to performance,
not to the motives presumably leading to the performance. This point is
very important. An unfortunate factor in the lives of many individuals
with severe emotion dysregulation is that people rarely give them
feedback about their behavior that is uncontaminated with
interpretations about their presumed motives and intent. When the
presumed motives do not fit, the individuals often discount or are
distracted from the valuable feedback they may be getting about their
behavior. Feedback should be behaviorally specific; that is, a skills
trainer should tell the client exactly what he or she is doing that
seems to indicate either continuing problems or improvement. Telling
clients that they are manipulating, expressing a need to control,
overreacting,

4. Skills Training Treatment Targets and Procedures • 71

clinging, or acting out is simply not helpful if there are not clear
behavioral referents for the terms. This is, of course, especially true
when a trainer has pin-­ pointed a problem behavior correctly but is
making inaccurate motivational inferences. Many arguments between
clients and trainers arise out of just this inaccuracy. The role and use
of interpretation in DBT are discussed extensively in Chapter 9 of the
main DBT text. Learning to tell the difference between behaviors
observed and interpretations about behavior is also an important part of
the mindfulness "what" skill of describing (see Mindfulness Handout 4
for a description of the "what" skills). A skills trainer must attend
closely to a client's behavior (within sessions or self-­reported) and
select those responses on which to give feedback. At the beginning of
skills training, the client may do little that appears competent; the
trainer is usually well advised at this point to give feedback on a
limited number of response components, even though other deficits could
be commented upon. Feedback on more may lead to stimulus overload and/or
discouragement about the rate of progress. A response-­ shaping paradigm
should be used, with feedback, coaching, and reinforcement designed to
encourage successive approximations to the goal of effective performance
(see Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 20, as well as Chapter 10 of
the main DBT text). Individuals with disordered emotion regulation often
desperately want feedback about their behavior, but at the same time are
sensitive to negative feedback. The solutions here are for trainers to
surround negative feedback with positive feedback, to normalize skills
deficits by telling stories about themselves or others who have had the
same problems, and/or to cheerlead with encouraging statements. Treating
clients as too fragile to deal with negative feedback does them no
favor. An important part of feedback is giving clients information about
the effects of their behavior on their skills trainers; this is
discussed more extensively in Chapter 12 of the main DBT text.
"Coaching" is combining feedback with instructions. It is telling a
client how a response is discrepant from the criterion of skilled
performance and how it might be improved. Clinical practice suggests
that the "permission" to behave in certain ways that is implicit in
coaching may sometimes be all a client needs to accomplish changes in
behavior. Coaching is ordinarily integrated into homework review. It is
also used when trainers are helping clients apply skills they are
learning to their everyday lives, and

when problem behaviors show up during skills training sessions.

Skill Generalization DBT does not assume that skills learned in therapy
will necessarily generalize to situations in everyday life outside of
therapy. Therefore, it is very important that skills trainers actively
encourage this transfer of skills. There are a number of specific
procedures that skills trainers can use as well, as described below.

Between-­Session Consultation If clients are unable to apply new skills
in their natural environment, they should be encouraged to get
consultation from their individual therapists, case managers,
counselors, or from supportive family members (particularly if family
members are also learning DBT skills); and from one another between
sessions. Skills trainers can give these individuals lessons on how to
provide appropriate coaching. In some areas, crisis line personnel may
also be able to coach DBT skills. On residential, inpatient, and day
treatment units, clients can be encouraged to seek assistance from staff
members when they are having difficulty. Another technique is to provide
a unit behavioral consultant with regular office hours. This
consultant's task is to help clients apply their new skills to everyday
life.

Review of Session Video Recordings If possible, video recordings of
skills training sessions should be made. The videos can then be reviewed
by clients between sessions if there is a room available where they can
come and watch them. (Because of confidentiality concerns, it is
important for clients not to take videos out of your clinical setting.)
There are several benefits to clients in watching video sessions. First,
clients are often unable to attend to much of what transpires during
skills training sessions because of substance use prior to sessions,
high emotional arousal during sessions, dissociation, or other
concentration difficulties accompanying depression and anxiety. Thus
clients may improve their retention of material offered during the
sessions by viewing the session videos. Second, clients may gain
important insights from viewing themselves and their interactions with
others. Such insights often help clients understand

72 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

and improve their own interpersonal skills. Third, many clients report
that watching a skills training video can be very helpful when they are
feeling overwhelmed, panicked, or unable to cope between sessions.
Simply watching a video, especially if the client can watch one of a
session where a needed skill was taught, has an effect similar to that
of having an additional session. Skills trainers should encourage use of
the videos for these purposes.

Use of DBT Web-Based Resources, DVDs, and DBT Skills Apps Over the years
I have developed a series of skills training videos that clients can
either buy or borrow to take home and watch. My experience teaching DBT
skills has been that even when I am the skills leader, participants
often also like watching me teach the same skill on a video. At times
watching them, I have thought my own videos are better than me. There
are now many self-help websites for DBT skills; many of these give DBT
skills instructions, as well as examples of using them in daily life.
Smartphone apps on DBT are proliferating as well; most of these apps are
set up to provide mobile coaching in skills use. Look up DBT apps on
your carrier. My online video and audio recordings can be found in a
number of places. Try the video page of the Behavioral Tech website
(http://behavioraltech. org/products/list.cfm?category=Videos), or look
up "Linehan DBT videos" and "DBT self-help" on your search engine, on
YouTube, or on iTunes.

In Vivo Behavioral Rehearsal: Homework Assignments Homework assignments
are keyed to the specific behavioral skills currently being taught. It
is advantageous if a skills trainer or a client can also get the
client's individual therapist to use some of the homework assignments
and accompanying worksheets throughout therapy, or on an as-­needed
basis. This is always done in standard DBT. For example, one worksheet
focuses on identifying and labeling emotions and takes clients through a
series of steps to help them clarify what they are feeling. The
individual therapist may suggest that a client use this form whenever he
or she is confused or overwhelmed by emotions. The website for this book
(www.­guilford. com/skills-training-manual) contains multiple worksheets
covering each of the DBT behavioral skills but skills trainers and
individual therapists

can also revise these to fit either their clients' or their own personal
preferences and needs.

Use of Assignment Worksheets and Diary Cards The first half of every
skills training session is devoted to review of homework, as described
in Chapter 3. This is how trainers check on clients' behavioral progress
(or lack of it) between sessions and provide necessary feedback and
coaching. It is essential that homework review, including providing
individualized feedback and coaching, not be skipped. When review is
skipped, clients are not reinforced for their practice, and over time
practice is likely to drop off. When review is limited to what skills
were practiced, and individual feedback and coaching on skills use are
skipped, little may be learned. This is equivalent to a piano teacher's
checking to see that the student practiced during the week, but never
listening to the student play the piece that was practiced. Little
progress can be expected when such is the case. The primary method of
tracking skills practice is by reviewing the worksheets assigned at the
previous session. DBT diary cards should also be reviewed when clients
are in DBT skills training only (i.e., are not in an individual therapy
where skills use is routinely evaluated). The DBT diary card (Figure
4.1) lists the most important DBT skills taught. The top half of the
diary card is reviewed in individual therapy, and the bottom half can be
reviewed in both individual therapy and skills training sessions. For
clients in a skills-only program and for parents in a multifamily skills
group, use only the bottom half of the diary card, which covers some of
the most important skills. Next to each skill is a space for daily
recording of whether or not the client actually practiced the skill that
day. (See Table 4.2 for instructions in helping a client to use the
diary cards.) If multiple members of a family are filling out the diary
card each week, it can be useful for them to attach the cards to the
kitchen refrigerator or some other public place. In addition, diary
sheets can be created for each skills training module and given to
clients as the need arises. A weekly review of the diary card is
important, because if only the previous week's homework is reviewed,
there is a danger that skills taught previously will drop off the
client's radar and not be practiced. Not bringing in the diary card
(when diary cards are reviewed), or reporting no practice effort or
skills application, is viewed as a problem in self-­management and is
ana-

Dialectical Behavior Therapy Diary Card

Name:

Filled Out in Session? Y N

Circle Start Day Day of week

Highest Rating for Each Day

Highest Urge To:

Commit SelfUse Emotion Physical Suicide Harm Drugs Misery Misery 0--5

0--5

0--5

0--5

0--5

How Often Did You Fill Out? Daily 2--3× 4--6x Once

Drugs/Medications

Joy

Alcohol

0--5

# 

Illegal Drugs

What?

# 

Actions

p.r.n./OverMeds. as the-Counter SelfPrescribed Meds. Harm Lied

What?

Y/N

# 

What?

Y/N

# 

Last Day Filled Out: Month Year Day Emotions Optional

Used Skills\* 0--7

MON TUE WED THUR FRI SAT SUN \*Used Skills 0 = Not thought about or used
5 = Tried, could use them, helped 1 = Thought about, not used, didn't
want to 6 = Automatically used them, 2 = Thought about, not used, wanted
to didn't help 3 = Tried but couldn't use them 7 = Automatically used
them, 4 = Tried, could do them but they didn't help helped

Med. Change This Week

Homework Assigned and Results This Week:

Coming into Session (0--5)

Urges to:

Belief I Can Change or Regulate My:

Quit Therapy

Emotions

Use Drugs

Actions

Commit Suicide

Thoughts

Coming into Session (0--5)

Skills Focus This Week:

DBT Diary Card

Filled out this card?

DEAR (Describe, Express, Assert, Reinforce) MAN (Mindful, Appear
confident, Negotiate) GIVE (Gentle, Interested, Validate, Easy manner)
FAST (Fair, no Apologies, Stick to values, Truthful) ABC (Accumulate
positive emotions, Build mastery, Cope ahead) PLEASE (Care: PhysicaL
ills, Eating, Avoid mood-altering substances, Sleep, Exercise) TIP
(Temperature, Intense Exercise, Paced Breathing, Paired muscle
relaxation)

Mindfulness

Interpersonal Effectiveness

Emotion Regulation

Daily

2--3×

4--6x Once

In session

Check skills; circle days skill was practiced

Wise mind

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Observe: Just notice

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Describe: Put words on, just the facts

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Participate: Enter into the experience

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Nonjudgmentally

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

One-mindfully: Present moment

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Effectively: Focus on what works

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

DEAR

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

MAN

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

GIVE

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

FAST

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Walked the middle path; Dialectics

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Validation

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Strategies to change behavior

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Checked the facts

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Did opposite action

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Problem-solved

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Accumulated positive emotions A

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Built mastery B

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Coped ahead C

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Reduced vulnerability: PLEASE

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Mindfulness of current emotion CRISIS SURVIVAL

Distress Tolerance

STOP skill

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Pros and cons

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

TIP

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Distracted

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Self-soothed

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Improved the moment

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

REALITY

Radical acceptance

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

ACCEPT

Half-smiling, Willing Hands

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

Willingness, Mindfulness of Current Thoughts

MON

TUE

WED

THUR

FRI

SAT

SUN

FIGURE 4.1. Front (top) and back (bottom) of a DBT diary card. The
entire back half of the card is used in skills training sessions; the
front half is used in individual therapy except for the "Used Skills"
column, which is also employed in skills training. Should be printed on
4" × 6" card stock (front and back). 73

TABLE 4.2. Instructions for Helping a Client Complete the DBT Diary Card

1.  Name: Put here the client's name, initials, or clinical ID.
2.  Filled Out In Session? If the card was filled out during the
    session, have the client circle "Y" for "yes"; otherwise circle "N"
    for "no."
3.  How Often Did You Fill Out \[This Side\]? In the past week, did the
    client fill out the card daily, 2--3 times, or once?
4.  Date Started: Ask the client to note the first date the card was
    started, including year.
5.  Day of Week: Instruct the client to record information for each day
    of the week.
6.  Using the 0--5 Rating Scale: You'll notice that many of the columns
    require the client to record a numerical value from 0 to 5. This is
    a subjective, continuous scale intended to communicate the client's
    experience along a variety of behaviors or experiences. The anchor
    point 0 represents the absence of a particular experience (e.g., no
    urge); the anchor point 5 refers to the strongest degree of the
    experience (e.g., strongest urges imaginable).
7.  Urges to . . . : The "Commit Suicide" column refers to any urges to
    commit suicide. The "Self-Harm" column refers to urges to engage
    self-harm or in any self-­injurious behaviors. The "Use Drugs" column
    refers to use of any drug of abuse (e.g., over-the-­ counter meds.,
    prescription meds., street/illicit drugs)---or, for clients not
    using drugs to any urge to escape.
8.  Highest Ratings refers to ratings of intensity of emotional misery,
    intensity of physical misery or pain, and degree of joy (or
    happiness) experienced during the day. Have the client rate each
    emotion daily, using the 0--5 rating scale.
9.  Drugs/Medications: For alcohol, have the client put down how many
    drinks and what type of alcohol (e.g., "3" for 3 beers). For illegal
    drugs, have the client specify the type of drug used (e.g., heroin)
    and how much was used. For p.r.n./over-the-­counter medications, have
    the client put down how many doses and what type of medication was
    taken. For meds. as prescribed, if taken as prescribed, have the
    client put a "Y" for yes; if not taken as prescribed (either too
    much or too little, or some medications but not others), have the
    client put down an "N" for no. • Write "ditto" marks in subsequent
    specify boxes, to indicate use is the same as the previous day. • An
    Easier Way: The client can use horizontal lines through rows and
    vertical lines through columns to indicate no use. For instance, if
    the 74

client didn't use any prescription meds. this week, a vertical line down
the "Y/N" column under "Meds. as Prescribed" is OK. Or if the client
didn't use alcohol, over-the-­counter meds., or prescription meds. on
Wednesday, then a horizontal line may be drawn through the corresponding
boxes for Wednesday. 10. Actions . . . : The column "Self-Harm" refers
to any intentional self-harm or suicide attempt. The "Lied" column
refers to all overt and covert behaviors that mask telling the truth.
It's important for the client to assume a nonjudgmental stance in
completing this. Instruct the client to put the number of lies told per
day in the column, and place an \* in this column to signify lying on
the diary card. The Used Skills (0--7) column is used to report the
highest skill usage for the day. When making this rating, the client
should refer to the 0--7 "Used Skills" table just under the columns. The
last two columns are optional. Two columns are for tracking specific
emotions, and two are for any other behaviors you and the client want to
track. Note that there is not a rating scale for these, so when you and
the client are deciding what to track, also decide how to track it---for
example, with a "Y," "N," a 0--5 or 0--7 scale, or by describing what
and how much (i.e., "What?" and #). 11. Med. Change This Week: Instruct
the client to write down any changes in prescribed medications. These
changes may consist of modifications in the dosage (increase or
decrease) of the medications (e.g., increase from 5 mg to 10 mg; a
decrease from 20 mg to 10 mg), the dropping of a medication, or the
addition of a new medication. If there is insufficient room, the client
should describe these on a separate piece of paper. 12. Homework
Assigned and Results This Week: Have the client record any behaviors
assigned for the week, describe what was done, and indicate what the
results were. 13. Urges to Use (0--5) and Urges to Quit Therapy (0--5):
Have the client rate the intensity of current urges to engage in these
behaviors, at the beginning of the session. 14. Skills Focus This Week:
Instruct the client to write down any skills that are specifically
focused on, used, or practiced during the week. This space can also be
used to write down what skills need more focus during the week. 15.
Belief I Can Change or Regulate . . . : Using the same 0--5 rating
scale, rate your belief regarding your ability to change or regulate
your emotions, actions, and thoughts as you start your therapy session.

4. Skills Training Treatment Targets and Procedures • 75

lyzed and discussed as such. The problem should be framed in such a way
that whatever skills are currently being taught can be applied.

Creating an Environment That Reinforces Skilled Behavior Individuals
differ in styles of self-­regulation. On the continuum whose poles are
internal self-­regulation and external environmental regulation, many
individuals with high dysregulation of emotions and associated actions
and thoughts are near the environmental pole. Many therapists seem to
believe that the internal self-­regulation pole of the continuum is
inherently better or more mature, and spend a fair amount of therapy
time trying to make individuals with emotion dysregulation more
self-­regulated. Although DBT does not suggest the converse---that
environmental regulation styles are preferable---it does suggest that
going with the clients' strength is likely to be easier and more
beneficial in the long run. Thus, once behavioral skills are in place,
clients should be taught how to maximize the tendency of their natural
environments to reinforce skilled over unskilled behaviors. This may
include teaching them how to create structure, how to make public
instead of private commitments, how to find communities and lifestyles
that support their new behaviors, and how to elicit reinforcement from
others for skilled rather than unskilled behaviors. (See Distress
Tolerance Handouts 19 and 20.) This is not to say that clients should
not be taught self-­regulation skills; rather, the types of
self-­regulation skills taught should be keyed to their strengths.
Written self-­monitoring with a prepared diary form, for example, is
preferable to trying to observe behavior each day and make a mental note
of it. Keeping alcohol out of the house is preferable to trying a
self-talk strategy to inhibit getting out the bottle. It is easier to
diet if a client eats at home rather than out at restaurants that serve
yummy but huge meal portions. Using an alarm to wake up can be more
effective than counting on oneself to wake up when needed. A final point
needs to be made here. Sometimes clients' newly learned skills do not
generalize because out in the real world clients punish their own
behavior. This is usually because their behavioral expectations for
themselves are so high that they simply never reach the criteria for
reinforcement. This pattern must change if generalization and progress
are to occur. Problems with self-­reinforcement and self-­punishment are
discussed more extensively

in Chapters 3, 8, and 10 of the main DBT text; the behavioral validation
strategies described in that text's Chapter 8 and in this manual should
be used in skills training as well (see also Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handouts 18 and 19). I discuss these topics further in the skills module
content chapters of this manual (Chapters 7--10).

Family and Couple Sessions One way to maximize generalization is to have
individuals from the clients' social community learn the DBT skills.
Usually, these will be members of the clients' families or their spouses
or partners. In adolescent DBT programs, for example, as noted
previously, skills training ordinarily includes parents or other family
care providers. Trainers can give clients copies of the skills handouts
to take home to teach their family members and/or friends the skills.
Thus all members of a family can be learning the same sets of skills,
and can practice together and coach each other. Family members of
clients with emotion dysregulation have been very receptive to this type
of therapy. Skills training can also be offered for friends and family
members of adults who are in the DBT treatment program. In these
situations, clients and their family members may be in separate groups.

Use of Fading Principles At the beginning of skills training, the
trainers model, instruct, reinforce, give feedback, and coach the
clients for using skills both within the therapy sessions and in the
natural environment. If skillful behavior in the everyday environment is
to become independent of the trainers' influence, however, the trainers
must gradually fade out use of these procedures, particularly
instructions and reinforcement. The goal here is to fade skills training
procedures to an intermittent schedule, such that the trainers are
providing less frequent instructions and coaching than clients can
provide for themselves, and less modeling, feedback, and reinforcement
than clients obtain from their natural environments.

Managing Review of Skills Practice Homework It is important to remember
that DBT is a problem-­ focused treatment with two core intervention
strat-

76 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

egies: validation and problem solving. Both are important in managing
homework review. When trainers are reviewing homework, the strategy is
to validate when the assigned skills are practiced correctly and
effectively---and to problem-solve when no homework is done, the skills
are not practiced correctly and/or effectively, and/or problems in using
the skills are identified. Even for clients who are eager to learn, who
read the skills book at home, and who practice the skills religiously,
problems in correctly and effectively using the skills can arise. Thus
it is important not to cut this review time in favor of more time for
teaching new skills in the second half of the session. Problem solving
is a two-stage process: (1) understanding the problem at hand
(behavioral analysis) and (2) attempting to generate new, effective use
of the skills (solution analysis). Understanding the problem at hand
requires defining problems in using the skills, highlighting patterns
and implications of current skills use, and developing hypotheses about
factors interfering with effective use of the skills. The second stage,
that of targeting change, requires providing feedback on correct
implementation of skills when needed; developing solutions to the
problems that have arisen in using skills; and encouraging efforts to
practice the skills by providing the rationale for using skills and
troubleshooting implementation of solutions. The aim of this repeated
focus on analyzing and problem-­solving difficulties is not only to get
clients to begin using the skills effectively, but also to get clients
to begin using the problem-­ solving strategies with one another and
eventually with themselves. To a large extent, skills training is a
general case of solution analysis. Skills are presented as practical
solutions to life's problems, and the potential effectiveness of various
skills in particular situations is discussed during each meeting.
Perhaps more than any other set of strategies, solution analysis
utilizes the power of a group context. Each member should be encouraged
to offer solution ideas to other group members and to help develop
strategies to solve the problems described. For example, a member who is
having trouble paying attention during group sessions and getting
homework assignments into short-term memory can be helped to think of
ways to attend more closely. The group as a whole can almost always be
counted on to come up with many solutions to not remembering to practice
during the week. Difficulties in selecting the right skill to use or

in applying a skill in a particular situation are further opportunities
for group solution analysis. Almost always, someone will already have
solved the problem at hand for him- or herself; thus the group leaders
should be especially careful in the solution analysis phase not to jump
in with solutions before eliciting possible solutions from other group
members. However, they should not be reluctant to offer a solution or a
particular application of a skill, even if other group members have
offered other ideas. Managing the sharing of between-­session practice
requires enormous sensitivity on the part of the leaders. The tasks here
are to prod each client gently to analyze his or her own behavior; to
validate difficulties; and to counter tendencies toward judging
negatively and holding the self to impossibly high standards. At the
same time, leaders help clients develop more effective skill strategies
for the coming week if needed. The leaders must be adept at alternating
attention between the previous week's behaviors and in-­session attempts
to describe, analyze, and solve problems. Shame, humiliation,
embarrassment, self-­ hatred, anger, and fear of criticism or looking
"stupid" are common emotions interfering with the ability to engage in
and profit from homework review. Deft handling of these emotions is the
key to using practice sharing therapeutically; it involves combining
validating strategies with problem-­solving strategies, and irreverent
communication with reciprocal communication. (See Chapter 5 of this
manual for more on validation and communication strategies.) The first
step in practice sharing is for each group member to share with the
group the particular skills he or she used (and the success or failure
of these efforts), as well as the situations the skills were used in
during the previous week. Clients will inevitably present their
situations and/or skill use in very general and vague terms at first.
They will also often describe their inferences of others' motives or
emotions, or their judgmental beliefs, as if these inferences and
beliefs are facts. The task of a skills trainer is to engage a client in
the strategy of behavioral analysis. In other words, the task is to get
a client to describe (using the mindfulness "what" skill of describing)
the particular environmental and behavioral events leading up to the
problem situation and to the successful or unsuccessful attempt to use
the skills. Obviously, providing such a description requires that a
client be able to observe during the week. Often clients have great
difficulty describing what

4. Skills Training Treatment Targets and Procedures • 77

happened because they are not astute observers; however, with repeated
practice and repeated reinforcement over the weeks, their observation
and description skills tend to improve. A minute description allows a
trainer to assess whether a client in fact used the skills
appropriately. If the client has practiced and the skills have worked,
he or she should be supported and encouraged by the leaders. The client
models for other clients how they can use those same skills for similar
problems. Thus the leaders should try briefly to elicit from other group
members examples of either similar problems or similar skill usage to
foster this generalization. Client-to-­ client praise and encouragement
are reinforced. It is very important to get each client to describe in
detail his or her use of the skills in that particular week's
problematic situations. The same amount of attention to detail must be
given to the week's successes as to the week's difficulties. In
addition, over time the leaders can use such information to identify the
client's patterns in skill usage. The insight strategies can also be
used. During homework sharing, it is very important to look carefully
for patterns in situational problems, as well as typical responses to
such problems. Highlighting idiosyncratic patterns can be especially
helpful in future behavioral analyses. This is especially important if a
client is consistently reporting only one skill strategy. For example,
in one of my groups I had a client who always tried to change problem
situations as his primary method of emotion regulation. Although his
skills at problem-­ solving situations were excellent and commendable,
nonetheless it was also important for him to learn other methods (e.g.,
tolerating the situation, distracting himself). Skills trainers should
comment on any rigid patterns that they see, as well as on effective
patterns or skills that the clients use. Clients' observations and
comments about their own or one another's skillful patterns should, of
course, be noted and reinforced. (It is essential to follow the
guidelines provided in the insight section in Chapter 9 of the main DBT
text.) Not every problem situation can be changed. My experience is that
when given a limited amount of time to share, clients with disordered
emotion regulation will almost always share their successes in using
skills, and will rarely want to describe their problems and failures.
Thus listening carefully to the successes is even more important than it
might be with other populations.

When the Skills Did Not Help If a client could not use the skills being
taught, or reports using the skills but not getting any benefits from
them, the leaders use problem-­solving strategies such as behavioral
analysis to help the client analyze what happened, what went wrong, and
how he or she could use the skills better next time. It is extremely
important at this point to lead the client through a detailed
examination of just what did occur. This can be torturous, because
almost always (especially during the first several months of therapy)
clients are fearful of skills trainers' and other members' judgments,
and are also judging themselves in negative ways. Thus they can be
expected to be very inhibited. Sometimes a client will jump right in
with a notion of why a skill didn't work or why he or she couldn't apply
it, without examining the actual events. These explanations are
frequently pejorative and involve name calling (e.g., "I am just
stupid"). Or a client may accept without question the premise that his
or her situation is hopeless and skills will never help. Emotionally
dysregulated people are rarely able to analyze objectively and calmly
what led up to a particular problem, especially when the problem is
their own behavior. Obviously, if they cannot conduct such an analysis,
attempts to solve the problem are probably doomed from the start. Many
are unable to see the critical role of environmental context in behavior
and persist in viewing all behavior as a function of internal motives,
needs, and the like. (It is, of course, essential that skills trainers
not collude with this view.) Thus the skills trainer's task here is to
engage the client in a behavioral analysis; to model nonpejorative,
nonjudgmental behavioral evaluations; and (in a group context) to get
both the individual and the group engaged in the process so that the
same skills can be used in other problem situations. (How to do this,
where to start and stop, and roadblocks to avoid are described in detail
in Chapter 9 of the main DBT text.) Over time, it is important to
encourage and reinforce clients in helping one another analyze and solve
difficult problems.

When a Client Has Difficulty with Homework During sharing, a client will
often report that he or she did not practice at all during the preceding
week. It would be an error to take this comment at

78 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

face value. On close examination, we often find that the client did
practice; he or she just did not actually solve the problem. The
discussion then turns to the issue of shaping and setting appropriate
expectations. Often we find that the client does not have a complete
understanding of how to practice the skill assigned. Or we may find that
the person does not understand many of the skills discussed previously,
but has been afraid to ask questions. In these instances, both the
self-­censoring of questions and the problem in homework practice should
be discussed. Whenever possible, it is useful to ask other clients to
help the person having difficulty. In the case of interpersonal
effectiveness, we may ask another client to role-play how he or she
would cope with the situation. Emotion regulation and distress tolerance
do not lend themselves to demonstration, but other clients can share how
they have coped (or would cope) with similar situations. Sometimes a
client reports that he or she tried to use the skills but could not
carry them out. Chaos in the environment, lack of skills, or not
understanding the assignment or instructions can be important
influences. For example, a client may enter an interpersonal situation
with every intent of applying some of the interpersonal effectiveness
skills learned previously, but then may get confused and forget what to
say or how to respond to a particular remark by the other person. At
other times, a client may report using the skill appropriately, except
that it didn't work. Even the most skilled negotiator cannot always get
what he or she wants; relaxation exercises, even when used correctly, do
not always lead to reduction of anxiety and tension. In these instances,
it is essential to get precise information about what happened. A client
and a trainer may both be tempted to skip this and decide that this
particular skill is not useful for this particular client. Although this
may be true, it may also be true that the client is not applying the
skill in the correct way. At each point in the analysis, the trainer
should be open to almost any problem. No matter what, the trainer should
treat each problem as one to be solved and jump immediately to "How
could you solve that?" Finally, sometimes a client who says he or she
did not practice actually did practice, but either did not realize it or
used skills learned outside skills training. This information can be
missed completely if the patient's experiences during the week are not
explored in enough depth. In general, what works for whom is very
individu-

al. Leaders must be cautious, however, in assuming a skill doesn't fit
the particular client. Inexperienced leaders often give up on a skill
too easily. They may assume that the specific skill is not a good match
for a specific group member when, in actuality, the client has not been
applying the skill properly.

When a Client Did Not Do Any Homework Practice Almost all incidents of
noncompliance with homework assignments (i.e., refusing or forgetting to
practice skills) and of refusal or failure to engage in skills training
activities should elicit an immediate movement into behavioral analysis
with the client involved. The clients' tendency to offer simple
solutions and answers must be counteracted. Common reasons given by
clients for not practicing include not wanting to, not remembering, and
not having an occasion to practice. Rarely can they identify the
situational factors influencing their lack of motivation, failure to
remember, or inability to observe practice opportunities. Individuals
with disordered emotion regulation tend to use punishment, commonly in
the form of self-­denigration, as a form of behavior control. It is, of
course, important that the leaders resist the temptation to collude with
clients in punishing themselves for not practicing. Members who have not
attempted to practice during the preceding week will often not want to
discuss the reason for not practicing and will ask the leaders to go on
to the next person. It is essential that the leaders not be convinced to
do this. The analysis of not doing homework can be very important. In
the case of a person who is avoiding the topic because of fear or shame,
it offers a chance to practice opposite action, a skill taught in the
emotion regulation module. It also offers other group members an
opportunity to practice their own behavior management and
problem-­solving skills within the context of the group. The first step
is to get a precise definition of the behaviors missing, followed by
problem solving to avoid the same problem in the future. (See missing
links analyses in Chapter 6 of this manual for stepby-step
instructions.) Ask the following questions in order: 1. "Did doing your
homework get into shortterm memory?" This means "Were you aware of the
assignment?" If the answer is no, there is no point in trying to solve
any other problem. Non-­awareness

4. Skills Training Treatment Targets and Procedures • 79

may be due to inattention in the session, absence from the session,
and/or not reading or getting the reminder of the homework. If this is
the problem, solutions for how to find out and know the assignment must
be found. If the client says yes, move to the next question. 2. "Were
you willing to do the needed or expected effective behavior?" If the
answer to this question is no, ask what got in the way of willingness to
do effective behaviors. Ideas might include willfulness, feeling
inadequate, or feeling demoralized. Problem-solve what got in the way of
willingness--- for example, to practice radical acceptance, do pros and
cons, or practice opposite action. If the client says yes, move to the
third question. 3. "Did the thought of doing your homework ever come
into your mind?" If no, work on developing ways to get the thought of
homework to come into mind. (Get the group to generate lots of ideas.)
If the answer is yes, move to the fourth question. 4. "What got in the
way of doing your homework once you thought of it?" If "I'll do it
later" showed up, ask whether the thought of doing the homework returned
at a later point. If not, as above, work on how to get the idea to show
up again. If yes, analyze what happened then. If willfulness showed up
("No! I'm not going to do it!"), work on solving that problem. (Be open
to the likelihood that willfulness may stay around for a while.) Don't
use willfulness to treat willfulness.

Analyzing Motivation to Complete Homework Practice A frequent comment
that requires careful analysis is "If I didn't do it, I must not have
wanted to do it." Motivational interpretations are often learned in
previous therapies, even when they have little to do with reality. Even
if the problem is one of motivation, the question of what is interfering
with motivation must be addressed. The most important thing to remember
here is to offer nonpejorative hypotheses and communicate to the client
a nonjudgmental attitude; the client is usually judgmental enough.
Hypotheses that are particularly worthy of exploration include
hopelessness that the skills will do any good; hopelessness that the
client can ever learn the skills; beliefs that he or she doesn't need
the skills and already has them; and beliefs that he or she should have
learned these skills earlier, and therefore is inadequate or stupid for
having to learn them now. Such beliefs probably lead to negative
emotional re-

actions, which the client then flees from. It is very important to
communicate to clients that it is OK to have hopeless beliefs, and that
the skills trainers will not feel invalidated if the clients do not have
perfect trust in them. Although each of these beliefs may be perfectly
reasonable (and should be validated), holding on to the beliefs is
probably not useful, and thus cheerleading (see Chapter 8 of the main
DBT text), cognitive modification (see Chapter 11 of the main DBT text),
and solution analysis (see Chapter 5 of this manual) are in order.
Failures in motivation and in memory offer important opportunities for
the leaders to teach principles of behavioral management and learning.
(See this manual's Chapter 8, especially Section XVII.) The goal over
time is to use these principles to replace the judgmental theories based
on willpower and mental illness that individuals with emotion
dysregulation often hold. Failure to practice is a problem to be solved.

Improving Compliance with Between-­Session Skills Practice I have found
the following strategies useful in helping group members improve the
frequency of skills practice between sessions. 1. Give specific
assignments. When you are assigning homework, give very specific
assignments. In addition, provide a homework assignment calendar for
clients to write down assignments, and worksheets for clients to write
down the results of their practice. Send e-mails, text messages, or
other reminders during the week to remind everyone of the assignments.
2. Give clients a choice of worksheets. On the website for this book,
there are usually at least two worksheets for each assignment. I have
found that clients have very specific likes and dislikes when it comes
to worksheets. Some like to write a lot, and some don't. I have
developed a series of worksheets for almost every skills handout, so
that clients can have a greater sense of control over what they actually
practice and write down. 3. Reinforce completion of homework. This can
be done by giving out a tangible reward that fits the group you are
teaching. We give out one sticker for each worksheet a client completes
between sessions. If for some reason a client did not have access to the
assignment, then filling out any worksheets will be given the same
number of stickers. A secondary

80 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

outcome of this strategy is that it cuts off almost any good reason for
not doing any homework skills practice. If you want to give an arbitrary
reinforcer for homework, such as a sticker, you have to be specific in
telling clients exactly how much practice is needed to get the reward.
Awarding stickers has had a remarkable effect on increasing homework
compliance in our clinic and in other clinics we know of. As noted
previously, clients in our groups love the stickers and often bring in
their favorites to add to our stock. They put them on the outside of
their skills binders. Other groups give out candy. Vouchers that can be
exchanged for a range of tangible rewards can also be effective. As in
programs for substance use disorders, you might be able to get community
merchants to donate to a gift locker to use in these programs. 4. Do not
give the reward if the client did not complete the requisite homework.
This point is critical. Many clients will become very distressed, angry,
sad, or tearful when they do not get a reward. It may seem much easier
just to give the reward anyway, but this is a mistake. Once you do this
several times, the function of the stickers as contingent on doing
homework practice will be lost. Those doing their homework for stickers
may then become distressed. If you want to reinforce other behaviors
(e.g., trying hard), you can give out other rewards. For example, I give
out a verbal "10,000 gold stars" (and sometimes an extravagant "12,000
or 13,000") at intervals whenever someone engages in behavior I want to
be sure to reinforce. Although the stars are purely verbal, clients seem
very willing to work for them. I began doing this in skills groups when
a client petulantly said in a group session that she had heard I give
out gold stars in other settings, and she wanted to know why I never
gave them out in the skills group.

5.  Start the review of homework with one or two who haven't done it.
    Ask at the beginning of the session who has and has not done the
    homework. Start with those who have not done it, and ask the series
    of questions listed above. For the average client, the analysis of
    not doing homework is somewhat aversive, despite your efforts to do
    it in a nonaversive manner. This aversive review of homework
    noncompletion, however, can be very motivating and should not be
    skipped, no matter how much the clients try to get you to skip it.
    However, you can at times end the review as soon as you determine
    that the clients' refusal to proceed or willfulness about it will
    make it difficult to proceed. In general, my policy is to go to the
    next person or topic whenever a client refuses to respond. What I do
    not do is skip asking the client to respond (always in a tone of
    voice that implies I have forgotten that they do not want to be
    asked). In essence, I put clients' requests that I skip them on an
    extinction schedule. The exception here is the person who has made
    it abundantly clear that he or she is not participating in homework
    review or in the group as a whole. With such an individual, I might
    say in homework review, "Are you still not doing homework \[or not
    sharing homework\]?" Or I might say, "Are you still on strike?" If
    there is no answer or the answer is yes, I might go on or I might
    say, "Well, I want you to know my hope springs eternal."
6.  Jump to those who have done homework after analyzing one or two who
    haven't. Do this when more than two out of eight clients have not
    done their homework. Be sure to reinforce any and all homework done.
    Listening to homework reports and getting others in the group to
    listen are crucial here. Give needed feedback, and try to involve
    other group members in discussing homework. Relate one person's use
    of skills or difficulties to those of others in the group when
    possible.

Chapter 5

Application of Fundamental DBT Strategies in Behavioral Skills Training

The overarching strategy in DBT is the emphasis on dialectics at every
turn in treatment. As can be seen in Figure 5.1, core DBT strategies are
designed in pairs, representing acceptance on the one hand and change on
the other. There are five major strategy categories: (1) the overarching
dialectical strategies; (2) core strategies (problem solving vs.
validation); (3) communication style strategies (irreverent
vs. reciprocal); (4) case management strategies
(consultation-to-the-­patient vs. environmental intervention); and (5)
integrative strategies. The core strategies of problem solving and
validation,

together with the dialectical strategies, form the essential components
of DBT. Communication strategies specify interpersonal and communication
styles compatible with the therapy. Case management strategies specify
how the therapist interacts with and responds to the social network in
which the client is enmeshed. As can be seen in Figure 5.2, DBT is a
modular treatment. The key characteristic of a modular treatment is that
the treatment provider can move the treatment strategies within various
treatment modules in and out of treatment as needed. Skills

DIALECTICAL Stylistic Change

Acceptance

Irreverent

Reciprocal

Problem solving

Validation Core

Consultation to the patient

Environmental intervention Team consultation Case management

FIGURE 5.1. Treatment strategies in DBT. From Linehan, M. M. (1993).
Cognitive-­behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New
York: Guilford Press. Copyright 1993 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by
permission. 81

82 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

Behavioral assessment

Contingency management procedures Cognitive modification procedures
Skills training procedures

1.  Paying attention

Dialectical Strategies Change Strategies

Strategy Type

Acceptance Strategies

Irreverence

Core

Validation

Problem solving

Communication style

Reciprocally

Consultation to the patient

Management of environment

Environmental intervention

2.  Reflecting back accurately
3.  Accurately reading the unsaid
4.  Understanding the causes
5.  Acknowledging the inherently valid . . .

Exposure procedures

6.  . . . with equality and authenticity Modularity of Validation
    Strategies

Modularity of Problem-Solving Strategies FIGURE 5.2. Example of
modularity of strategies and procedures.

training procedures are part of the problem-­solving change strategies.
Although not exhaustive, the modules shown in Figure 5.2 represent
treatment strategies that skills trainers routinely use and are
described in more detail later in this chapter. The focus in skills
training is for the client to learn and put into action new skillful
means of responding to problems in living. Although the skills taught
can be divided into change skills and acceptance skills (see Figure
5.3), learning and using new skills nevertheless represents a change on
the part of the client. Integrative strategies outline how to handle
specific problem situations that may come up during skills training,
such as problems in the therapeutic relationship, suicidal behaviors,
therapy-­destroying behaviors, and ancillary treatments. Some of these
strategies have already been discussed in Chapters 3 and 4. A number of
therapist strategies have also been translated into skills for clients
and are discussed further in Chapters 6--10. All the strategies are
discussed in detail in the main DBT text. Skills trainers need to know
them all in order to respond flexibly to new problems that arise. This
chapter reviews the basic DBT strategies and procedures; it also
addresses some of the problems that may arise

specifically in skills training, as well as some of the modifications of
strategies I have found useful, particularly in a group context.

Dialectical Strategies: Maintaining Therapeutic Balance The dialectical
focus in DBT occurs at two levels of therapeutic behavior. At the first
level, a skills trainer must be alert to the dialectical balance
occurring within the treatment environment. In a group setting, each
group member (including each leader) is in a constant state of
dialectical tension at many levels and in many directions. The first set
of tensions consists of those between each individual member and the
group as a whole. From this perspective, the group has an identity of
its own, and each member can react to the group as a whole. Thus, for
example, a member may be acting in dialectical tension with the group's
norms, its beliefs or attitudes, or its "personality." In addition,
insofar as the identity of the group as a whole is both the sum of and
more than its parts, the identity of each individual in the group is in
some aspect defined by his or her relationship to

5. Application of Fundamental DBT Strategies in Behavioral Skills
Training • 83

the group. Because both the identity of the group and the identity of
each individual change over the skills training year, identification of
members with the group and the struggles that evolve with this identity
provide a dialectical tension that can be harnessed for the sake of
therapeutic progress. A second set of tensions consists of those between
each individual pair within the group---­ tensions that can become active
at any moment when two group members interact. A drawback of allowing
members to interact with one another outside the group is that
relationships between members can develop outside the public arena of
the group. Thus the dialectical tensions between one member and another
will often not be apparent to the leaders or other group members.
Overlaying and interfacing with these two levels, so to speak, is a
third set of dialectical tensions between each individual and his or her
unique environment---a context brought into the treatment situation via
long-term memory. The group leaders must be aware of the multiple
tensions impinging on a skills training session at any given time.
Maintaining a therapeutic balance and moving the balance toward
reconciliation and growth are the tasks of the skills trainers. It is
essential here for each trainer to remember that he or she is also a
group member---and thus is also in dialectical tension with the group as
a whole, with the other leader, and with each individual member.
Clearly, the dialectical framework that is necessary here is that of a
dynamic, open system. The system includes not only those present, but
also all external influences that are brought into group

sessions via long-term memory and established behavioral patterns. This
framework will help the group leaders avoid the mistake of always
interpreting members' behavior from the point of view of a closed
system, which assumes that all responses are a direct reaction to events
within sessions. It is far more common, however, for a group activity or
event to precipitate the remembering of events that have occurred
outside sessions. Clients with disordered emotion regulation are often
quite unable to put aside cognitive processing of very stressful events,
to stop ruminating, or to focus on one thing in the moment. It is also a
mistake, on the other hand, for the leaders never to attribute client
behavior to in-­session events. It is this dialectical tension between
and among influential events that the leaders must be attuned to. The
second level of dialectical focus is on teaching and modeling
dialectical thinking as a replacement for dichotomous, either--or,
black-and-white thinking. It is important for both leaders and
co-­leaders to be facile with an array of dialectical techniques.

Specific Dialectical Strategies Dialectical strategies are described in
simple language in the skills handouts on dialectics (Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 15 and 16), and all of the dialectical strategies
are described in detail in Chapter 7 of the main DBT text. Although
trainers will use all of the dialectical strategies at one time or
another, some are particularly useful in skills training.

Mindfulness Acceptance skills

Distress Tolerance

Change skills

Emotion Regulation

Observe Describe Participate Nonjudgmentally

Interpersonal Effectiveness One-mindfully Effectively FIGURE 5.3.
Example of modularity of DBT skills.

84 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

The most common dialectical strategies in DBT are storytelling and
metaphors. The teaching notes for each skill (Chapters 6--10 of this
manual) provide a number of examples but are by no means exhaustive. For
example, at the very start of skills training, the opportunity arises to
enter the paradox of how it can be that everyone is doing the best they
can and simultaneously everyone needs to do better. Entering the paradox
here requires the trainers to refrain from providing rational
explanations; in order to achieve understanding and to move toward
synthesis of the polarities, each person needs to resolve the dilemma
for him- or herself. Playing the devil's advocate is another key
strategy. A trainer presents a propositional statement that is an
extreme version of one of a client's own dysfunctional beliefs, and then
plays the role of devil's advocate to counter the client's attempts to
disprove the extreme statement or rule. It is an important strategy for
helping clients let go of ineffective myths about emotions and about
using interpersonal skills. Almost any disaster or crisis is an
opportunity to practice not only particular skills, but the strategy of
making lemonade out of lemons (i.e., finding the positives in a negative
situation). As I have noted in Chapter 2 of this manual, conducting an
open (rather than closed) group offers an opportunity to allow natural
change---yet another dialectical strategy. Dialectics are critically
important in the two most important characteristics of skills training:
assessing use of skills and teaching new skills. Assessing dialectically
involves openness to being incorrect in one's analysis and understanding
of clients' difficulties with skills. It is always asking the question
"What is being left out here?" A group setting, in particular, offers a
rich environment for demonstrating the futility of approaching problem
solving with a "right versus wrong" cognitive set. No matter how
brilliant a solution to a particular problem may be, it is always
possible for a group member to come up with another strategy that may be
equally effective. And every problem solution has its own set of
limitations; that is, there is always "another side of the story." It is
extremely important for the group leaders not to get into a battle of
trying to prove that the skills being taught are the only right way to
handle every situation, or even any particular situation. Although the
skills may be very effective for some purposes, they are not more
"right" than other approaches. Thus the leaders' task is to ask this
question repeatedly:

"How can we all be right, and how can we test the effectiveness of our
strategies?"

Typical Dialectical Tensions Feelings and Beliefs versus Wise Mind The
strategy of "wise mind" is the first core mindfulness skill taught (see
Chapter 7 of this manual) and should then be encouraged throughout
skills training. When a client makes a statement representing an
emotional or feeling state (e.g., "I feel fat and unlovable") as if the
feeling state provides information about the empirical reality ("I am
fat and unlovable"), it is effective at times simply to question the
client: "I'm not interested right now in what you believe or think. I am
interested in what you know to be true in your wise mind. What do you
know to be true? What does wise mind say is true?" The dialectical
tension is between what the client believes in "emotion mind" and what
he or she thinks to be true ("reasonable mind"); the synthesis is what
she knows to be true in wise mind. The push toward wise mind can be
easily abused, of course, especially when a trainer confuses wise mind
with what the trainer believes to be the case. This can be particularly
difficult when the trainer overvalues the wisdom of his or her own
knowledge or opinions. The value of therapeutic humility cannot be
overstated. When such divergences arise, the trainer's task is to ask,
"What is being left out of my own position?" while simultaneously
looking for a synthesis. In DBT, one of the major functions of the
consultation team is to provide a balance to the arrogance that can
easily accompany a therapist's or trainer's powerful position.

Willingness versus Willfulness The tension between "willingness" and
"willfulness" is an important one in skills training. Although I discuss
it much more fully in Chapter 10 of this manual, the essential tension
is between responding to a situation in terms of what the situation
needs (willingness) and responding in a way that resists what a
situation needs or responding in terms of one's own needs rather than
those of the situation (willfulness). Thus willfulness encompasses both
trying to "fix" the situation and sitting passively on one's hands,
refusing to respond at all. Many forms of this tension can arise during
skills training. A key one arises in a group context when

5. Application of Fundamental DBT Strategies in Behavioral Skills
Training • 85

the leaders are interacting with one member or the group as a whole, and
the member or group is withdrawing and refusing to interact. The tension
is between the leaders' attempting to influence the member or group and
allowing themselves to be influenced by the member or group. The
essential question, framed somewhat more directly, is this: How far
should the leaders push, and how far should the group member or the
group as a whole resist? Use of the terms "willfulness" and
"willingness" can be quite helpful in this dilemma. I have found myself
on many occasions discussing who is being willful with a client. Is it
me, the client, or both of us? Of course, the answer to the question
revolves around what is needed in the situation, and it is at this point
that skill becomes important. It is also, however, a matter of
perspective or dialectical focus. The group leaders must keep in mind
the member's or group's needs at the moment and in the long
term---­current comfort versus future gain---and balance these respective
goals. If this balance is missed, then the leaders are in danger of
being willful. It is all too easy to get into a power struggle with
group members, in which the needs of the leaders to make progress, to
feel effective, or to create a more comfortable atmosphere come into
conflict with the needs of the members. The problem of willfulness
versus willingness is nowhere more apparent than when a skills trainer
is juggling the needs of an individual group member and those of the
group as a whole. This most commonly occurs when one member is refusing
to interact; is hostile; or otherwise is behaving in a way that
influences the mood, comfort, and progress of the entire group. In my
experience, such a threat to the group's good can bring out the tendency
to be willful in a skills trainer. Generally the tension here is between
two types of willfulness. On the one hand, a trainer can be willful by
actively controlling or attacking the errant member or his or her
behavior. Because group members are often singularly unskilled at coping
with negative affect, when one member creates conflict, other group
members may withdraw. As the mood of the group becomes increasingly
tense or hopeless, the skills trainer naturally wants to turn it around;
thus the attempt to control the member initiating the conflict ensues.
In contrast, the skills trainer can be equally willful by ignoring the
conflict and tense mood and responding in a passive way. Passivity in
this case actually masquerades as activity, since ignoring the tension
is generally manifested by the trainer's continuing to push and escalate
the conflict.

The synthesis of willfulness on each side is willingness. It is
critically important to remember that no matter how aversive a client's
behavior may be, willfulness cannot be fought with willfulness. Thus it
is critical that skills trainers respond to willfulness with
willingness. For example, I have often found it useful to ask (in a
light voice) a client who appears willful, "Are you by chance feeling
willful right now?" If the client answers yes, I ordinarily ask, "How
long do you think you are going to be willful?" With or without an
answer, I "allow" the willful client to continue to be willful and ask
only that he or she let me know when willingness returns. With
adolescents who are willful in skills training, I have asked, "Hmm, are
you by chance on strike?" If the answer is yes, I say "OK," and keep on
with the rest of the group.

Good Guy versus Bad Guy In a group setting, keeping group members
working together collaboratively is often very hard work for the
leaders. Variations in individual members' moods when they arrive for a
session, as well as reactions to in-­session events, can have a
tremendous effect on any given individual's willingness to work
collaboratively during a particular group meeting. It is not atypical
that an entire group may be "not in the mood" for working at a
particular meeting. When this happens, the leaders must continue to
interact with the group members in an attempt to get them working
collaboratively again. However, this attempt to interact with the
members is often viewed by the members as "pushing," and the leader
doing the work (usually the primary group leader) is viewed as the "bad
guy" by the group members. At this point it is often helpful for the
co-­leader to validate the group members' experience. As they are pushed
by the primary leader, they often not only retreat but become more rigid
in their refusal to interact. Validation from the co-­leader can reduce
the negative affect and enhance their ability to work. When this occurs,
however, the co-­leader may then be viewed as the "good guy." Thus the
dialectical tension builds between the leaders. This scenario is closely
related to the psychodynamic concept of "splitting." The danger is that
the leaders will allow themselves to become "split," so to speak, acting
as independent units rather than a cohesive whole. This is most likely
to happen if either of the leaders begins to see his or her position as
"right" and the other

86 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

leader's position as "wrong." Once this happens, the leaders pull away
from one another and disturb the balance that might otherwise occur.
This will not go unnoticed, because group members watch the relationship
between the leaders closely. I often refer to group skills training as a
recreation of family dinners. Most members have many experiences of
unresolved conflicts and battles occurring at family dinners. Group
skills training is an opportunity for members to experience a wholeness
in the resolution of conflict. The leaders' ability to contain the
dialectic in their relationship---to stay united and whole, even as they
take different roles---is essential for this learning. Of course, being
the "good guy" can be quite comfortable, and being the "bad guy" can be
quite uncomfortable. Thus it takes some skillfulness and personal
feelings of security for the primary leader to take the role of the "bad
guy." (I should be careful to note here that it is not always the
primary leader who is the "bad guy"; at times, either leader can take
this role.) Another dialectical tension that may build is that between
the skills training leaders and clients' individual psychotherapists.
Here the skills trainers can either be the "good guys" or the "bad
guys," and the individual therapists can play the corresponding role. In
my experience, during the first year of a standard comprehensive DBT
treatment program, the skills trainers are more often the "bad guys" and
the individual therapists are the "good guys"; however, on occasion the
roles are switched. In fact, this is one of the great assets of
separating skills training from individual therapy in DBT: It allows a
client to have a "bad guy" and a "good guy" simultaneously. Thus the
client is often able to tolerate staying in therapy more readily. The
function of the "good guy" is often to hold the client in therapy while
he or she resolves conflicts with the "bad guy." Many individuals with
disordered emotion regulation do not have the experience of staying in a
painful relationship long enough to work a conflict out and then to
experience the reinforcement of conflict resolution. DBT, therefore,
offers perhaps a unique context in which this can be done. In a sense,
clients always have a benign consultant to help them deal with conflicts
with the other providers. The essential ingredient is that whoever is
the "good guy" must always be able to hold in mind the therapeutic
relationships as a whole, rather than allowing them to resolve into
"right versus wrong" and true "good guy versus bad guy." It is the
skills trainers' ability to hold these

relationships as a whole that will eventually allow their clients to
learn to do the same. As the trainers model balance, clients will learn
to balance themselves.

Content versus Process As noted previously, group process issues are not
attended to systematically during group skills training, except when
negative process threatens to destroy the group. For this to go
smoothly, it is critical that skills trainers orient participants to the
difference between a skills training group and a therapy process group.
Those who have been in the latter often have difficulties with the
concept of learning skills versus discussing and working on
interpersonal processes. When interpersonal conflicts arise in a group,
or emotions become so dysregulated that it is difficult to make
progress, the tension that immediately arises is between a decision to
proceed with teaching content versus a decision to stop and attend to
the process in the group. Attending to process can be fraught with
difficulties, particularly when clients are highly dysregulated. More
than a few minutes of process is often more than these clients can
handle. The danger is that a conflict beginning in one session may not
be resolved, because clients walk out or the session ends. When this
happens and the conflict is serious, the skills leaders may need to
spend time talking with clients individually to help them work through
the issues. If possible, it is best to put these discussions off until a
session break, or to hold them after the session, by phone between
sessions (if the conflict is severe), or before the next session. To
highlight that these discussions are not individual therapy, I conduct
them somewhere in the hallway---or, if it is necessary to go into a room
to talk, I keep the door open. On the other hand, if content alone is
attended to without any attention to process, a group can eventually
break down. This is particularly the case when the leaders have not been
able to establish a norm of coming to group skills training on time, of
doing homework assignments, of paying attention in group sessions, and
of treating others with respect. In these cases, holding the balance
between content and process is essential. In my experience, some skills
training leaders do better with content and find it easy to ignore
process, whereas other leaders do well with process and find it easy to
ignore content. It is rare that a leader will find achieving this
critical balance an easy task.

5. Application of Fundamental DBT Strategies in Behavioral Skills
Training • 87

Perhaps the key is recognizing that individuals with low distress
tolerance pull toward making every moment they are in comfortable. Their
inability to put discomfort on a shelf and attend to a task poses a
formidable obstacle to continuing with content when process issues are
in the foreground. We have found it necessary, time and again, to forge
ahead. Forging ahead generally requires the trainers to ignore some or
even most of the process issues, and to respond as if clients are
collaborating even when they are not. It is a delicate balance that can
only be mastered with experience.

Following the Rules versus Reinforcing Assertiveness As noted in Chapter
3 of this manual, DBT skills training has a number of rules. These rules
are not unimportant, and some of them are unequivocal and unbendable. On
the other hand, a primary target in DBT is teaching interpersonal
skills, including the ability to assert oneself. If skills trainers are
doing their job well, a tension arises over time between maintaining the
rules (regardless of clients' assertions and requests to the contrary)
and reinforcing clients' growing assertive skills by bending the rules
when requested in an appropriate manner. The ability to balance "giving
in" and "not giving in" is essential. It is here that the trainers'
attitude of compassionate flexibility must be balanced with unwavering
centeredness (qualities discussed in Chapter 4 of the main DBT text).
What is required is clear thinking on the part of the skills trainers.
Giving in for the sake of giving in is as rigid as holding to rules for
their own sake. The simple fact that a client requests that a rule be
bent or broken in an appropriate manner, however, is not sufficient for
reward. Clearly, appropriate requests are not always met with a gracious
response in the real world. In fact, one of the key misconceptions of
many individuals I treat is that if they ask appropriately, the world
will (or should) always give them what they need or want. Learning to
deal with the fact that this does not always happen is essential for
growth and is one of the goals of distress tolerance training (see
Chapter 10 of this manual). On the other hand, the attempt to teach this
fundamental lesson should not be confused with arbitrary refusals to
make exceptions when the situation requires it. Once again, the notion
of willingness can be viewed as the synthesis, and thus as the path for
the trainers to follow.

Willingness, however, requires clarity on the skills trainers' part. The
clarity needed has to do with the ultimate goals of therapy for an
individual member (or for the group, in a group setting) and the means
of achieving the goals. The tension that most often exists is that
between current comfort and learning to deal with discomfort. Skills
trainers must straddle these two aims in coming to a decision about what
is the most effective response to a client's assertive behavior. The
task is much easier, of course, if the skills trainers can see emerging
client assertiveness as progress rather than as a threat. However, life
becomes much more difficult for the trainers when clients begin
interacting as peers rather than as "clients." The "one up, one down"
relationship that so often exists in therapy is threatened as the
clients make progress. To the extent that the skills trainers can take
delight in the clients' emerging abilities to outreason and outmaneuver
them, therapy progress will be enhanced and not threatened. Essential in
a group context, of course, is respecting the other group members' point
of view. It is also essential for the trainers to recognize when they
are up against a brick wall and are not going to win their point anyway.
At these times, the willingness to bend the rules and agree to a
client's assertive request can sometimes radically change the nature of
the therapeutic relationship. The use of two leaders in conducting group
treatment offers further avenues for setting up dialectic, as noted
earlier. In essence, each group leader's style can function as one
element in the dialectical opposition. For example, a "good cop, bad
cop" strategy, in which one leader focuses on content while the other
focuses on process, can be used. Or one leader can help the other leader
and a group member synthesize a tension or conflict. While one leader
presents one side of the whole, the other leader presents the
contrasting side.

Core Strategies: Validation and Problem Solving Validation The
validation strategies (representing core acceptance) are essential to
DBT. As noted previously, it was the necessity of combining
validation---a set of acceptance strategies---with problem-­ solving and
other change strategies that first led me to develop a "new" version of
CBT. Problem solving must be

88 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

intertwined with validation. As in individual DBT, validation strategies
are used in every skills training session in DBT. They involve a
nonjudgmental attitude and a continual search for the essential validity
of each client's responses (and, in a group context, those of the group
as a whole). In group settings, both the leaders and the group as a
whole function as the opposing pole to the invalidating environments
commonly experienced by individuals with disordered emotion regulation.
The first general task in validating during skills training is to help
clients observe and accurately describe their own emotions, thoughts,
and overt behavior patterns. Much of DBT behavioral skills training---in
particular, mindfulness training---is aimed at just this. Second, skills
trainers communicate empathy with clients' emotional tone, indicate
understanding of (though not necessarily agreement with) their beliefs
and expectancies, and/or make clear observations of their behavioral
action patterns. In other words, the trainers observe and describe the
clients' behavior accurately. Third, and most importantly, the trainers
communicate that the clients' emotional responses, beliefs/expectancies,
and overt behaviors are understandable and make sense in the context of
their lives and the current moment. It is particularly important for the
skills trainers to validate normative behaviors and those that fit the
facts of the clients' situations. In each instance, the trainers look
for the nugget of gold in the cup of sand---the validity within what may
otherwise be a very dysfunctional response. This is the reverse of the
invalidating environment's approach. The components of validation are
outlined in Figure 5.2 and are discussed further below and in detail in
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handouts 17 and 18, as well as Chapter 8 of
the main DBT text. In both group and individual skills training, almost
constant cheerleading is necessary. The skills trainers' biggest problem
here will probably be maintaining the energy necessary to cajole, prod,
sweet-talk, and cheer on the clients' very slow movement in adopting
new, more skillful behaviors. The tensions between "I can't; I won't,"
and "You can; you must," can drain even the most energetic trainer. Each
group leader must rely on the other to provide fresh energy when one is
losing steam or when one needs to be bailed out of a willful dialogue
with members. It is equally important in group skills training to elicit
and reinforce clients' validation of one another. The ability to
validate others is one of the skills

taught in the Interpersonal Effectiveness module. Individuals with high
emotion dysregulation are very often exceptional in their ability to
empathize with and validate one another. They are also capable of highly
judgmental responses. (In some groups, this can become a special problem
if the wind-down at the end of session includes individual
observations.) They can find it very difficult to understand and
validate emotional patterns they have not experienced, thought patterns
they are not familiar with, and behaviors they have not exhibited. My
experience, however, is that group members bend over backward to
validate one another, and that a greater problem is for the leaders to
draw out their critical observations that might provide valuable
feedback to others. Peace at all costs---a typical objective in some
invalidating environments---should not be the norm in group skills
training. Other clients, of course, grew up with the norm of no peace at
any cost; once again, a dialectic emerges. In group skills training
sessions, validation means that the leaders should always point out the
truth inherent in clients' comments and group experiences, even while
simultaneously demonstrating the contradictory point of view. Conflict
within the group or between an individual group member and a leader is
dealt with by validating both sides of the conflict and arriving at a
resolution that finds the synthesis of both points of view, rather than
invalidating one side or the other.

A "How To" Guide for Validation The essence of validation is this: The
skills trainers communicate to the clients that their responses make
sense and are understandable within their current life context or
situation. The trainers actively accept clients and communicate this
acceptance to clients. Clients' responses are taken seriously and are
not discounted or trivialized. Validation strategies require the skills
trainers to search for, recognize, and reflect to the clients and/or the
group as a whole the validity inherent in their responses to events.
With unruly children, parents have to "catch them while they're good" in
order to reinforce their behavior; similarly, skills trainers have to
uncover the validity within clients' responses, sometimes amplify this
validity, and then reinforce it. Two things are important to note here.
First, validation means the acknowledgment of that which is valid. It
does not mean "making" valid. Nor does it mean validating that which is
invalid. The skills

5. Application of Fundamental DBT Strategies in Behavioral Skills
Training • 89

trainers observe, experience, and affirm, but do not create validity.
Second, "valid" and "scientific" are not synonyms. Science may be one
way to determine what is valid, logical, sound in principle, and/ or
supported by generally accepted authority. However, an authentic
experience or apprehension of private events is also a basis for
claiming validity---at least, when it is similar to the experiences of
others or when it is in accord with other, more observable events.
Validation can be considered at any one of six levels. Each level is
correspondingly more complete than the previous one, and each level
depends on the previous levels. Taken as a whole they are definitional
of DBT and are required in every interaction with the client. I have
described these levels most fully in a 1997 publication.1  At Level 1 of
validation, the skills trainers listen to and observe what clients are
saying, feeling, and doing. They also make corresponding active efforts
to understand what is being said and observed. The essence of this step
is that both the skills leader and co-­leader stay awake and interested
in clients, paying attention to what they say and do in the current
moment. The trainers notice the nuances of response in the interaction.
Validation at Level 1 communicates that the client per se, as well as
the client's presence, words, and responses in the session, have "such
force as to compel serious attention and \[usually\] acceptance."2
Although both trainers are charged with Level 1 validation, paying
attention to nuances of responses across the entire group is a special
responsibility of the co-­leader, as noted in Chapter 2.  At Level 2 of
validation, the skills trainers accurately reflect back to the clients
the clients' own feelings, thoughts, assumptions, and behaviors. The
skills trainers convey an understanding of the client by hearing what
the clients have said, and seeing what the clients do and how they
respond. Validation at Level 2 sanctions, empowers, or authenticates
that each individual is who he or she actually is. At Level 2, the
skills trainers are always checking to be sure that their reflections
are accurate, and are always willing to let go of their previous
understanding in favor of a new understanding.  At Level 3 of
validation, the skills trainers articulate the unverbalized. The skills
trainers communicate understanding of aspects of the clients' experience
and response to events that have not been communicated directly by the
clients. The trainers

"mind-read" the reasons for the clients' behavior and figure out how the
clients feel and what they are wishing for, thinking, or doing, just by
knowing what has happened to the clients. The skills trainers can make
the link between precipitating events and behaviors without being given
any information about the behaviors themselves. The trainers can also
articulate emotions and meanings the clients have not expressed. Level 3
validation is most important in the review of homework and in responding
to clients' difficulties in learning, accepting, or practicing new
skills.  At Level 4, behavior is validated in terms of its causes.
Validation here is based on the notion that all behavior is caused by
events occurring in time; thus, in principle, it is understandable. The
skills trainers validate (this validation is not to be confused with
"approval" or "excusing") the clients' behavior by showing that it is
caused by past events. Even though information may not be available to
determine all the relevant causes, the clients' feelings, thoughts, and
actions make perfect sense in the context of the clients' current
experiences, physiology, and lives to date. At a minimum, what "is" can
always be justified in terms of sufficient causes; that is, what is
"should be," in that whatever was necessary for it to occur had to have
happened.  At Level 5, skills trainers validate in terms of present
context or normative functioning. Skills trainers communicate that
behavior is justifiable, reasonable, well grounded, meaningful, and/or
efficacious in terms of current events, normative biological
functioning, and/or clients' ultimate life goals. The skills trainers
look for and reflect the wisdom or validity of clients' responses (and
often those of the group as a whole), and communicate that the responses
are understandable. The skills trainers find the relevant facts in the
current environment that support clients' behaviors. The clients'
dysfunction does not blind the skills trainers to those aspects of
response patterns that may be either reasonable or appropriate to the
context. Thus the skills trainers search the clients' responses for
their inherent reasonableness (as well as commenting on the inherent
dysfunction of various aspects of these responses, if necessary).  Level
6 of validation requires radical genuineness on the part of the skills
trainers. The task is to recognize each person as he or she is, seeing
and responding to the strengths and capacities of the client, while
keeping a firm empathic understanding

90 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

of his or her actual difficulties and incapacities. The skills trainers
believe in each client and his or her capacity to change and move toward
ultimate life goals, just as they may believe in a friend or family
member. The trainers respond to the client as a person of equal status,
due equal respect. Validation at the highest level is the validation of
the individual "as is." The skills trainers see more than the
role---more than a "client" or a "disorder." Level 6 validation is the
opposite of treating a client in a condescending manner or as overly
fragile. It is responding to the individual as capable of effective and
reasonable behavior rather than assuming that he or she is an invalid.
Whereas Levels 1--5 represent sequential steps in validation of a kind,
Level 6 represents change in both level and kind. Two other forms of
validation should also be mentioned here:  Cheerleading strategies
constitute a further form of validation and are the principal strategies
for combating active passivity and tendencies toward hopelessness in
many clients with serious emotion dysregulation. In cheerleading, skills
trainers communicate the belief that clients are doing their best and
validate clients' ability to eventually overcome their difficulties (a
type of validation that, if not handled carefully, can simultaneously
invalidate clients' perceptions of their helplessness). In addition,
skills trainers express a belief in the therapy relationship, offer
reassurance, and highlight any evidence of improvement. Within DBT,
cheerleading is used in every therapeutic interaction. Although active
cheerleading should be reduced as clients learn to trust and to validate
themselves, cheerleading strategies always remain an essential
ingredient of a strong therapeutic alliance.  Functional validation is
yet another form of validation that is used regularly in DBT. It is a
form of nonverbal or behavioral validation that, at times, may be more
effective than verbal validation. For example, if a skills trainer drops
a 50-pound block on the client's foot, it would be considered
invalidating if the trainer's response is to do nothing except say,
"Wow, I can see that really hurts! You must be in a lot of pain."
Functional validation would entail the trainer's removing the block from
the client's foot.

See Chapter 8 of the main DBT text for more on validation.

Problem Solving A number of the core problem-­ solving strategies have
been discussed in Chapter 4 (behavioral analysis, insight, didactic
strategies, solution analysis, and orienting/commitment strategies). In
this section, I review several additional and important problem-­ solving
procedures as outlined in Figure 5.2: contingency management,
exposure-based procedures, and cognitive restructuring. These procedures
are each aimed at change and are basic components of all major CBT
approaches. It's important not only for therapists to be adept at using
these procedures, but also for clients to know them; elements of each
procedure have been translated into DBT skills. Contingency management
procedures are taught in the Interpersonal Effectiveness module (Chapter
8, Section XVII; see also Interpersonal Effectiveness Handouts 20--22).
The skill of opposite action (Emotion Regulation Handouts 9--11) is
based on exposure procedures long known to be effective treatments for
anxiety and phobias. In DBT, these principles have been expanded to
apply to all problem emotions. The skill of checking the facts (Emotion
Regulation Handouts 8--8a) is a translation of cognitive restructuring
into a skill. These procedures are also covered in Chapter 10 of the
main DBT text.

Contingency Management Procedures Every response within an interpersonal
interaction is potentially a reinforcement, a punishment, or a
withholding or removal of reinforcement. "Contingency management" is the
provision of consequen­ ces for specific behaviors, aimed at increasing
or maintaining behaviors that are wanted and decreasing behaviors that
are not wanted. Although natural consequences are preferred (see below),
they often do not occur frequently or immediately enough to be effective
in changing client behavior patterns. Thus contingency management
requires skills trainers to organize their behavior strategically, so
that client behaviors that represent progress are reinforced, while
unskillful or maladaptive behaviors are extinguished or punished.
Orientation to contingency management in skills training starts with the
first session. When the rules of DBT skills training are introduced in
the first orientation session, the major therapeutic contingencies are
discussed. However, only two of the rules involve clear contingencies:
Missing 4 consecutive

5. Application of Fundamental DBT Strategies in Behavioral Skills
Training • 91

weeks of scheduled skills training sessions, or not meeting with one's
individual DBT therapist for four consecutive scheduled sessions (if a
client is in standard DBT) or as required by the specific skills program
(if a client is in a non-DBT treatment), will result in termination of
therapy. There are no clearly stated contingencies for violation of the
other rules. In my experience, it is never a good idea to tell clients
that they will be terminated from skills training if they break the
other rules. However, there are contingent consequences. The main ones
are trainer and/or member disapproval, leader and group attention to the
rule breaking, and more interpersonal distance. The basic idea in
contingency management is that a client's adaptive functional behavior
results in reinforcement, whereas negative maladaptive behavior results
in either aversive consequences or no discernible consequences that
could reinforce the behavior. A "reinforcer," by definition, is any
behavioral consequence that increases the probability of the behavior's
occurring again. "Extinction" is reducing the probability of a
behavior's occurring by removing the behavioral reinforcer(s).
"Punishment" is any behavioral consequence that decreases the
probability of the behavior's occurring again. Applying Reinforcing
Contingencies

As noted, any consequence that increases the probability of a behavior
is a reinforcer. The most important point is not to assume that any
particular response to a client's behavior is a positive reinforcer
without checking. For example, in our clinic, not only do we use
stickers as reinforcers for doing skills homework and for coming to
skills training on time; we also let participants tell us what stickers
they want, and we pay close attention to whether using stickers is
working to increase and maintain the targeted behaviors. Ordering pizza
for the group if all members were present, for example, did not work in
our substance dependence program. As I have mentioned in Chapter 4, when
a client said in one of my groups that she did not think it was fair
that I gave out "12,000 gold stars" to people outside of group (as she
had heard), I immediately started giving out "10,000--13,000 gold stars"
for any skillful behavior that appeared to be particularly difficult for
participants to do. Because the gold stars were completely imaginary, it
had not occurred to me that they would work with skills participants.
Work, however, they did.

It is important to note that praise of skills use may or may not
reinforce clients' skillful behaviors. For example, if an individual's
history involves many instances in which praise and acknowledgment of
skill and strength have led to an absence of further help and/or higher
expectations, praise may be aversive instead of rewarding. It is not a
good idea, however, to stop praising skillful behaviors altogether, for
two reasons. First, a client can interpret the absence of praise as
never being able to do anything right--- in other words, as implied
criticism. Second, praise in most settings is meant as a reinforcer, and
it is important for praise to become a reinforcer for clients. So what
is the synthesis? The best strategy is not to go overboard with
excessive praise, but to give clear feedback about skillful behavior
(i.e., to comment that the behavior is skilled if it is, and constitutes
progress if it does), and when necessary to follow this immediately with
recognition that this does not mean the client can solve all of his or
her problems or has no more problems to be solved. In this way, the
praise is freed from the expectancy that competence will result in loss
of any further help. It is also important to remember to balance
praising effective use of skills with praising effort even when it is
not effective. Praise of effort is particularly important when new
behaviors are being shaped. Use (and misuse) of praise as a reinforcer
is discussed in more detail in Chapter 10 of the main DBT text. Natural
Reinforcers

As far as possible, skills trainers should try to provide natural
reinforcers for clients' adaptive behavior. "Natural reinforcers" are
consequences that clients can expect in everyday life. Thus, if clients
are taught assertion skills, and trainers never reward assertive
behaviors by giving clients what they request, then it is unreasonable
to expect those behaviors to continue. Similarly, if clients' attempts
at regulating intense anxiety precipitated by being asked to talk in
skills training sessions are met with trainers' making them talk even
longer, then it is unreasonable to expect the clients to continue
regulating their anxiety. If clients improve their tolerance of aversive
events during sessions, and this is followed by the trainers' allowing
sessions to become more aversive, then it is unreasonable to expect
further distress tolerance. The point is that as clients begin to apply
the skills being taught, skills trainers must be careful to respond in a
manner that will reinforce such improvement. Although

92 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

shaping principles require the trainers eventually to "up the ante," so
to speak, by requiring even more skillful behavior, these increases in
demands must be kept gradual. Otherwise, clients will always feel that
they cannot do enough to please the trainers or get their needs met. It
can also be useful to pair natural reinforcement with praise. Shaping

In "shaping," gradual approximations to the target behavior are
reinforced. Shaping requires a skills trainer to break the desired
behavior down into small steps and to reinforce each of these steps
sequentially. It has to do with what behaviors a trainer expects from
clients and is willing to reinforce. Trying to extract an adaptive
behavior from clients without reinforcing small steps on the way to the
goal behavior usually does not work. Without shaping, both skills
trainers and clients would become so frustrated and distressed that
skills training could not proceed. Inevitably, individuals with
pervasive and severe disordered emotion regulation have no self-­ shaping
skills. Unreasonable expectations for immediate perfection (by the
clients, their family members, or their therapists) can interfere with
their ability to learn the skills gradually. Thus it is crucial that
skills trainers continually model shaping principles. Not only should
they be discussed openly and explained, but trainers' expectations of
clients should also follow shaping principles. What group leaders
sometimes forget, however, is that these same principles apply to the
entire group. In my experience, one of the greatest difficulties in
conducting DBT group skills training is that skills trainers'
expectations for the group as a whole are often far higher than the
group can deliver. Extinction and Punishment

As important as reinforcement is the withholding of reinforcement for
behaviors targeted for extinction. In theory, this may seem obvious, but
in practice, it can be quite difficult. The problematic behaviors of
emotionally dysregulated clients are often quite effective in obtaining
reinforcing outcomes or in stopping painful events. Indeed, the very
behaviors targeted for extinction have often been intermittently
reinforced by mental health professionals, family members, and friends.
Contingency management at times requires the use of aversive
consequences similar to "setting limits" (punishment) in other treat-

ment modalities, as well as the systematic and tenacious withdrawal of
usual reinforcers (extinction). Three guidelines are important in using
aversive consequences. First, punishment should "fit the crime," and a
client should have some way of terminating its application. For example,
a detailed analysis when skills practice assignments are not done is
ordinarily aversive for most clients. Once it has been completed,
however, a client's ability to pursue other topics should be restored
without further comment about the client's not completing the week's
assignment. Second, it is crucial that skills trainers use punishment
with great care, in low doses, and very briefly, and that a positive
interpersonal atmosphere be restored following any client improvement.
If a client is banging on the table, but stops when a firm request is
made to "cut it out," a warm interaction with the client should follow.
Third, punishment should be just strong enough to work. Although the
ultimate punishment is termination of skills training, a preferable
fallback strategy for egregious behavior that threatens to destroy the
group is putting clients on "vacations from training." This approach is
considered when a situation is so serious that it is impossible to carry
on effective group skills training, and all other contingencies and
interventions have failed. Examples of such instances might include
property destruction during group sessions, stealing important property
of others from the clinic and refusing to return it, continued selling
of drugs on the clinic's front porch, putting confidential information
obtained in group sessions on Facebook, buying guns for other group
members to commit suicide with, or threatening a skills trainer in front
of his or her children. It does not include all the very irritating and
often dysfunctional emotional behaviors that many clients engage in.
Learning how to tolerate irritation is one of the important goals of
skills training. It can be equally important for skills trainers to
learn it. When utilizing the vacation strategy, the trainers clearly
identify what specific new behaviors are required, what behaviors have
to be changed, and what conditions must be met for the client to return.
The trainers maintain intermittent contact by phone or letter, and
provide a referral or backup while the client is on vacation. (In
colloquial terms, the trainers kick the client out, then pine for his or
her return.) Generally, aversive procedures should be used when a client
is avoiding difficult activities such as coming to skills training
sessions, doing homework, practicing in sessions, or engaging in active
prob-

5. Application of Fundamental DBT Strategies in Behavioral Skills
Training • 93

lem solving. In these cases, it is essential to intervene immediately
and push clients, instead of ignoring them and allowing the avoidance to
continue. In other words, the avoidance response must be
short-­circuited. The idea is to make the immediate consequences of
avoiding more aversive than those of not avoiding. When clients miss a
session, for example, our policy is to call them immediately (using an
unknown phone number if necessary) and try to cheerlead them into coming
to the session. During such calls, skills trainers use various
strategies (e.g., the DEAR MAN, GIVE skills, including broken record,
easy manner, and negotiating) taught to clients in the Interpersonal
Effectiveness module. (I usually have a bus schedule handy when I call.)
An exception to this policy, discussed later, is made when calling
reinforces missing sessions. Another common pattern in a group context
is for a member who did not do any homework practice to try to avoid
discussing it in the session. If the group leaders skip over that member
and go on to the next person, then the avoidance has worked. The best
strategy, discussed in detail in Chapter 4, is to move immediately, in a
nonjudgmental and warm fashion, to analyze not doing the homework. If
the member still refuses after some pushing, a leader might move toward
analyzing why he or she doesn't want to talk---or, if this is too
aversive, it can be discussed privately during a break. The point is
that avoidance should not be rewarded. Positive maladaptive behaviors
(e.g., attempts to get attention, sobbing, hostile behavior, attempts to
discuss weekly life crises) should be put on an extinction schedule. A
skills trainer ignores the client's maladaptive behaviors and continues
to interact with the client as if he or she is not producing such
behaviors. Or, if the behaviors cannot be ignored, the trainer can make
a brief comment suggesting that the client cope by using some of the
skills being taught in the current (or a past) skills module. Thus a
client who begins crying can be encouraged to practice distress
tolerance or mindfulness skills. If a client is storming out of the
room, a trainer can suggest calmly the use of emotion regulation skills;
once calm, the client can come back into the session. With few
exceptions (e.g., the skills trainers have clear reasons to believe that
a client is leaving to commit suicide, or the client is brand-new and is
clearly overwhelmed), skills trainers should not routinely follow
clients when they leave skills training sessions precipitously. Even if
it would not reinforce these clients' leaving, it might serve as
vicarious re-

inforcement for others' leaving. However, leaving (and thus avoiding
skills training) should not be reinforced unchecked. Thus, if the client
is in individual therapy, a trainer should alert the therapist, so that
the behavior can be dealt with in individual therapy as an instance of
therapy-­interfering behavior, or the precipitous leaving can be
discussed in the next session. If the client is not in individual
therapy, one of the skills trainers should discuss the problem with the
client before, after, or during a break in a subsequent session. It is
very important to remember to soothe clients whose behavior is on an
extinction schedule and those who are receiving aversive consequences.
(In my experience, the ability to put a client's behavior on an
extinction schedule and simultaneously soothe the person is one of the
hardest tasks for new skills trainers to learn.) In each case, the
behavior is what is being punished, not the person. Especially in group
skills training, leaders need to develop the ability to ignore many
behaviors and to come back to the members with a soothing comment after
the behaviors stop. Or, even while the dysfunctional behaviors are going
on, leaders can soothe members while at the same time insisting that
they practice their skills anyway. To a member crying about a
relationship breakup, a leader might say something to this effect: "I
know this is really difficult for you, but try your best to distract
yourself from your troubles. Be mindful to the task, and tell me about
your efforts to practice your skills this week." After listening to a
few other group members, the leader might go back to this member and ask
briefly but warmly, "How are you doing with your attempt to be mindful
to group? . . . Keep trying." Observing Limits

"Observing limits" constitutes a special case of contingency management
involving the application of problem-­solving strategies to client
behaviors that threaten or cross a trainer's personal limits. Such
behaviors interfere with the trainer's ability or willingness to conduct
the therapy. Trainers must take responsibility for monitoring their own
personal limits and for clearly communicating them to clients. Trainers
who do not do this eventually burn out, terminate therapy, or otherwise
harm their clients. DBT favors natural over arbitrary limits. Thus
limits vary among therapists, over time, and over circumstances. Limits
should also be presented as for the good of trainers, not for the good
of clients.

94 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

What the clients are arguing is in their best interests may not
ultimately be good for their skills trainers. For example, I am very
easily distracted when teaching new skills. I have stopped many skills
training sessions to ask various members to stop squeaking a chair,
throwing popcorn, or talking to their neighbors. When one client said,
"Marsha, you are so easily distracted!", I said, "Yes, I am, so cut it
out, please." When clients are repeatedly late, I may point out how
demoralized I am that they have not figured out how to get there on
time. After one client said, "Marsha, you are always demoralized," I
replied, "And I would stop being demoralized if you would get here on
time." An important limit in standard DBT is that a group skills trainer
takes calls when a client wants to find out what the homework was or to
say that the client will not attend or will be late, but the trainer
does not take coaching calls. The individual therapist takes these
calls. In our multifamily skills groups, however, a skills leader takes
coaching calls from a parent (and the adolescent's therapist takes calls
from the adolescent). Otherwise, as noted above, limits vary among
providers, over time, and over circumstances, and often the DBT team may
have to help skills trainers expand their limits. See Chapter 10 of the
main DBT text for more on observing limits.

Exposure-Based Procedures Structured exposure procedures, (e.g.,
prolonged exposure for PTSD), are not used in DBT skills training. DBT
skills training, however, can be effectively combined with
exposure-based protocols, and many principles of exposure are woven
throughout DBT skills. For example, as noted earlier, Opposite Action is
a variation on exposure treatments. Others that also elicit exposure
include: Mindfulness of current emotions; observing sensations;
participating; the distress tolerance skills of paired muscle
relaxation, body scan meditation, improving the moment (which is
opposite action for many), radical acceptance, and mindfulness of
current thoughts; and the emotion regulation skills of the sleep hygiene
protocol and mindfulness of current emotions. DBT skills in these cases
can help clients cope with urges to use dysfunctional means to end
emotion pain and regulate and reduce the anger, shame, or humiliation
that victims of trauma often experience. Less structured exposure-based
procedures, however, are consistently used in skills training. First,
exposure

to the cue that precedes a problem behavior must be nonreinforced. For
example, if a client is fearful that admitting to not doing the skills
homework will lead to his or her being rejected and starts coming late
after skills review, the skills trainers must not reinforce the client's
shame by addressing the absence of skills practice in a judgmental voice
tone or otherwise communicate rejection. Second, clients' avoidance of
topics, procedures, and process discussions (when process is the focus)
is almost always blocked. Third, clients are instructed over and over
about the value of exposure. After several months in well-run DBT skills
training, every client should be able to give a very good rationale for
why and when avoidance makes things worse and why, and when exposure
improves them. Thus, when clients employ exposure to difficult tasks or
feared situations during homework practice, the skills trainers should
note and reinforce it.

Cognitive Modification Procedures Cognitive Restructuring

There are a number of structured exercises throughout the skills
training program for helping clients check the facts of a situation (see
this manual's Chapter 9, Section VIII, and Emotion Regulation Handout 8
for this skill) and modify dysfunctional assumptions and beliefs. The
mindfulness skills of describing and being nonjudgmental focus intensely
on teaching clients how to describe what is observed, and how to tell
the difference among observing an event in the environment, a thought
about the event, and an emotion about the event (see this manual's
Chapter 7, Sections V and VII, and Mindfulness Handouts 4 and 5 for
these skills). However, formal cognitive restructuring plays a much
smaller role in DBT than in other forms of CBT, and cognitive techniques
play only a small role in DBT treatment of disordered emotion regulation
in particular. This topic is discussed extensively in Chapters 8 and 11
of the main DBT text. Contingency Clarification

The task in contingency clarification is to help clients clarify the
"if--then" contingency relationships in their lives and in the learning
of skills. Contingency clarification can be distinguished from the
didactic strategies. The didactic strategies stress general contingency
rules that hold for all or most people;

5. Application of Fundamental DBT Strategies in Behavioral Skills
Training • 95

contingency clarification always looks for the contingencies operating
in an individual client's life. It is looking for the pros and cons of
one set of behaviors versus another set of behaviors. It is important
for everyone to access pros and cons when deciding what to do in a
situation, and this is why there is emphasis on pros and cons at the
start of every skills module. In skills training, it is important to
discuss the pros and cons of learning and practicing each new skill, and
to analyze what happens when dysfunctional behaviors are replaced with
new skills. The idea here is to help clients learn to better observe the
contingent relationships occurring in their everyday lives. Individuals
with disordered emotion regulation often have great difficulty observing
these natural contingencies. When it comes to observing the effects of
using new behavioral skills, they may miss the benefits. One of the
skills trainers' tasks is to demonstrate to clients that the
contingencies formerly favoring dysfunctional behaviors are not
currently operating. Homework practice always includes trying a new
skill and observing its outcome. The idea is not to prove preconceived
beliefs of the skills trainers or of the clients about contingent
relationships, but rather to explore the actual contingent relationships
existing in the clients' everyday lives. It will often become clear in
the process that the contingencies, or rules, for one person may not
apply to another. Furthermore, rules that operate in one context may not
operate in another situation for the very same person. Figuring out the
rules of the game, so to speak, is intimately related to the behavioral
skill of being effective or focusing on what works---one of the core
mindfulness skills. Doing what works means engaging in behaviors where
contingent outcomes are the desired outcomes. This approach is often a
new one for individuals with emotion dysregulation, since they are more
experienced at looking at behaviors in moral terms of "right" or "wrong"
rather than in terms of outcomes or consequences. Contingency
clarification strategies are a step in moving these individuals toward
more effective behavior.

Stylistic Strategies DBT balances two quite different styles of
communication that refer to how the therapist executes other treatment
strategies. The first, "reciprocal communication," is similar to the
communication style advocated in client-­centered therapy. The sec-

ond, "irreverent communication," is quite similar to the style advocated
by Carl Whitaker in his writings on strategic therapy. 3 Reciprocal
communication strategies are designed to reduce a perceived power
differential by making the therapist more vulnerable to the client. In
addition, they serve as a model for appropriate but equal interactions
within an important interpersonal relationship. Irreverent communication
is usually riskier than reciprocity; however, it can facilitate problem
solving or produce a breakthrough after long periods when progress has
seemed thwarted. To be used effectively, irreverent communication must
balance reciprocal communication, and the two must be woven into a
single stylistic fabric. Without such balancing, neither strategy
represents DBT. I discuss stylistic strategies briefly below; a fuller
discussion is provided in Chapter 12 of the main DBT text.

Reciprocal Communication Strategies Responsiveness, self-­disclosure,
warm engagement, and genuineness are the basic guidelines of reciprocal
communication. Reciprocal communication is a friendly, affectionate
style reflecting warmth and engagement in the therapeutic interaction.
Self-­ involving self-­disclosure in individual therapy consists of a
therapist's immediate, personal reactions to a client and his or her
behavior. Reciprocal communication in the context of skills training
requires that trainers make themselves vulnerable to their clients and
express this vulnerability in a manner that can be heard and understood
by the clients. As always, there is a question of balance here, and the
fulcrum on which this balance is based is the welfare of the clients.
Thus reciprocity is in the service of the clients, not for the benefit
of the skills training leaders. Leaders' expressions of vulnerability in
sessions not only address the power imbalance that all clients
experience, but also can serve as important modeling events. Such
expressions can teach clients how to draw the line between privacy and
sharing, how to experience vulnerable states without shame, and how to
cope with their own limitations. In addition, they provide glimpses into
the world of so-­ called "normal" people, thus normalizing vulnerability
and life with limitations. One of the easiest ways to use reciprocal
communication in skills training is for the skills trainers to share
their own experiences in using the skills being taught. In my
experience, one of the benefits of leading skill groups is that it gives
me an opportunity to

96 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

keep working on improving my own skills. If group leaders can share
their own attempts (and especially their failures) with drama and humor,
so much the better. Sometimes the trick is for the leaders to label
their own experiences as relevant to the skills the group is attempting
to learn. For example, when I am teaching how to say no to unwanted
requests, I almost always discuss my own difficulties in saying no to
group members' pressures to get me to do things I don't think are
therapeutic. Since resisting their intense attempts at persuasion
usually requires me to use all of my own skills, the example covers
quite a bit of the material we teach in skills training. By now, all of
my skills groups know about my efforts to deal with my unreasonable fear
of heights when I go hiking (focusing on one thing in the moment,
distraction, self-­ encouragement); with back pain on meditation retreats
(focusing on one thing, radical acceptance); with my sudden fear of
tunnels (opposite action, coping ahead with various severities of
earthquakes); with trying to find my way after getting lost while
driving in Israel (radical acceptance \[after hours of nonacceptance\]
that a road that ended at the edge of a cliff the first time would not
be the correct road out the next time, even if it was the only road
going the right direction); and with other assorted life dilemmas I
encounter from week to week. Co-­leaders of mine have discussed their
troubles in learning to meditate, difficulties with asking for things,
problems in coping with bosses and professors, the process of mourning
losses, and so on. The point is that sharing one's own use of skills
being taught can provide valuable modeling both in how to apply skills
and in how to respond to one's own vulnerability in a nonjudgmental
fashion. The use of self-­disclosure is an important part of DBT. In
skills training, modeling uses of skills and ways of coping with
adversity is the most frequent form of self-­disclosure. The primary rule
is that disclosure must be in the interest of the clients, not the
interest of the skills trainers. That said, most clients love hearing
good stories from the leaders. My clients often say when I ask them if
they have already heard a specific story, "Yes, we have, but tell us
again, Marsha." The good news here is that, like a parent telling
bedtime stories, a leader can often tell a good story over and over.
Reciprocal communication can be difficult to practice in a group setting
as opposed to a one-toone setting. It can feel like many against one or
two. This difficulty, of course, should give group leaders more empathy
for the group members, who usu-

ally experience the very same problem. Nonetheless, sharing the
difficulty does not make it go away. It can also be very difficult to
respond in a manner appropriate to each member, when members are in many
different places (psychologically speaking) at once. The time it takes
to find out where even one member is may preclude efforts to explore the
current psychological state of other members. And, to the extent that
group leaders attend to such within-­ session process issues, they are
veering away from the goals of skills training anyway. By contrast, an
individual skills trainer can titrate responses to fit the individual
client; timing and attention to various topics can be geared to the
state of the one person at hand. In group sessions, it is very difficult
to strike a response that meets each member's needs. Thus it is often
much more difficult to move the group forward (or anywhere but down, it
often seems). This frustration may act to make group leaders want to
pull away and close up, or, at other times, to pull close enough to
attack. Either way, the frustration reduces the experience of warmth and
engagement. In such a stressful atmosphere, it is sometimes difficult to
relax. And it is difficult for leaders to be responsive when they are
not relaxed. Great care must be taken to observe the effects of
self-­disclosure on group members. To a certain extent, their ability to
accept such a stance is variable. In a group setting, however,
individual differences may be harder to detect than in the individual
setting, where the focus is always on the individual client.
Difficulties are easy to camouflage and easy to overlook. It is
reasonably safe to say, however, that all members will have difficulties
with the leaders' expressing their frustration and/or anger with the
group; thus extraordinary care must be taken in doing so.

Irreverent Communication Strategies Irreverent communication is used to
push a client "off balance," get the client's attention, present an
alternative viewpoint, or shift the client's affective response. It is a
highly useful strategy when the client is immovable, or when therapist
and client are "stuck." It has an "offbeat" flavor and uses logic to
weave a web the client cannot escape. Although it is responsive to the
client, irreverent communication is almost never the response the client
expects. An important value of irreverence is that unexpected
information is more deeply processed cognitively than expected
information is.4, 5 For irreverence to

5. Application of Fundamental DBT Strategies in Behavioral Skills
Training • 97

be effective, it must both be genuine (vs. sarcastic or judgmental) and
come from a place of compassion and warmth toward the client. Otherwise,
the client may become even more rigid. When using irreverence, a
therapist or trainer highlights some unintended aspect of the client's
communication or "reframes" it in an unorthodox manner. For example, if
the client storms out of skills training saying, "I am going to kill
myself," the skills trainer might say when catching up with the client,
"I thought you agreed not to drop out of skills training." Irreverent
communication has a matter-of-fact, almost deadpan style that is in
sharp contrast to the warm responsiveness of reciprocal communication.
Humor, a certain naiveté, and guilelessness are also characteristic of
the style. A confrontational tone can be irreverent as well, by
communicating "bullshit" to responses other than the targeted adaptive
response. For example, the skills trainer might say, "Are you out of
your mind?" or "You weren't for a minute actually believing I would
think that was a good idea, were you?" The irreverent skills trainer
also calls the client's bluff. For the client who says, "I'm quitting
therapy," the skills trainer might respond, "Would you like a referral?"
The trick here is to time the bluff carefully, with the simultaneous
provision of a safety net; it is important to leave the client a way
out. Irreverence has to be used very carefully in group skills training,
although it can be used quite liberally when skills training is
conducted individually. This is because irreverence requires a skills
trainer to observe very closely its immediate effects and move to repair
any damage as quickly as possible. It is very difficult to be that
astute and attentive to each individual in a group setting. The person a
group leader is talking to may be very receptive to an irreverent
statement, but another group member, listening in, may be horrified.
Once leaders get to know their clients fairly well, they can be more
comfortable using irreverence. As noted above, specific examples and the
rationale for irreverent communication (as well as reciprocal
communication) are discussed in Chapter 12 of the main DBT text. The
main place for irreverence, in a group context, is usually in the
individual work with each client during the first hour of a session (the
homework practice-­sharing component). In irreverence, problematic
behavior is reacted to as if it were normal, and functional adaptive
behavior is reacted to with enthusiasm, vigor, and positive
emotionality. Dysfunctional plans or actions may be overreacted to

in a humorous fashion or viewed as a fabulous opportunity for skills
practice (turning the "lemon" of problem behavior into lemonade).
Behaviors or communications may be responded to in a blunt,
confrontational style. The aim of irreverence is to jolt the individual
client, or the group as a whole, into seeing things from a new, more
enlightened perspective. Irreverent communication should help clients to
make the transition from seeing their own dysfunctional behavior as a
cause of shame and scorn to seeing it as inconsequential and even funny
and humorous. To do this, a skills trainer can only be a half step ahead
of clients; timing is of the essence. An irreverent attitude is not an
insensitive attitude; nor is it an excuse for hostile or demeaning
behavior. A group leader always takes suffering seriously, albeit
matter-of-­factly, calmly, and sometimes with humor.

Case Management Strategies Consultation-to-the-­Client Strategies In
general, DBT requires a skills trainer to play the role of a consultant
to the client rather than that of a consultant to other people in the
client's social or health care network, including other therapists the
client may have. DBT assumes that the client is capable of mediating
between various therapists and health care providers. Thus the skills
trainer does not play a parental role, and does not assume that clients
are unable to communicate in a straightforward manner with those in
their own treatment network. When safety is an immediate issue, or it is
very obvious that a client cannot or will not serve as his or her own
intermediary, the skills trainer should move from the
"consultation-to-the-­client" strategies to the "environmental
intervention" strategies (see below). The rationale, strategies, and
rules for when to use which of these two groups of strategies are
clearly laid out in Chapter 13 of the main DBT text. The consultation
strategies are quite different from how providers may have learned to
relate to other professionals treating their clients. The one exception
to these rules occurs when the skills trainers and a client's individual
therapist are all in a DBT program and consult weekly in the therapist
consultation team. The role of the skills trainers in these
consultations is to give the individual DBT therapist information about
how the client is doing in skills training; they alert the therapist to
problems that may need work in individual psycho-

98 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

therapy, and share insights that are being given in the skills training
sessions. These consultations are limited to sharing of information and
joint treatment planning. It must, of course, be clear to the clients
from the very beginning that they are being treated by a team of
therapists who will coordinate therapy at every opportunity. The
interaction of the two therapy modalities is stressed by both the
individual therapist and the skills trainers. DBT skills trainers,
however, do not serve as intermediaries for individual clients with
their individual therapists. If clients are having problems with their
individual therapists, the skills trainers usually consult with clients
on how they might address these problems with their individual
therapists. Generally, the task of the skills trainers is to help
clients use the skills they are learning to work on the problem. If a
client is in individual therapy that is independent of the DBT program
(i.e., individual work with another therapist in a different treatment
setting), the consultation-to-the-­client approach may involve some
contact with the individual therapist. These consultations ordinarily
should be conducted with the client present. The material taught in
skills training can and usually should be shared with the individual
psychotherapist. The skills trainers' task in this case is to help the
client do this effectively. A client in skills training only may be
seeing other care providers, such as a pharmacotherapist or other type
of health care provider. In these cases, the skills trainers interact
with them as needed in the same manner that they interact with non-DBT
therapists. That is, skills trainers consult to the client on how to
work with the other care providers, and the client is present for any
interactions of skills trainers with these care providers. Difficulties
that individual clients experience with other therapists and clinical
agencies can be dealt with in the skills training sessions if those
difficulties can be made relevant to the skills being taught. For
example, in the Interpersonal Effectiveness module, an individual client
may be helped to communicate more effectively with other professionals
treating him or her. In the Emotion Regulation module, clients can be
helped to modulate their emotional reactions to these professionals.
During the Distress Tolerance module, they can be assisted in accepting
and tolerating the behaviors of other professionals that they find
problematic. Generally, problems with treatment professionals brought up
in skills training sessions are dealt with in precisely

the same manner that any other interpersonal problem is dealt with.

Environmental Intervention Strategies Strategies for intervening
directly in the client's environment are rarely used by skills trainers.
Clients will often want much more environmental intervention from skills
trainers than the trainers should be willing to give. One example (which
occurs frequently with highly suicidal clients) has to do with getting a
pass from an inpatient unit to come to a session. It can often be
difficult for a client to talk a hospital into giving such a pass. The
client may then want a skills trainer to call the hospital on his or her
behalf. The trainer's first response should be to emphasize that it is
the client's responsibility to behave in such a way that inpatient
treatment personnel will want to allow him or her to leave the hospital
on a pass for skills training. My one concession to the politics of
inpatient hospitalization is that if it appears absolutely necessary, I
will call the inpatient personnel to let them know that I do indeed
expect inpatients to get themselves out on a pass to come to skills
training sessions. I do not, however, try to convince them to let a
particular client out. Over and over in skills training sessions,
trainers must stress that their job is to teach clients environmental
intervention skills so that clients can do environmental interventions
for themselves. New clients may be shocked at first with this confidence
that they will eventually succeed in learning these skills. But the
shock is balanced with an emerging pleasure at being treated as adults
who can run their own lives.

Integrative Strategies There are six integrative strategies in DBT for
responding to the following specific issues and problems in treatment:
(1) ancillary treatments, (2) crises, (3) suicidal behaviors, (4)
therapeutic relationship issues, (5) telephone calls, and (6) therapy-­
interfering or -destroying behaviors. Telephone calls and therapy-­
interfering or -destroying behaviors have already been discussed in
Chapters 3 and 4 of this manual, respectively. In the remainder of this
chapter, I briefly review the strategies for ancillary treatments,
crises, suicidal behaviors, and relationship problem solving as they
apply to skills training. All these strategies are discussed in greater
detail in Chapter 15 of the main DBT text.

5. Application of Fundamental DBT Strategies in Behavioral Skills
Training • 99

Ancillary Treatments There is nothing in standard DBT (skills training,
DBT individual treatment, DBT team) that proscribes ancillary health
care, including mental health care, as long as these programs are
clearly ancillary to DBT and not the primary treatment. The basic idea
here is that for clients in DBT, there can only be one primary therapist
responsible for the overall care of the client. In standard DBT, the
individual DBT therapist is the primary treatment provider; overall
treatment planning, crisis and suicide management, case management, and
decisions about ancillary treatments are in the hands of this therapist.
As noted in Chapter 2 of this manual, a similar stance is taken when an
individual in DBT skills training has a non-DBT individual therapist or
case manager instead of a DBT therapist. In both cases, management of
crises, suicidal behaviors, and ancillary treatment (e.g., emergency
department or inpatient admission) is handled by the skills trainers
only until the primary therapist can be contacted. Once this therapist
is contacted, client management will be turned over to him or her---or,
if necessary, the skills trainer will carry out treatment directions
given by the primary therapist. If a client is in DBT skills training
only, with no other mental health treatment provided, it is the
responsibility of the skills leaders to manage crises, suicidal
behaviors, and any other client problems that arise in treatment.
Depending on the skills of the skills trainers and the needs of the
client, these events may be managed completely by the skills trainers,
or the client may be referred for ancillary individual treatment. If
they are managed by the skills trainers, this will ordinarily require
individual sessions. Management of client suicidality or of individual
or family crises is extremely difficult in a group
setting---­particularly crises that are recurrent, such as difficulties
with a suicidal or drug-­ dependent spouse or child.

Crisis Strategies When a skills training client in crisis is also in
individual therapy, skills trainers should (1) refer the client to the
individual therapist and assist him or her in making contact if
necessary; and (2) help the client apply distress tolerance skills until
contact is made. The crisis strategies described in Chapter 15 of the
main DBT text should be used in a modified version. If the client has no
individual therapist, all

of the crisis strategies used in individual therapy should be used;
following resolution of the crisis, the client should be referred to
individual DBT, other appropriate therapy, or intensive case management.
Just as clients can be in a state of individual crisis, a group can also
be in a state of crisis. A group in crisis is functioning in a state of
emotional overload. Usually this will be the result of a common trauma,
such as a group member's committing suicide, a hostile act directed at
the entire group, or a trainer's leaving. In these instances, group
leaders should employ all of the crisis strategies used in individual
crisis intervention; they are simply applied to the entire group instead
of to one client. The steps are summarized in Tables 5.1 and 5.2.

Suicidal Behavior Strategies If the risk of suicide is imminent and the
client is also in individual therapy, a skills trainer should call the
individual therapist immediately for instructions on how to proceed. As
noted in Chapter 2 of this manual, individual therapists (both DBT and
nonDBT) of skills training clients agree at the start to be available by
phone; to provide a backup provider's phone number to call if necessary
during their clients' skills training sessions; and to provide an
up-to-date crisis plan. If neither a client's individual therapist nor a
backup therapist can be located, the skills trainer must do crisis
intervention until contact can be made with the individual therapist. If
the client does not have an individual therapist, the skills trainer
does crisis intervention and then refers the client for individual
therapy if needed (in combination with continued skills training). As a
general rule, a skills trainer should be much more conservative in the
treatment of suicidal risk than is the individual therapist. The crisis
plan is a good place to start. Steps for intervention when a client is
threatening imminent suicide or self-­injury, or is actually engaging in
self-­injurious behavior during contact (or has just engaged in it), are
discussed in detail in the main DBT text and are outlined in Table 5.2.

Relationship Problem Solving Relationship problem solving is the
application of general problem-­solving strategies to the therapeutic
relationship. In individual skills training, that relationship is
between the trainer and the client. In group skills training, however,
at least four relationships may require problem solving: (1) member ver-

100 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING TABLE 5.1. Crisis
Strategies Checklist

   Skills trainer attends to emotion rather than content.    Skills
trainer explores the problem now.    Skills trainer focuses on immediate
time frame.    Skills trainer identifies key events setting off current
emotions and sense of crisis.    Skills trainer formulates and
summarizes the problem.    Skills trainer focuses on problem solving.   
Skills trainer gives advice and makes suggestions.    Skills trainer
frames possible solutions in terms the skills group is learning.   
Skills trainer predicts future consequences of action plans.    Skills
trainer confronts group maladaptive ideas or behavior directly.   
Skills trainer clarifies and reinforces group's adaptive responses.   
Skills trainer identifies factors interfering with productive plans of
action.    Skills trainer focuses on affect tolerance.    Skills trainer
helps group commit itself to a plan of action.    Skills trainer
assesses group members' suicide risk (if necessary).    Skills trainer
anticipates a recurrence of the crisis response. Note. Adapted from
Table 15.1 in Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-­behavioral treatment of
borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford Press. Copyright
1993 by The Guilford Press. Adapted by permission.

sus group leaders, (2) group versus group leaders, (3) member versus
member, and (4) leader versus leader. Not only are there more
relationships to balance, but there are also many more issues coming
into play. The public nature of the relationships is particularly
important. Individuals who have difficulties regulating their emotions
are exquisitely sensitive to any threat of rejection or criticism; when
that rejection or criticism is public, they may experience such
overwhelming and intense shame that it completely cuts off any chance of
adequate problem solving. Thus leaders have to be correspondingly
sensitive in dealing with relationship problems in treating such
individuals. The relationship problem solving typical of process therapy
groups is simply not possible with individuals who are sensitive to
rejection, emotionally dysregulated, and without interpersonal skills.
Therefore, some of this problem solving has to be conducted individually
and outside the group sessions. Otherwise, problems may not be resolved
and may escalate to such an extent that members find it impossible to
continue in the group.

Member versus Group Leader It is essential for clients with high
suicidality and/ or severe emotion dysregulation to form an attached

relationship with at least one of the group leaders if they are to
continue in skills training. Without such attachments, the trials,
tribulations, and traumas that frequently arise in skills training will
overwhelm the clients, and they will eventually drop out of therapy.
These individual relationships, which are distinct from a leader's
relationship to the group as a whole, are enhanced by individual
attention given to group members before and after group meetings and
during breaks. Relationship problems between group members and group
leaders should not be ignored. Depending on the seriousness of the
problem, a problem-­ solving meeting may take place before, after, or
during a break in a skills training session; on the phone; or in a
scheduled individual meeting before or after a group meeting. Whenever
possible, such an individual meeting should be scheduled near in time to
the group session, so that it does not take on the character of an
individual psychotherapy session. It is best to hold the meeting in a
corner of the group therapy room or somewhere in the hall or waiting
area. Also, the focus should be kept on the member's problems with the
group or with the leader. As a first step, the leader should help the
group member observe and describe exactly what the problem is and with
whom he or she has the prob-

5. Application of Fundamental DBT Strategies in Behavioral Skills
Training • 101

lem. Sometimes the problem will be with one or the other leader. The
public light of group sessions seems to enhance members' sensitivity to
even slight rejections or insensitive comments on the part of the
leaders. Comments that might not lead to trouble in an individual
interaction can lead to great problems in group therapy. Thus, if the
problem is a leader's behavior, problem solving should be centered
around it. At other times, however, the problem is not with a group
leader's behavior, but rather with the notion of attending and working
in the group at all. With individuals in ongoing individual therapy,
these problems are usually dealt with by the individual therapist. The
primary therapist assists the client with all behaviors that interfere
with treat-

ment, including those that show up in ancillary or collateral treatment.
At times, however, a client may also profit from some individual
attention from the group leaders. During such a meeting, strategies can
be worked out to reduce the stress on the individual member. For
example, we have had some group members who simply could not sit through
an entire group session without becoming hostile or having a panic
attack. In these cases, plans were developed so that when the clients
saw that their behavior was about to go out of control, they would get
up and leave the session for a few moments' break. Careful attention
must be paid to issues of shaping. Clients who have difficulties
regulating their emotions are prone to indirect communication, which at
times requires mind reading by the skills

TABLE 5.2. DBT Suicidal Behavior Strategies Checklist

When threats of imminent suicide or self-­injury are occurring, and
skills trainer cannot turn management over to an individual therapist:
   Skills trainer assesses the risk of suicide and of self-­injury.   
Skills trainer uses known factors related to imminent suicidal behavior
to predict imminent risk.    Skills trainer knows the likely lethality
of various suicide/self-­injury methods.    Skills trainer consults with
emergency services or medical consultant about medical risk of planned
and/or available method(s).    Skills trainer follows the crisis plan
already prepared.    Skills trainer removes, or gets client to remove,
lethal items.    Skills trainer emphatically instructs client not to
commit suicide or engage in self-­injurious behavior.    Skills trainer
maintains a position that suicide is not a good solution.    Skills
trainer generates hopeful statements and solutions for coping.    Skills
trainer keeps contact when suicide risk is imminent and high (until
client's care is stabilized).    Skills trainer anticipates a recurrence
(before care is stabilized).    Skills trainer communicates client's
suicide risk to current or new individual therapist as soon as possible.
When a self-­injurious act is taking place during contact or has just
taken place:    Skills trainer assesses potential medical risk of
behavior, consulting with local emergency services or other medical
resources to determine risk when necessary.    Skills trainer assesses
client's ability to obtain medical treatment on his or her own.    If
medical emergency exists, call emergency services.    Skills trainer
stays in contact with client until aid arrives.    Skills trainer calls
individual therapist (if there is one).    If risk is low, skills
trainer instructs client to obtain medical treatment, if necessary, and
to call his or her individual therapist (if in therapy). Note. Adapted
from Table 15.2 in Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-­behavioral treatment
of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford Press. Copyright
1993 by The Guilford Press. Adapted by permission.

102 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

trainers. How much mind reading should a group skills trainer engage in?
How much outreach should be made to a withdrawn group member? The goal
is to require group members to reach their capabilities and if possible
to go slightly beyond these, without requiring so much that the members
fall back in failure. At the beginning of skills training, leaders will
often need to telephone group members when they miss sessions or after
they storm out of sessions. The key, however, is not to engage in this
behavior so reliably that clients begin to expect it, count on it, and
become distressed if a leader does not reach out or call. The best
approach is for leaders to be direct in their communications about what
they will and won't do. As discussed earlier in this chapter, the DBT
policy is to reach out and call group members when such calling is not
reinforcing maladaptive behaviors, and to refrain from reaching out when
it will reinforce such behaviors. Obviously, such judgments are
difficult. It is especially difficult at the beginning of skills
training, when leaders have little idea of the group members' respective
capabilities; in this case, it is important to make policies clear. In
all cases, however, it is essential not to assume that a particular
response on the part of the leaders is reinforcing. There is no
substitute for observing the consequences of various therapeutic
actions. Our general policies are as follows. If a member does not show
up for a skills training session, that person is called immediately by
one of the leaders and urged strongly to drop everything and come to the
group session immediately. This phone call is designed to cut off the
person's ability to avoid a group session. Clients with disordered
emotion regulation often believe that if they don't come to a group
session, they won't have to deal with group issues; calling immediately
interferes with the avoidance. The phone conversation should be kept
strictly to a discussion of how the person can get to the session, even
if he or she arrives for only the last half hour. We have at times even
offered to send a leader or a volunteer staff person out to pick up the
person when the reason for not coming is lack of transportation. In
short, the phone call in this situation serves to cut off reinforcement
for avoidance rather than to reinforce the avoidance behavior. (For
clients who know our clinic's phone number and refuse to pick up, we
often use phones with other, unknown numbers to make our calls.) If a
leader waits a few days to call, or if the phone call addresses the
person's problems, then the call may well reinforce the client's
tendency to withdraw

rather than confront problems. In this event, the withdrawal leads to
positive outreach on the part of the skills trainer, a positive
interaction, and sometimes a positive resolution. The dialectical
dilemma here is the need to choose between avoiding reinforcement for
withdrawal and allowing a member to drop out. A leader simply has to
face the fact that many clients who have trouble regulating their
emotions cannot engage in problem solving alone. Thus, in the interests
of shaping, the leader should call, do problem solving, and then
emphasize that the direct discussion of the problem does result in
problem resolution. Once this pattern is stabilized, then the leader can
gradually decrease the degree of outreach, while simultaneously verbally
instructing the individual that he or she is expected to increase
outreach to the leaders and to the skills training group. While at the
beginning the leader walks all the way over to the client's side of this
"teeter-­totter," he or she needs to grab the client and begin moving
back toward the middle. Without this movement, the very problems that
outreach is intended to resolve may be exacerbated. With highly suicidal
and/or dysregulated clients, leaders should expect to spend a
considerable amount of time resolving crises related to skills training.
The key point is that interventions should be limited to problems in the
clients' relationship to the group as a whole or to the group leaders.
In other crisis situations, leaders should instruct the clients to call
their individual therapists (or refer such a client to an individual
therapist if the client does not have one). If a leader suspects that
phone calls may be reinforcing a client's problem, outcomes of phone
calls should be closely observed, and the possibility should be
discussed openly with the client as yet another problem to be solved.
Because there are two leaders in group skills training, each leader
should take great care to observe the consultation-to-the-­client
approach. That is, one leader should not become an intermediary between
a client and the other leader. A leader can, however, work with the
client on how to resolve a problem with the other leader. In my
experience, it is rare for a group member to be having serious problems
with both group leaders at the same time. When this occurs, skills
trainers must bring the topic up with their DBT therapist consultation
team. The most difficult problem to address---and the easiest to
ignore---is that of the group member who comes to every session and
stays for the entire session, but either interacts in a hostile manner
or

5. Application of Fundamental DBT Strategies in Behavioral Skills
Training • 103

withdraws. Once I had a group member who came and fell asleep during
most group sessions. What I wanted to do was reciprocally withdraw from
the group member. When a leader withdraws from a group member, however,
the group member can be expected to withdraw even further and eventually
drop out. Addressing these issues directly in group sessions can be
threatening, can take up a lot of time, and is usually not a good idea
as a first approach. Since the group member is not directly expressing a
problem and is not asking for attention, it is the leader's
responsibility to approach him or her and set up an individual
consultation before or after a group session or during the break.
Failure to initiate an action is usually a sign that a leader is
frustrated and, perhaps, is not motivated to keep the member in the
group. At these times, having a second leader can be an enormous asset.
The one leader can prod the other to address the issue.

Group versus Group Leaders When the entire group is engaging in therapy-­
interfering behavior vis-à-vis the group leaders, the problem cannot, of
course, be dealt with individually; it is a group problem. When should
this problem be addressed directly, and when should it be ignored? An
attempt to address the problem directly often backfires. Once group
members have withdrawn or begun to interact in a hostile manner, they
are often unable to stop the withdrawal in order to process the problem.
Any move on the leaders' part to address the problem is viewed as
criticizing further or as creating more conflict, and the group simply
withdraws further. It is usually better either to ignore the group
withdrawal or hostility, or to comment on it briefly without pushing the
issue and then focus on drawing out individual group members. At this
point, it is essential to be able to cajole, distract, and otherwise
respond to the problem in a relatively indirect manner. If leaders
reciprocate with hostility, coldness, and withdrawal, the problem will
increase. This is perhaps one of the most difficult situations that
group skills training leaders must face. Unfortunately, it can often
happen in the beginning months of a new skills training group,
particularly when members are forced to be in the group and really don't
want to be there. It is a bit like trying to walk through
quicksand---­pulling with all one's strength to get one foot up, and then
putting it down again in front of the other. Although it is exhaust-

ing and frustrating, the leaders' refusal to give up or give in and
reciprocate with hostility or obvious frustration communicates clearly
to clients that no matter what they do or how withdrawn they are, the
group will progress and continue. On the other hand, leaders can do only
so much with a group if the group members are withdrawn and not talking.
In these situations, it is helpful to be able to read the clients'
minds. It is sometimes a good idea for the leaders to have a dialogue
(out loud) with one another, trying to figure out the problem. Although
over time the group members should develop the ability to resolve group
stalemates with the leaders via problem solving, at the beginning
progress is usually not visible. It is absolutely essential in these
situations that leaders not let their own judgments and hostile
interpretations have free rein. Compassion and empathy are essential.
Sharing frustration with the DBT team can be very useful here.
Individual therapists may have gathered helpful information about
reasons for the group's distress from their own individual clients.

Member versus Member Not infrequently, there is conflict between
individual members in a skills training group. In my experience,
encouraging group members to discuss their problems with one another
openly in a group session almost always results in disaster. Again,
clients who have trouble regulating their emotions often cannot tolerate
criticism in a group setting; thus memberto-­member problems need to be
dealt with privately until the collective ability to solve problems
publicly is increased. In private interactions with a distressed group
member (before or after a session or during a break), a leader's primary
role is to soothe the distressed member and to explain the offending
member in a sympathetic manner. If criticisms or member-to-­member
conflicts arise during a session, a leader's best strategy is to serve
as the third point or fulcrum. Rather than suggesting that the
conflicting members talk with one another to resolve their differences
or hurt feelings, the leader should publicly defend the offending member
while simultaneously empathizing with the offended member. If the
conflict is over procedural issues, problem solving can go forward in
the group session. For example, a conflict arose in one of our skills
training groups between one member's need for the window curtains to be
closed and other group members' need for the curtains to be open. Such
conflicts should be

104 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

mediated by a group leader, but can be discussed in group sessions. A
leader's role in these cases is somewhat like a parent's or teacher's
role with a group of quarreling children. The sensitivities of each
individual member must be respected; a leader must resist the tendency
at times to sacrifice one member for the good of the whole.

Leader versus Leader Perhaps the most damaging conflict in conducting
DBT group skills training is that which can arise between the two group
leaders. Smooth coordination can be especially difficult when the
leaders have different theoretical perspectives, when they take
different views of how groups should be conducted, or when one or both
leaders wish for a different role in the skills training than the role
assigned. These issues need to be resolved outside the skills training
sessions, preferably before the first session. When conflicts arise in
sessions, the usual procedure is for the co-­leader to defer to the
primary leader during the session and argue his or her case afterward. A
particular problem arises when the co-­leader is better tuned in to group
members and to the unfolding process than the primary leader. This is a
situation where the DBT consultation team can be quite useful. No matter
what the difference in experience between leaders may be, it is
important for them not to fall into the trap of who is "right" and who
is "wrong." Not only is this approach dialectically flawed, but it is
rarely useful in resolving a conflict. A related situation can occur
when group members complain about an absent leader to the other leader.
How should the leader who is present react? The most important thing is
not to become split off from the absent leader. The same strategy used
when an absent member is being discussed should be employed. That is,
the present leader should portray the absent leader in a sympathetic
light, while simultaneously validating the concerns of the members
present. It is a tricky line to walk, but essential nonetheless.

Relationship Generalization Leaders must be vigilant in noticing when
interpersonal relationships within the group are similar to problems
individuals are having outside group sessions. A number of typical
problems show up in group skills training. The exquisite sensitivity to
criticism of individuals with emotion dysregulation, and the rapid onset
of extreme shame, almost

always create problems. The public nature of the group setting simply
exacerbates these problems. Problems that individuals have with their
families or their children are likely to show up in the group. Many
members have problems in coping with authority figures, especially when
the authority figures are telling them what to do. Others have problems
with being authority figures and voicing their opinions. Therefore, at
least some clients will have problems doing homework practice. Some
individuals will have problems admitting to progress; others may have
difficulties admitting to lack of progress or to not knowing how to use
a skill. The inability of many individuals with high emotion
dysregulation to put personal problems on a shelf and attend to the
skills training material is similar to their difficulties outside skills
training at work, at school, or with their family members. Their
inability to remember to practice skills (or to get themselves to
practice even when they do remember), and then to punish or berate
themselves in a judgmental fashion, is indicative of their general
difficulties with self-­management. Their tendency to withdraw
emotionally and become silent when any conflict occurs during group
sessions is typical of their difficulties in dealing with conflict
outside the group. An often unstated, but particularly difficult,
problem of many group members is their inability to shut themselves off
emotionally from other group members' pain. Consequent exacerbation of
their own painful emotions can result in either panic attacks, hostile
behavior, or complete emotional withdrawal. As can be seen from just
this partial list, skills training in a group setting can be counted on
to bring up many of the everyday problems that individuals with emotion
dysregulation have. Some group members who ordinarily have reasonably
good emotion regulation may have very little regulation when specific
topics come up. This is especially true in two types of situations. The
first is when a client's main problems are with a relative or close
friend who also has a severe disorder, and whom the client cannot seem
to help. The second is when the client's family or close friends
persistently do things that lead to misery for the client. Trouble
arises in such cases when clients become determined to get the group
leaders to help them figure out how to change the other persons. These
clients may view their own use of skills as relatively hopeless, or may
have a blind spot about their own ineffective behaviors. Often the only
strategy that can work with these clients is to insist repeatedly that
the focus of skills training is on developing their own skills, not

5. Application of Fundamental DBT Strategies in Behavioral Skills
Training • 105

those of their relatives or friends. In these cases, it is essential
that the skills leaders remain firm. At times an activity may need to be
stopped to address the problem before continuing. In one of my groups,
for example, I was teaching problem solving. One client (whose problem
with her son was the example to be solved) repeatedly insisted that the
only possible solutions were new behaviors from her son. All attempts by
me to focus on solutions that the mother could implement were met with
tears and screams that she was being invalidated. I finally realized I
could not use that problem to demonstrate problem solving, said as much,
and made up a new example to work with. I then discussed the issue with
the client at the end of the group session. The basic idea of
relationship generalization strategies is to help members see when their
everyday problems are showing up within the skills training group.
However, this can be quite tricky, because it must be done without
invalidating clients' real problems with the group or with specific
members. It is important that leaders not be overinclined to attribute
all within-­therapy problems to outside problems, rather than to
inadequacies in the group format or to the leaders' application of the
treatment. Clients' difficulties in accepting negative feedback or
implied criticism suggest that leaders must be extremely sensitive in
applying the relationship generalization strategies. In my own
experience, the best way to do this is to take an individual problem,
make it into a universal problem, and then discuss it in that context.
Astute group members may figure out that they are the ones being talked
to, but still it is not a public humiliation. The first step in
relationship generalization is to relate the within-­ session
relationship problem to general problems that need work both in and out
of the skills training group. Just making this connection (an insight
strategy; see Chapter 9 of the main DBT text) can sometimes be
therapeutic. The next step is to use problem-­solving strategies to
develop

alternative response patterns for members to try. The key in
relationship generalization is to plan for rather than to assume
generalization. Planning, at a minimum, requires discussion with the
group members. The discussion should also include developing homework in
which clients can practice applying new skills to everyday situations.
Since this is the essential idea undergirding skills training and
homework practice anyway, relationship generalization is especially
compatible with DBT skills training. The Appendices to Part I, which
follow this chapter, provide a wide variety of options for structuring
DBT skills training programs. Part II of this manual (Chapters 6--10)
presents instructions for how to orient clients to skills training and
to teach the four DBT skills training modules. The handouts and
worksheets for skills training clients can be found on the special
website for this manual (www. guilford.com/skills-training-manual) and
may be downloaded and printed.

References 1. Linehan, M. M. (1997). Validation and psychotherapy. In A.
C. Bohart & L. S. Greenberg (Eds.), Empathy reconsidered: New directions
in psychotherapy (pp. 353--392). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. 2. Cayne, B. S., & Bolander, D. O. (Eds.). (1991). New
Webster's dictionary and thesaurus of the English language. New York:
Lexicon. 3. Whitaker, C. A. (1975). Psychotherapy of the absurd: With a
special emphasis on the psychotherapy of aggression. Family Process, 14,
1--16. 4. Bower, G. H., Black, J. B., & Turner, T. J. (1979). Scripts in
memory for text. Cognitive Psychology, 11(2), 177--220. 5. Friedman, A.
(1979). Framing pictures: The role of knowledge in automatized encoding
and memory for gist. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
108(3), 316--355.

Part I Appendices

Introduction: Options for Putting Together Your DBT Skills Training
Program There are many ways to put together a skills training program.
This manual includes not only the standard skills used in most standard
6-month and 1-year DBT programs, but also a large set of additional
skills that you can integrate with the standard skills if you wish.
Included are optional skills that expand on the standard skills, and
supplementary skills that expand skills training to new areas. You can
adapt your skills program to your particular populations and time
constraints. The teaching notes in Chapters 6--10 give instructions on
how to use each of the skills, and identify those that are ordinarily
optional and those that are supplemental. Whether a skill is standard,
optional, or supplementary, however, can change, depending on the type
of skills program you are running. For example, validation as a separate
skill is optional in the adult program, but standard in the multifamily
adolescent program. The skills for addictive behaviors are supplementary
with most populations, but standard when the clients being treated are
individuals with addictions. These Appendices present session-by-­
session schedules for 11 different skills programs. Many of the
schedules I have provided have been used in treatment studies where
outcomes for DBT were very strong. Other schedules are still being
evaluated; they range from the standard 24-week DBT skills program that
repeats modules for a full year to a 4-week skills program. The skills
schedules are presented in Schedule 1. Descriptions of the schedules are
as follows.

Schedule 1: 24 Weeks, Linehan Standard Adult DBT Skills Training
(Research Studies, 2006 and After). This is the schedule I have used in
clinical outcome studies since 2006.1, 2, 3 One cycle through the skills
runs 24 weeks, and it is then typically repeated, for a total of 48
weeks. In research, we have used it with individuals who met criteria
for BPD and were at high risk for suicide, as well as with suicidal
individuals meeting criteria for both BPD and PTSD. Clinically, we use
it with suicidal adults meeting criteria for BPD, as well as with our
friendsand-­family skills groups. Clients in the latter type of group
enter with no known diagnosis of mental disorder themselves; they
usually attend to learn skills for coping better with difficult people
in their lives (e.g., children, partners, parents, or bosses/co-­
workers).  Schedule 2: 24 Weeks, Linehan Standard Adult DBT Skills
Training (before 2006). This schedule was used in research and clinical
skills classes at my clinic at the University of Washington.4, 5 It was
based on the original DBT skills manual, which contained fewer skills.
In Schedule 2, I have translated as well as possible the names and
numbering of the original skills into their names and numbers in this
manual. As you can see, early research used fewer skills than subsequent
studies, although in both Schedules 1 and 2, programs have run 48 weeks
each (24 weeks, repeated once).  Schedule 3: 12 Weeks, Soler Adult DBT
Skills Training; Schedule 4: 20 Weeks, McMain Adult DBT Skills Training;
and Schedule 5: 14 Weeks, Neacsiu Adult DBT Emotion Regulation Skills
Training. Schedules 3--5 outline the skills used in three different
skills-only treatment programs. Schedule 3 was tested with women meeting
criteria for BPD, in research evaluating the efficacy and 107

108 • I. AN INTRODUCTION TO DBT SKILLS TRAINING

effectiveness of DBT skills compared to standard group psychotherapy.6,
7 Schedule 4 was evaluated by McMain as an intervention for individuals
with BPD on a wait list for standard DBT.8 Both of these studies were
conducted before the current set of revised skills was available. I have
translated as well as possible the names and numbering of the skills
used by both Soler and McMain into their names and numbers in this
manual. Schedule 5 was evaluated by Neacsiu (using the revised skills)
as a treatment for individuals without BPD, but with high emotion
dysregulation and at least one mood disorder.9  Schedule 6: 25 Weeks,
Adolescent Multifamily DBT Skills Training. This is the multifamily
skills program for families of teens high in emotion dysregulation and
at high risk for suicide. The skills program is part of a standard DBT
program for adolescents. It is in use at the University of Washington
and at the University of California at Los Angeles. We have found that
teens and their parents have no problems with using the same handouts as
our adult clients. The most common feedback we get from teens in our
posttreatment interviews is that the skills groups were their favorite
parts of the treatment. For further information on conducting skills
training with teens (and particularly for in-depth discussion of how to
treat teens with DBT), see our book on DBT for treating suicidal
adolescents,10 as well as the new DBT skills book for adolescents.11 
Schedule 7: Variable Sessions, Inpatient DBT Skills Training
(Intermediate Unit and Acute Unit). Two sets of skills are given here.
The first is for individuals on an inpatient unit for an intermediate
length of stay; the second is for individuals on an acute unit,
ordinarily for 1--2 days.12 Both skill sets assume a 7-day skills
curriculum. If the average intermediate length of stay is 2 weeks,
patients can be exposed to each skill twice. For a 2-day stay, one skill
might be taught over and over.13  Schedule 8: DBT Skills for Addictive
Behaviors (to Integrate with Schedule 1 Skills); and Schedule 9: DBT
Parenting Skills (to Integrate with Schedule 1 Skills). Schedules 8 and
9 outline sets of skills that can be integrated into any of the standard
sets of skills training.14, 15 They are presented here as they would be
integrated into Schedule 1. Schedule 8 is the set of addiction skills
for addictive behaviors that we integrated into standard DBT skills
training in the studies we have conducted at the University of
Washington for men and women meeting criteria for both BPD and drug
dependence and/or opiate addiction. Schedule 9 highlights the behavior

change strategies and validation skills so important in parent training.
Schedule 10: Comprehensive DBT Mindfulness Skills Training. This
schedule includes the mindfulness skills from each DBT module. This is a
particularly good set of skills if you are offering an "introduction to
mindfulness" program. The skills can be taught as laid out in the
schedule, or taught in other arrangements that meet the needs and
desires of the group you are teaching. If you have a long-term
mindfulness program, you can alternate between teaching each skill and
having a silent session focused on mindfulness practice (e.g.,
meditation, mindful walking, or other practices). Consider starting
sessions with meditation (use a mindfulness bell for timing, and
consider rotating timers). Begin with 5--10 minutes of mindful
meditation, increasing it over time to 20--25 minutes. For instructions
for mindful meditation, draw upon your own training, ideas from
mindfulness handouts, or recording-led mindfulness practices. Consider
ending your sessions with brief readings; for example, read one story
per session from The Song of the Bird by Anthony DeMello.16 After the
reading, give participants time to think about how the reading is
relevant to their lives. After 4--5 minutes of reflection, ring your
mindfulness bell. Starting with the skills leader, invite participants
to share brief comments on the reading. (Be sure to let people say, "I
pass.")  Schedule 11: Advanced DBT Skills Training. This set of skills
works well in a DBT advanced class. These are skills that are often not
included in the standard skills groups because of time constraints, but
are often requested by skills group participants. It is important to
note, however, that in advanced classes participants usually want to
have a large say in what skills are covered. Participants may want to
spend very little time on reviewing old skills or learning new skills,
and instead may want to focus the agenda on problem-­solving issues that
have come up in participants' lives during the week. When this is the
case, you can teach new skills when they are appropriate for solving
members' problems, and otherwise ask participants to focus on using
their own skills to help one another use DBT skills to solve problems.
The issues here are often what skill is needed and how to use it
effectively. When this is the agenda, skills practice and role playing
may occupy much of the group's time. A notebook with all the skills can
be useful here for participants to use as a sort of dictionary to help
them find appropriate skills for specific problems.

Part I Appendices • 109

In sum, there are many types of DBT skills training programs and many
different approaches to teaching the DBT skills. Studies are in progress
around the world as I write this. It is useful to keep up on the DBT
skills literature. To find skills research, go to Google Scholar
(http://scholar.google. com) and enter "DBT Skills Training." If you
read of programs that you believe would be useful in your environment,
get in touch with the authors and ask for a list of the skills they
taught. You can also get new ideas for providing skills training by
searching the Internet periodically. For example, you can find videos of
me teaching some of the skills on YouTube (search "Marsha Linehan DBT
skills"). There are many DBT self-help sites that can also give you good
ideas on teaching (search "DBT self-help"). The International Society
for the Improvement and Teaching of DBT (ISITDBT; http://isitdbt.net)
has an annual meeting the day before the annual meeting of the
Association of Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies (ABCT; www. abct.org).
Workshops and research on DBT skills are very often available there as
well. If you are using a skills set without research data, be sure to
keep track of outcomes and client feedback in your own program, and make
changes as needed.

References 1. Linehan, M. M., Comtois, K. A., Murray, A. M., Brown, M.
Z., Gallop, R. J., Heard, H. L., et al. (2006). Two-year randomized
trial + follow-up of dialectical behavior therapy vs. therapy by experts
for suicidal behavior and borderline personality disorder. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 63(7), 757--766. 2. Harned, M. S., Chapman, A. L.,
Dexter-Mazza, E. T., Murray, A., Comtois, K. A., & Linehan, M. M.
(2008). Treating co-­ occurring Axis I disorders in chronically suicidal
women with borderline personality disorder: A 2-year randomized trial of
dialectical behavior therapy versus community treatment by experts.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76(6), 1068--1075. 3.
Linehan, M. M., Korslund, K. E., Harned, M. S., Gallop, R. J., Lungu,
A., Neacsiu, A. D., McDavid, J., Comtois, K. A., & Murray-­Gregory, A. M.
(2014). Dialectical Behavior Therapy for high suicide risk in borderline
personality disorder: A component analysis. Unpublished manuscript. 4.
Linehan, M. M., Armstrong, H. E., Suarez, A., Allmon, D., & Heard, H. L.
(1991). Cognitive-­behavioral treatment of chronically parasuicidal
borderline patients. Archives of General Psychiatry, 48, 1060-- 1064.

5.  Linehan, M. M., Heard, H. L., & Armstrong, H. E. (1993).
    Naturalistic follow-up of a behavioral treatment for chronically
    parasuicidal borderline patients. Archives of General Psychiatry,
    50, 971--974.
6.  Soler, J., Pascual, J. C., Tiana, T., Cebria, A., Barrachina, J.,
    Campins, M. J., et al. (2009). Dialectical behaviour therapy skills
    training compared to standard group therapy in borderline
    personality disorder: A 3-month randomized controlled clinical
    trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47, 353--358.
7.  Soler, J., Pascual, J. C., Campins, J., Barrachina, J., Puigdemont,
    D., Alvarez, E., et al. (2005). Doubleblind, placebo-­controlled
    study of dialectical behavior therapy plus olanzapine for borderline
    personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(6),
    1221--1224.
8.  McMain, S. F., Guimond, T., Habinski, L., Barnhart, R., &
    Streiner, D. L. (2014). Dialectical behaviour therapy skills
    training versus a waitlist control for self-harm and borderline
    personality disorder. Manuscript submitted for publication.
9.  Neacsiu, A. D., Eberle, J. W., Kramer, R., Wiesmann, T., &
    Linehan, M. M. (2014). Dialectical behavior therapy skills for
    transdiagnostic emotion dysregulation: A pilot randomized controlled
    trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 59, 40--51.
10. Miller, A. L., Rathus, J. H., & Linehan, M. M. (2007). Dialectical
    behavior therapy with suicidal adolescents. New York: Guilford
    Press.
11. Rathus, J. H., & Miller, A. L. (2015). DBT skills manual for
    adolescents. New York: Guilford Press.
12. Swenson, C. R., Witterholt, S., & Bohus, M. (2007). Dialectical
    behavior therapy on inpatient units. In L. A. Dimeff & K. Koerner
    (Eds.), Dialectical behavior therapy in clinical practice:
    Applications across disorders and settings (pp. 69--111). New York:
    Guilford Press.
13. Bohus, M., Haaf, B., Simms, T., Schmahl, C., Limberger, M. F.,
    Schmahl, C., et al. (2004). Effectiveness of inpatient DBT for BPD:
    A controlled trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 42(5), 487--499.
14. Linehan, M. M., Schmidt, H., Dimeff, L. A., Craft, J. C., Kanter,
    J., & Comtois, K. A. (1999). Dialectical behavior therapy for
    patients with borderline personality disorder and drug-­dependence.
    American Journal on Addictions, 8, 279--292.
15. Linehan, M. M., Dimeff, L. A., Reynolds, S. K., Comtois, K. A.,
    Shaw-Welch, S., Heagerty, P., et al. (2002). Dialectical behavior
    therapy versus comprehensive validation plus 12-step for the
    treatment of opioid dependent women meeting criteria for borderline
    personality disorder. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 67, 13--26.
16. De Mello, A. (1984). The song of the bird. New York: Image Books.

Schedule 1: 24 Weeks, Linehan Standard Adult DBT Skills Training
Schedule (Research Studies, 2006 and After) Week

Standard Handout(s)

Optional Handout(s)

Repeated at the start of each module: 2 Weeks Orientation, Mindfulness
Skills Orientation; Goals and Guidelines

1

G1: Goals of Skills Training G3: Guidelines for Skills Training G4:
Skills Training Assumptions

G1a: Options for Solving Any Problem

Wise Mind; Mindfulness "What" Skills

1

M1: Goals of Mindfulness Practice M2: Overview: Core Mindfulness Skills
M3: Wise Mind: States of Mind M4: Taking Hold of Your Mind: "What"
Skills

M1a: Mindfulness Definitions (to hand out for home) M3a: Ideas for
Practicing Wise Mind

Mindfulness "How" Skills

2

M4: Taking Hold of Your Mind: "What" Skills (cont.) M5: Taking Hold of
Your Mind: "How" Skills

Module 1

+6 Weeks Distress Tolerance Skills

Crisis Survival; Pros and Cons

3

DT1: Goals of Distress Tolerance DT2: Overview: Crisis Survival Skills
DT2: When to Use Crisis Survival Skills DT5: Pros and Cons

DT4: The STOP Skill

TIP skills

4

DT6: Tip Skills: Changing Your Body Chemistry

DT6a: Using Cold Water, Step by Step DT6b: Paired Muscle Relaxation,
Step by Step

Distracting; Self-­Soothing; Improving the Moment

5

DT7: Distracting DT8: Self-­Soothing DT9: Improving the Moment

DT8a: Body Scan Meditation, Step by Step DT9a: Sensory Awareness, Step
by Step

Reality Acceptance

6

DT10: Overview: Reality Acceptance Skills DT11: Radical Acceptance
DT11b: Practicing Radical Acceptance, Step by Step (or use DTWS 9:
Radical Acceptance) DT12: Turning the Mind

DT11a: Radical Acceptance: Factors That Interfere with DTWS9: Radical
Acceptance

Willingness; Half-­ Smiling; Willing Hands

7

DT13: Willingness DT14: Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands

DT14a: Practicing Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands

Mindfulness of Thoughts

8

DT15: Mindfulness of Current Thoughts DT15a: Practicing Mindfulness of
Thoughts

9, 10 Module 2

2 Weeks Orientation, Mindfulness Skills +7 Weeks Emotion Regulation
Skills

Understanding and Labeling Emotions

11

ER1: Goals of Emotion Regulation ER2: Overview: Understanding and Naming
Emotions ER3: What Emotions Do for You ER4: What Makes It Hard to
Regulate Your Emotions ER5: A Model for Describing Emotions ER6: Ways to
Describe Emotions

ER4a: Myths about Emotions ER5a: A Brief Model for Describing Emotions

Checking the Facts

12

ER7: Overview: Changing Emotional Responses ER8: Checking the Facts
(with ERBWS5: Checking the Facts)

ER8a: Examples of Emotions That Fit the Facts

110

Schedule 1 (cont.) Week

Standard Handout(s)

Opposite Action

13

ER10: Opposite Action (with ERWS6: Figuring Out How to Change Unwanted
Emotions) ER11: Figuring Out Opposite Actions (with ERWS7)

Problem Solving

14

ER12: Problem Solving ER13: Reviewing Opposite Action and Problem
Solving

A

15

ER14: Overview: Reducing Vulnerability to Emotion Mind ER15:
Accumulating Positive Emotions in the Short Term ER16: Pleasant Events
List

16

ER17: Accumulating Positive Emotions in the Long Term ER18: Values and
Priorities List

ER20b: Sleep Hygiene Protocol

17

ER19: Build Mastery and Cope Ahead ER20: Taking Care of Your Mind by
Taking Care of Your Body ER22: Mindfulness of Current Emotions

ER20a: Nightmare Protocol, Step by Step ER20b: Sleep Hygiene Protocol
ER21: Overview: Managing Really Difficult Emotions ER23: Managing
Extreme Emotions ER24: Troubleshooting Emotion Regulation Skills (with
ERWS16: Troubleshooting Emotion Regulation Skills) ER25: Review of
Skills for Emotion Regulation

B, C; PLEASE; Mindfulness of Emotions

Optional Handout(s) ER9: Opposite Action and Problem Solving: Deciding
Which to Use

2 Weeks Orientation, Mindfulness Skills

18, 19 Module 3

+5 Weeks Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills

Understanding Obstacles; Clarifying Goals

20

IE1: Goals of Interpersonal Effectiveness IE2: Factors in the Way of
Interpersonal Effectiveness IE4: Clarifying Goals in Interpersonal
Situations

DEAR MAN

21

IE5: Guidelines for Objective Effectiveness: Getting What You Want (DEAR
MAN)

IE5a: Applying DEAR MAN Skills to a Difficult Current Interaction

GIVE

22

IE6: Guidelines for Relationship Effectiveness: Keeping the Relationship
(GIVE)

IE6a: Expanding the V in GIVE: Levels of Validation IE17: Validation
IE18: A "How To" Guide to Validation IE18a: Identifying Validation

FAST

23

IE7: Guidelines for Self-­Respect Effectiveness: Keeping Respect for
Yourself (FAST)

Evaluating Options

24

IE8: Evaluating . . . Options (with IEWS6: The Dime Game) IE9:
Troubleshooting . . . (with IEWS7: Troubleshooting)

Note. Repeat sequence for 1-year program.

111

Schedule 2: 24 Weeks, Linehan Standard Adult DBT Skills Training
Schedule (Research Studies before 2006) Week

Standard Handout(s) 2 Weeks Orientation, Mindfulness Skills 1 G1: Goals
of Skills Training G3: Guidelines for Skills Training 1 M3: Wise Mind:
States of Mind M4: Taking Hold of Your Mind: "What" Skills 2 M4: Taking
Hold of Your Mind: "What" Skills (cont.) M5: Taking Hold of Your Mind:
"How" Skills Module 2 6 Weeks Distress Tolerance Skills Pros and Cons 3
DT1: Goals of Distress Tolerance DT5: Pros and Cons Distracting
Self-­Soothing 4 DT7: Distracting DT8: Self-­Soothing Improving the Moment
5 DT9: Improving the Moment Reality Acceptance 6 DT11: Radical
Acceptance DT12: Turning the Mind Half-­Smiling 7 DT14: Half-­Smilinga
Willingness 8 DT13: Willingness 9--10 Repeat 2 Weeks Orientation,
Mindfulness Skills Module 3 6 Weeks Emotion Regulation Skills
Understanding Emotions ER1: Goals of Emotion Regulation ER3: What
Emotions Do for You 11 ER4: What Makes It Hard to Regulate Your Emotions
ER4a: Myths about Emotions Understanding and 12 ER5: A Model for
Describing Emotions Labeling Emotions ER6: Ways to Describe Emotions 13
ER15: Accumulating Positive Emotions in the Short Term ER16: Pleasant
Events List 14 ER17: Accumulating Positive Emotions in the Long Term
ER18: Values and Priorities List 15 ER19: Building Masterya ER20: Taking
Care of Your Mind By Taking Care of Your Body ER22: Mindfulness of
Current Emotions Opposite Action 16 ER10: Opposite Action (with WRWS6:
Figuring Out How to Change Unwanted Emotions) ER11: Figuring Out
Opposite Actions 17--18 Repeat 2 Weeks Orientation, Mindfulness Skills
Module 4 6 Weeks Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills Understanding
Obstacles; 19 IE1: Goals of Interpersonal Effectiveness Clarifying Goals
IE2: Factors In the Way of Interpersonal Effectiveness 20 IE4:
Clarifying Goals in Interpersonal Situations DEAR MAN 21 IE5: Guidelines
for Objective Effectiveness: (DEAR MAN) GIVE Skills 22 IE6: Guidelines
for Relationship Effectiveness: Keeping the Relationship (GIVE) FAST
Skills 23 IE7: Guidelines for Self-­Respect Effectiveness: Keeping
Respect for Yourself (FAST) Evaluating Options 24 IE8: Evaluating
Options . . . (with IEWS6: The Dime Game) IE9: Troubleshooting . . .
(with IEWS7: Troubleshooting . . . ) Module 1 Orientation; Goals and
Guidelines Wise Mind; Mindfulness "What" Skills Mindfulness "How" Skills

Note. Repeat sequence for 1-year program. aThese handout titles differ
from their present versions because the handouts did not include certain
skills.

112

Schedule 3: 13 Weeks, Soler Adult DBT Skills Training Schedule Week

Standard Handout(s)

2 Weeks Orientation, Mindfulness Skills Orientation; Wise Mind

2

G1: Goals of Skills Training G3: Guidelines for Skills Training M3: Wise
Mind: States of Mind

Mindfulness "What" Skills

1

M4: Taking Hold of Your Mind: "What" Skills

Mindfulness "How" Skills

2

M5: Taking Hold of Your Mind: "How" Skills 3 Weeks Distress Tolerance
Skills

Distracting; Self-­Soothing; Improving the Moment

3

DT7: Distracting DT8: Self-­Soothing DT9: Improving the Moment

Reality Acceptance

4

DT11: Radical Acceptance DT11b: Practicing Radical Acceptance, Step by
Step (or DTWS9, Radical Acceptance) DT12: Turning the Mind

Willingness; Mindfulness of Thoughts

5

DT13: Willingness DT15: Mindfulness of Current Thoughts 4 Weeks Emotion
Regulation Skills

Understanding Emotions Understanding and Labeling Emotions

6

ER1: Goals of Emotion Regulation ER3: What Emotions Do for You ER5:
Model for Describing Emotions ER6: Ways to Describe Emotions

A

7

ER15: Accumulating Positive Emotions in the Short Term ER16: Pleasant
Events List ER17: Accumulating Positive Emotions in the Long Term

B, C; PLEASE; Mindfulness of Emotions

8

ER19: Build Masterya ER20: Taking Care of Your Mind by Taking Care of
Your Body ER22: Mindfulness of Current Emotions

Opposite Action

9

ER10: Opposite Action (with ERWS6: Figuring Out How to Change Unwanted
Emotions)

4 Weeks Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills Understanding Obstacles;
Clarifying Goals

10

IE1: Goals of Interpersonal Effectiveness IE2: Factors In the Way of
Interpersonal Effectiveness

DEAR MAN

10

IE5: Guidelines for Objective Effectiveness: Getting What You Want (DEAR
MAN)

GIVE FAST

11

IE6: Guidelines for Relationship Effectiveness: Keeping the Relationship
(GIVE) IE7: Guidelines for Self-­Respect Effectiveness: Keeping Respect
for Yourself (FAST)

Evaluating Options

12

IE8: Evaluating Your Options (with IEWS6: The Dime Game)

aThis handout titles differs from its present versions because the
handout did not include skills for cope ahead.

113

Schedule 4: 20 Weeks, McMain Adult DBT Skills Training Week Standard
Handout(s) 1 G1: Goals of Skills Training M3: Wise Mind: States of Mind
4 Weeks Distress Tolerance Skills Pros and Cons 2 DT1: Goals of Distress
Tolerance DT5: Pros and Cons TIP Skills; Self Soothing 3 DT6: TIP
Skills: Changing Your Body Chemistry DT7: Distracting DT8: Self-­Soothing
Radical Acceptance; 4 DT11: Radical Acceptance Willingness DT12: Turning
the Mind DT13: Willingness DT14: Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands
Mindfulness "What" Skills 5 M4: Taking Hold of Your Mind: Mindfulness
"What" Skills 5 Weeks Interpersonal: Walking the Middle Path Dialectics
6 IE16: How to Think and Act Dialectically IE16a: Examples of Opposite
Sides That Can Both Be True IE16b: Important Opposites to Balance
Self-­Validation 7 IE17: Validation (focusing on self-­validation IE19:
Recovering From Invalidation Validation of Others 8 IE17 Validation
(focusing on validating others) IE18: A "How To" Guide to Validation
Behavioral Principles---­ 9 IE20: Strategies for Increasing the
Probability of Desired Behaviors Positive Reinforcement Mindfulness
"How" Skills 10 M5: Mindfulness How Skills 5 Weeks Emotion Regulation
Skills 11 ER1: Goals of Emotion Regulation Rationale; Model of ER3: What
Emotions Do for You Emotions; Observing and ER5: A Model for Describing
Emotions Describing Emotions ER6: Ways to Describe Emotions PLEASE 12
ER20: Taking Care of Your Mind by Taking Care of Your Body 13 ER15:
Accumulating Positive Emotions in the Short Term Increasing Positive
ER16: Pleasant Events List Experiences (Short-Term ER17: Accumulating
Positive Emotions in the Long Term and Long-Term); Mastery ER18: Values
and Priorities List ER19: Build Mastery and Cope Skills Opposite Action
14 ER9: Opposite Action and Problem Solving: Deciding Which to Use ER10:
Opposite Action (with ERWS6: Figuring Out How to Change Unwanted
Emotions) ER11: Figuring Out Opposite Actions Mindfulness in Everyday 15
Review and practice mindfulness skills Life ER22: Mindfulness of Current
Emotions 5 Weeks Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills Rationale;
Priorities 16 IE1: Goals of Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills IE3:
Overview: Obtaining Objectives Skillfully IE4: Clarifying Goals in
Interpersonal Situations DEAR MAN 17 IE5: Guidelines for Objective
Effectiveness: Getting What You Want (DEAR MAN) GIVE FAST 18 IE6:
Guidelines for Relationship Effectiveness: Keeping the Relationship
(GIVE) IE7: Guidelines for Self-­Respect Effectiveness: Keeping Respect
for Yourself (FAST) Identifying Obstacles 19 IE2: Factors in the Way of
Interpersonal Effectiveness IEWS7: Troubleshooting Interpersonal
Effectiveness with Skills Evaluating Options 20 IE8: Evaluating Options
. . . (with IEWS6: The Dime Game) Orientation; Mindfulness

114

Schedule 5: 14 Weeks, Neacsiu Adult DBT Emotion Regulation Skills
Training Week Standard Handout(s) 2 Weeks Orientation, Mindfulness
Skills Wise Mind; Observe 1 M3: Wise Mind M4: Taking Hold of Your Mind:
Mindfulness "What" Skills Describe; Participate; Nonjudgmentally; 2 M4:
Taking Hold of Your Mind: Mindfulness "What" Skills One-­Mindfully;
Effectively M5: Taking Hold of Your Mind: Mindfulness "How" Skills 6
Weeks Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills Understand, Identify, Label
Emotions 3 ER1: Goals of Emotion Regulation ER2: Overview: Understanding
and Naming Emotions ER3: What Emotions Do for You ER4: What Makes It
Hard to Regulate Your Emotions ER5: A Model for Describing Emotions ER6:
Ways to Describe Emotions Checking the Facts 4 ER7: Overview: Changing
Emotional Responses ER8: Checking the Facts (with ERWS5: Checking the
Facts Opposite Action 5 ER10: Opposite Action (with ERWS6: Figuring Out
How to Change Unwanted Emotions) ER11: Figuring Out Opposite Actions
Problem Solving 6 ER12: Problem Solving ER13: Reviewing Opposite Action
and Problem Solving Accumulating Positives and Building 7 ER15:
Accumulating Positive Emotions in the Short Term Mastery ER17:
Accumulating Positive Emotions in the Long Term ER19: Build Mastery and
Cope Ahead Cope Ahead and PLEASE 8 ER19: Build Mastery and Cope Ahead
ER20: Taking Care of Your Mind by Taking Care of Your Body 1 Week Review
of Mindfulness Skills Wise Mind; Observe 9 M3: Wise Mind M4: Taking Hold
of Your Mind: Mindfulness "What" Skills Describe; Participate;
Nonjudgmentally; 9 M4: Taking Hold of Your Mind: Mindfulness "What"
Skills One-­Mindfully; Effectively M5: Taking Hold of Your Mind:
Mindfulness "How" Skills 4 Weeks Distress Tolerance Skills TIP Skills 10
DT6: TIP Skills: Changing Your Body Chemistry Distracting,
Self-­Soothing, Improving 11 DT7: Distracting the Moment DT8:
Self-­Soothing DT9: Improving the Moment Radical Acceptance; Turning the
Mind 12 DT10: Overview: Reality Acceptance Skills DT11: Radical
Acceptance DT11b:Practicing Radical Acceptance, Step by Step (or DTWS:
Radical Acceptance) DT12: Turning the Mind Willingness; Half-­Smiling;
Mindfulness 13 DT13: Willingness of Thoughts DT14: Half-­Smiling and
Willing Hands DT15: Mindfulness of Current Thoughts 1 Week Interpersonal
Effectiveness Skills DEAR MAN, GIVE FAST; Interpersonal 14 IE5:
Guidelines for Objective Effectiveness: (DEAR MAN) Validation Behavioral
Principles in IE6: Guidelines for Relationship Effectiveness: Keeping
the Relationships Relationship (GIVE) IE7: Guidelines for Self-­Respect
Effectiveness: Keeping Respect for Yourself (FAST) IE17: Validation
IE18: A "How To" Guide to Validation IE20: Strategies for Increasing the
Probability of Desired Behaviors IE21: Strategies for Decreasing or
Stopping Undesired Behaviors IE22: Tips for Using Behavior Change
Strategies Effectively 115

Schedule 6: 25 Weeks, Adolescent Multifamily DBT Skills Training Week

Standard Handout(s) Optional Handout(s) Repeated at the start of each
module: 2 Weeks Orientation, Mindfulness Skills + 1 Week Middle Path
Skills G1a: Options for Solving Any Problem Orientation 1 G1: Goals of
Skills Training G2: Overview: Introduction to Skills G3: Guidelines for
Skills Training Training G4: Skills Training Assumptions G7: Chain
Analysis (if not taught in G5: Biosocial Theory (if not reviewed in
individual therapy) individual therapy) G8: Missing-Links Analysis (if
not taught as part of homework review) M2: Overview: Core Mindfulness
Skills 1 M1: Goals of Mindfulness Practice M3a: Ideas for Practicing
Wise Mind M3: Wise Mind M4: Taking Hold of Your Mind: "What" M4a--c:
Ideas for Practicing Observing, Mindfulness Goals; Describing,
Participating Skills Wise Mind; "What" Skills 2 M5: Taking Hold of Your
Mind: "How" M5a--c: Ideas for Practicing Skills Nonjudgmentalness, One-­
Mindfulness, Effectiveness IE16b: Important Opposites to Balance Middle
Path; 3 IE15: Dialectics Dialectics IE16: How to Think and Act
Dialectically IE16c: Identifying Dialectics IE16a: Examples of Opposite
Sides That Can Both Be True Module 1 5 Weeks Distress Tolerance Skills
Crisis Survival STOP 4 DT1: Goals of Distress Tolerance Skill; Pros and
Cons DT3: When to Use Crisis Survival Skills DT4: The STOP Skill Crisis
Survival Skills DT5: Pros and Cons TIP Skills 5 DT6: TIP Skills: Change
Your Body DT6a: Using Cold Water, Step by Step Chemistry DT6b: Paired
Muscle Relaxation, Step by Step DT6c: Effective Rethinking and Paired
Relaxation Distracting; Self-­ 6 DT7: Distracting Attention DT8a: Body
Scan Meditation, Step by Soothing; Improving DT8: Self-­Soothing Step the
Moment DT9: Improving the Moment DT9a: Sensory Awareness, Step by Step
Reality Acceptance 7 DT10: Overview: Reality Acceptance Skills DT11a:
Radical Acceptance: Factors That Interfere DT11: Radical Acceptance
DT11b: Practicing Radical Acceptance, DT12: Turning the Mind Step by
Step (or DTWS9, Radical DT14: Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands Acceptance)
DT14: Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands Willingness 8 DT13: Willingness
DT21: Alternate Rebellion and Adaptive Denial Review and graduation for
those ending skills training 2 Weeks Orientation, Mindfulness Skills
9--10 Module 2 7 Weeks Emotion Regulation Skills Validation 11 IE17:
Validation IE18a: Identifying Validation IE18: A "How To" Guide to
Validation ER3: What Emotions Do for You 12 ER1: Goals of Emotion
Regulation Understanding Emotions ER2: Overview: Understanding and
Naming Emotions ER5: Model for Describing Emotions ER6: Ways to Describe
Emotions 116

Schedule 6 (cont.) Changing Emotions

Checking the Facts

Problem Solving

Accumulating Positive Emotions

Building Mastery Ahead and Coping PLEASE

Module 3 Clarifying Goals

DEAR MAN

GIVE

FAST; Validation

The Dime Game Troubleshooting

Week Standard Handout(s) Optional Handout(s) ER8a: Examples of Emotions
That Fit the 13 ER7: Overview: Changing Emotional Facts Responses ER8:
Check the Facts (with ERWS5: Check the Facts) 14 ER9: Opposite Action
and Problem-­ ER11: Figuring Out Opposite Actions Solving: Deciding Which
to Use ER10: Opposite Action 15 ER12: Problem Solving ER13: Reviewing
Opposite Action and Problem Solving 16 ER15: Accumulating Positive
Emotions in ER12: Build Mastery and Cope Ahead ER14: Overview: Reducing
Vulnerability the Short Term to Emotion Mind ER16: Pleasant Events List
ER17: Accumulating Positive Emotions in R17: Accumulating Positive
Emotions in the Long Term the Long Term ER18: Values and Priorities List
ER20a: Nightmare Protocol, Step by Step 17 ER 19: Build Mastery and Cope
Ahead ER20b: Sleep Hygiene Protocol ER20: Taking Care of Your Mind by
Taking Care of Your Body Review and graduation for those ending skills
training 18--19 2 Weeks Orientation and Mindfulness Skills 6 Weeks
Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills 20 IE1: Goals of Interpersonal
Effectiveness IE2a: Myths That Interfere with Effectiveness IE2: Factors
in the Way of Interpersonal IE3: Overview: Obtaining Objectives
Effectiveness Skillfully IE4: Clarifying Goals in Interpersonal
Situations 21 IE5: Guidelines for Objective IE5a: Applying DEAR MAN
Skills to a Effectiveness: Getting What You Want Difficult Current
Interaction (DEAR MAN) 22 IE6: Guidelines for Relationship IE6a:
Expanding the V in GIVE: Levels of Effectiveness: Keeping the Validation
Relationship (GIVE) IE17: Validation (review) 23 IE7: Guidelines for
Self-­Respect IE18: A "How To" Guide to Validation Effectiveness: Keeping
Respect for (review) Yourself (FAST) IE19 Recovering from Invalidation
IE19a: Identifying Self-­Invalidation 24 Evaluating Options . . . (with
IEWS6: The Dime Game) 25 IE9: Troubleshooting: When What You Are Doing
Isn't Working Review and graduation for those ending skills training

117

Schedule 7: Variable Sessions, Inpatient DBT Skills Training
(Intermediate Unit and Acute Unit) Module

Intermediate Unit

Acute Unit

Core Mindfulness

M4: Wise Mind M5: Taking Hold of Your Mind: Mindfulness "What" Skills
M6: Taking Hold of Your Mind: Mindfulness "How" Skills

M4: Wise Mind M5: Taking Hold of Your Mind: Mindfulness "What" Skills
M6: Taking Hold of Your Mind: Mindfulness "How" Skills

Distress Tolerance

DT5: Pros and Cons DT6: TIP Skills: Changing Your Body Chemistry DT7:
Distracting DT8: Self-­Soothing DT9: Improving the Moment DT11: Radical
Acceptance DT12: Turning the Mind DT14: Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands
DT13: Willingness

DT5: Pros and Cons DT6: TIP Skills: Changing Your Body Chemistry DT7:
Distracting DT8: Self-­Soothing DT9: Improving the Moment DT11: Radical
Acceptance DT12: Turning the Mind

Emotion Regulation

ER5: A Model for Describing Emotions ER6: Ways to Describe Emotions
ER10: Opposite Action ER15: Accumulating Positive Emotions in the Short
Term ER16: Pleasant Events List

ER6: Ways to Describe Emotions ER10: Opposite Action ER15: Accumulating
Positive Emotions in the Short Term ER16: Pleasant Events List

Interpersonal IE4: Clarifying Priorities in Interpersonal IE4:
Clarifying Priorities in Interpersonal Effectiveness Effectiveness
Effectiveness IE5: Guidelines for Objectiveness Effectiveness IE5:
Guidelines for Objectiveness Effectiveness . . . (DEAR MAN) . . . (DEAR
MAN) IE6: Guidelines for Relationship Effectiveness . . . IE6:
Guidelines for Relationship Effectiveness . . . (GIVE) (GIVE) IE7:
Guidelines for Self-­Respect Effectiveness . . . (FAST) Note. Adapted
from Table 4.5 in Swenson, C. R., Witterholt, S., & Bohus, M. (2007).
Dialectical behavior therapy on inpatient units. In L. A. Dimeff & K.
Koerner (Eds.), Dialectical behavior therapy in clinical practice:
Applications across disorders and settings (pp. 69--111). New York:
Guilford Press. Copyright 2007 by The Guilford Press. Adapted by
permission.

118

Schedule 8: DBT Skills for Addictive Behaviors (to Integrate with
Schedule 1 Skills) Possible module

Handouts

General

DT16: Overview: When the Crisis Is Addiction DT16a: Common Addictions

Core Mindfulness

DT18: Clear Mind DT18a: Behavior Patterns Characteristic of Addict Mind
and of Clean Mind

Distress Tolerance

DT17: Dialectical Abstinence DT17a: Relapse Prevention Planning DT20:
Burning Bridges and Building New Ones DT21: Alternative Rebellion and
Adaptive Denial

Interpersonal Effectiveness

DT19: Community Reinforcement

Note. You can weave these skills into the modules listed to the left of
the handouts list or you can teach them as a group in sequence by their
numbers.

Schedule 9: DBT Parenting Skills Behaviors (to Integrate with Schedule 1
Skills) DEAR MAN

IE20: Strategies for Increasing the Probability of Desired Behaviors
IE21: Strategies for Decreasing or Stopping Undesired Behaviors IE22:
Tips for Using Behavior Change Strategies Effectively IE22a: Identifying
Effective Behavior Change Strategies

GIVE

IE17: Validation IE18: A "How To" Guide to Validation IE18a: Identifying
Validation

FAST

IE19: Recovering from Invalidation IE19a: Identifying Self-­Invalidation

Note. You can weave these skills into the modules listed to the left of
the handouts list or you can teach them as a group in sequence by their
numbers.

119

Schedule 10: Comprehensive DBT Mindfulness Skills Training Week

Standard Handout(s)

Optional Handout(s)

Orientation; Goals; Wise Mind

1

M1: Goals of Mindfulness Practice M1a: Mindfulness Definitions M2:
Overview: Core Mindfulness Skills M3: Wise Mind: States of Mind

Mindfulness "What" Skills

2

M4: Taking Hold of Your Mind: Mindfulness "What" Skills

M4a: Ideas for Practicing Observing M4b: Ideas for Practicing Describing
M4c: Ideas for Practicing Participating

Mindfulness "How" Skills

3

M5: Taking Hold of Your Mind: Mindfulness "How" Skills

M5a: Ideas for Practicing Nonjudgmentalness M5b: Ideas for Practicing
One-­Mindfulness M5c: Ideas for Practicing Effectiveness

4

M7: Goals of Mindfulness Practice: A Spiritual Perspective M7a: Wise
Mind from a Spiritual Perspective M8: Practicing Loving Kindness to
Increase Love and Compassion

5

M7: Goals of Mindfulness Practice: A Spiritual Perspective M7a: Wise
Mind from a Spiritual Perspective M8: Practicing Loving Kindness to
Increase Love and Compassion

6

DT8a: Body Scan Meditation, Step by Step DT9a: Sensory Awareness, Step
by Step

Mindful Meditation

7

ER22: Mindfulness of Current Emotions: Letting Go of Emotional Suffering
DT15: Mindfulness of Current Thoughts DT15a: Practicing Mindfulness of
Thoughts

Reality Acceptance

8

DT10: Overview: Reality Acceptance Skills DTWS9: Radical Acceptance
DT11: Radical Acceptance DT11a: Radical Acceptance: Factors That
Interfere DT11b: Practicing Radical Acceptance, Step by Step (or use
DTWS9, Radical Acceptance) DT12: Turning the Mind

Willingness

9

DT13: Willingness DT14: Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands

DT14a: Practicing Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands

Mindful Action

10

M9: Skillful Means: Balancing Doing Mind and Being Mind

M9a: Ideas for Practicing Balancing Doing Mind and Being Mind

Middle Path

11

M10: Walking the Middle Path: Finding the Synthesis between Opposites
IE12: Mindfulness of Others

IE12a: Identifying Mindfulness of Others

Spiritual Mindfulness

120

Schedule 11: Advanced DBT Skills Week

Standard Handout(s)

Optional Handout(s)

Orientation

1

Discuss goals of advanced skills training Develop with group guidelines
for skills training G1a: Options for Solving Any Problem

Review skills and decide which skills will be covered in the group

Mindfulness Review

2

M3: Wise Mind M4: Taking Hold of Your Mind: Mindfulness "What" Skills
M5: Taking Hold of Your Mind: Mindfulness "How" Skills

Mindfulness

3

M7: Goals of Mindfulness Practice: A Spiritual Perspective M7a: Wise
Mind from a Spiritual Perspective M8: Practicing Loving Kindness to
Increase Love and Compassion

Mindfulness M7: Goals of Mindfulness Practice: A Spiritual Perspective
M7a: Wise Mind from a Spiritual Perspective

Building Relationships Building Relationships

4

IE10: Overview: Building Relationships IE11a: Identifying Skills to Find
People IE11: Finding and Getting People to Like and Get Them to Like You
You IE12a: Identifying Mindfulness of Others IE12: Mindfulness of Others

Relationships

5

IE17: Validation IE18: A "How To" Guide to Validation

IE18a: Identifying Validation

Relationships

6

IE19: Recovering from Invalidation IE19a: Identifying Self-­Validation
IE13: Ending Relationships

IE19a: Identifying Self-­Validation IE13a: Identifying How to End
Relationships

Walking the Middle Path

7

IE15: Dialectics IE16: How to Think and Act Dialectically IE16a:
Examples of Opposite Sides That Can Both Be True IE16b: Important
Opposites to Balance

Walking the Middle Path

8

M9: Skillful Means: Balancing Doing Mind and Being Mind M9a: Practices
for Balancing Doing Mind and Being Mind M10: Walking the Middle Path:
Finding the Synthesis between Opposites

Walking the Middle Path IE16c: Identifying Dialectics

Behavior Change Strategies Chain Analysis

9

G6: Overview: Analyzing Behavior G7: Chain Analysis (with GWS2, Chain
Analysis of Problem Behavior) G7a: Chain Analysis, Step by Step

Missing-Links Analysis

10

G8: Missing-Links Analysis (with GWS3, Missing-Links Analysis) (cont.)

121

Schedule 11 (cont.) Week Behavior Change Strategies

11

Standard Handout(s) IE20: Strategies for Increasing the Probability of
Desired Behaviors IE21: Strategies for Decreasing or Stopping Undesired
Behaviors IE22: Tips for Using Behavior Change Strategies Effectively

Optional Handout(s) IE22a: Identifying Effective Behavior Change
Strategies

Develop further curriculum with participants 12

13

14

15

16

17

Note. Consider teaching this curriculum as a second module, or add to
Schedule 1, or let participants choose the skills they would like
covered.

122

Part II

Teaching Notes for DBT Skills Modules

Chapter 6

General Skills: Orientation and Analyzing Behavior

There are two sets of general skills. The first set focuses on
orientation to skills training, including a handout on the biosocial
theory of emotion dysregulation. The second set focuses on how to
analyze behavior so that a client can figure out the causes or events
that influence the behavior. This allows the client to problem-solve how
to change the behavior or how to prevent it in the future.

Orientation An orientation to skills training takes place during the
first session of a new skills group. The purposes of this orientation
are to introduce members to one another and to the skills training
leaders; to orient members to the structural aspects of skills training
(e.g., format, rules, meeting times); to orient them to the leaders'
approach and goals; to sell the skills as worth learning and likely to
work; and to generate enthusiasm for learning and practicing the skills.
This chapter provides an outline of topics to be covered, but their
content can be easily modified to reflect your particular circumstances
(e.g., format, timing, fees, rules, use of the telephone). An optional
section for teaching the biosocial theory of how emotion dysregulation
develops is included. As discussed in Chapter 4, orienting is a skills
trainer's chief means of selling the skills to group members. Therefore,
important tasks for skills trainers are to highlight the usefulness of
the skills, to elicit participants' specific personal goals, and then to
link these goals to the skills modules. Specific goals for the skills
training you are conducting will depend on the skills that you plan to
teach. The

specific goals listed on General Handout 1 and in the teaching notes are
general enough to cover most of what might be taught in the average
group. Optional goals are noted. Skills training guidelines, or rules,
are presented and discussed along with skills training assumptions. In
the teaching notes, I have put a checkmark () next to material I almost
always cover. If I am in a huge rush, I may skip everything that is not
checked. In the handouts and worksheets (see www.guilford.
com/skills-training-manual), I have put stars () on the standard
handouts I almost always use. After the first orientation session,
reorientation may be reviewed with members, or abbreviated if there are
no new members starting the group. Make an effort not to skip it, as
review can be useful to remind participants of assumptions and
guidelines, and it is a good time to discuss whether new guidelines
should be added. If there are new members, leaders should try to get old
members to conduct as much of the orientation as possible. In either
case, if orientation is concluded before the session ends and the
optional handouts are not being taught, leaders should proceed to the
material for the core mindfulness skills in Chapter 7.

Diary Cards Diary cards (see Figure 4.1 in Chapter 4) provide spaces for
logging practice of all relevant skills. These are usually introduced
and reviewed by a client's individual DBT therapist. However, clients
who are not in DBT individual treatment should be introduced to the
diary card in the orientation session. If the diary card, which includes
use of skills, is not

Thanks to Anita Lungu, Debra Safer, Christy Telch, and Eunice Chen. 125

126 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES

being reviewed by a participant's individual therapist, the skills
portion of the card can be reviewed weekly as part of the homework
practice review, in addition to any assigned skills practice worksheets.
If only the previous week's homework is reviewed, there is a danger that
skills taught previously will drop off the client's radar and not be
practiced.

Biosocial Theory The biosocial theory is often reviewed in individual
DBT sessions, and in some programs it is taught in adolescent and
multifamily skills programs. The theory is particularly relevant for
individuals meeting criteria for BPD and for individuals with pervasive
emotion dysregulation. It is important, if you are treating another
population, such as one with emotion overcontrol or other disorders,
that you teach a biosocial theory appropriate to the population you are
treating. The idea that all behavior is a joint product of biology and
environment, however, applies to everyone. If group members or
individual therapists have reviewed this theory, there may be little to
gain by reviewing it again.

Analyzing Behavior Because many DBT therapists teach their clients how
to conduct their own analysis of problematic behaviors, I have added a
supplementary set of skills that teach participants how to analyze and
problemsolve dysfunctional ineffective behaviors ("chain analyses") and
how to identify effective behaviors that are needed but missing
("missing-links analyses"). The chain analysis has been widely used in
DBT. I developed the missing-links analysis at the request of both
adolescents and parents in our multifamily group.

Chain Analysis Conducting chain analyses of problem behaviors is a
critical part of DBT. There are many ways to teach clients how to do
this, and there are many places and times to teach it in the course of
therapy. In standard DBT treatment programs, individual therapists teach
their clients how to do a chain analysis in the course of individual
therapy. DBT treatment teams employ abbreviated chain analyses to assess
team-­interfering behaviors of team members. In my treatment teams, we
always do a brief chain analysis with individuals who are late for team
meetings. It is often taught in residential and inpatient treatment
programs. It is an important part of skills training for eating
disorders1 and can also be very useful in substance use disorder
programs. When participants are not in individual therapy, teaching
chain analysis can be incorporated into skills training when there is
time and it appears useful. Inclusion of the chain analyses in skills
training per se is optional.

Missing-Links Analysis Whereas a chain analysis breaks down problem
behaviors, missing-links analysis is used to identify effective
behaviors that are missing. It consists of a systematic set of questions
and was originally developed for therapists to conduct rapid assessments
of failures to do assigned skills homework in group settings, where
there is often limited time to review homework. When missing-links
analysis was used for homework review in adolescent multifamily skills
groups, parents immediately wanted to learn how to do it to analyze
their children's missing effective behaviors. Teens also wanted to use
it to analyze their parents' missing behaviors. From there, it became
clear that it could be a useful strategic set of questions for any
missing effective behavior.

6. General Skills: General Handouts 1--1a • 127

Teaching Notes I.

The Goals of Skills Training (General Handouts 1--1a) Main Point: The
overall goal of DBT skills training is to help individuals change
behavioral, emotional, thinking, and interpersonal patterns associated
with problems in living. General Handout 1: Goals of Skills Training.
Use this handout to get clients to think about how they could personally
benefit from skills training, to identify which areas they are most
interested in, and to identify specific personal goals of behaviors to
increase and decrease in their own skills training. For clients who have
taken other skills training modules and been through orientation before,
this is an opportunity to evaluate the progress they have made on their
personal goals since the beginning of the previous module. The idea is
to generate some enthusiasm for learning and practicing the skills.
Research on DBT is moving very fast, and data suggest that DBT skills
training may be effective for a large variety of goals. If General
Handout 1 does not fit the goals of your group or individual client,
feel free to adapt or develop an entirely new list of goals for your
client(s). General Handout 1a: Options for Solving Any Problem
(Optional). This optional handout can be used at the start of a skills
module, or it can be used at another point when you believe it would be
useful. The handout was designed as a reply to participants who
responded to offers of help in solving life's problems with a "Yes, but
. . . " attitude. It can be particularly helpful to review this handout
in those situations. This handout describes the three effective
responses to any problem and shows what categories of skills are needed
for each. It also serves as a reminder that the only response that needs
no skillful behavior is the last option: "Stay miserable." General
Worksheet 1: Pros and Cons of Using Skills (Optional). This optional
worksheet is designed to help participants decide whether they have
anything to gain from practicing their DBT skills. It is particularly
useful when they are feeling willful or apathetic and don't want to
practice. It can be reviewed rather quickly if participants already know
how to fill out a pros-and-cons worksheet. If not, review the principles
of doing pros and cons. Be sure to instruct participants to fill out
pros and cons for both the option of practicing skills and the option of
not practicing. It can be useful, if there is time, to have participants
fill this out at least partially during the sessions. Suggest that
participants carry the sheet with them or post it somewhere at home, so
they can easily review it as needed.

A. Introductions To ease into a first session for newcomers, you can try
going around the room and asking members to give their names, tell how
they heard about the group, and provide any other information they would
like to share. As the group leaders, you should also give information
about yourselves and how you came to lead the group.

B. General Goal of Skills Training The overall goal of skills training
is to learn skills for changing unwanted behaviors, emotions, thinking,
and events that cause misery and distress.

99C. Behaviors to Decrease Ask participants to read General Handout 1
and check each set of behaviors they would like to decrease. If there is
a behavior on a particular list they do not have trouble with, they can
cross it out. Alternatively, they can circle the behaviors they think
are most important to decrease.

128 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: General Handout 1

Discussion Point: Discuss and share what is checked and circled. Ask
participants to fill out personal goals at the bottom of the page.
Discuss and share personal goals, including behaviors to decrease and
skills to increase. Note to Leaders: The goals below are organized first
by specific module and include supplemental skills that you may or may
not be teaching. You can skip describing and discussing supplemental
skills if you are not teaching them. In general, these notes are
guidelines and should be adapted as needed to fit the specific skills
you plan to teach and the characteristics of the people you are working
with.

99D. Skills to Increase 99 1. Mindfulness Skills Mindfulness skills help
us focus attention on the present moment, noticing both what is going on
within ourselves and what is going on outside of ourselves and become
and stay centered. Mindfulness as a practice has now become widespread,
with courses taught in corporations, medical schools, and many other
settings. Present the mindfulness goals by types of skills you are
teaching:  Core mindfulness skills (the mindfulness "what" and "how"
skills) teach us how to ob-

serve and experience reality as it is, to be less judgmental, and to
live in the moment with effectiveness.  (Supplemental) Mindfulness
skills from a spiritual perspective (including wise mind from a
spiritual perspective and practicing loving kindness) focus on
experiencing ultimate reality, forming an intimate connection with the
entire universe, and developing a sense of freedom.  (Supplemental)
Skillful means: Balancing doing mind and being mind  (Supplemental) Wise
mind by walking the middle path Discussion Point: Discuss goals of
mindfulness skills training. Get feedback about individual goals. Ask
participants to write down their individual goals on General Handout 1.

99

2.  Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills Interpersonal effectiveness
    skills help us maintain and improve relationships both with people
    we are close to and with strangers. Present the interpersonal
    effectiveness goals by types of skills you are teaching:  Core
    interpersonal effectiveness skills teach us how to deal with
    conflict situations, to get

what we want and need, and to say no to unwanted requests and
demands---all this in a way that maintains our self-­respect and others'
liking and respect for us.  (Supplemental) Building relationships and
ending destructive relationships. These skills enable us to find
potential friends, get people to like us, and maintain positive
relationships with others. They also show how to build closeness with
others on the one hand, and how to end destructive relationships on the
other.  (Supplemental) Walking the middle path. These skills help us to
walk a middle path in our relationships, balancing acceptance with
change in ourselves and in our relationships with others. Discussion
Point: Discuss goals of interpersonal effectiveness skills training. Get
feedback about individual goals. Ask participants to write down their
individual goals on General Handout 1.

99

3.  Emotion Regulation Skills Emotion regulation includes enhancing
    control of emotions, even though complete emotional control cannot
    be achieved. To a certain extent we are who we are, and emotionality
    is part of us. But we can get more control and perhaps learn to
    modulate some emotions.

6. General Skills: General Handouts 1--1a • 129

Present the emotion regulation goals by types of skills you are
teaching:  Understanding and naming emotions: These skills enable us to
understand emotions in

general and understand and identify our own emotions.  Changing
emotional responses: These skills help us to reduce the intensity of
painful or un-

wanted emotions (anger, sadness, shame, etc.), and to change situations
that prompt painful or unwanted emotions.  Reducing vulnerability to
emotion mind: These skills enable us to reduce vulnerability to becoming
extremely or painfully emotional, and to increase emotional resilience. 
Managing really difficult emotions: These skills help us to accept
ongoing emotions and to manage extreme emotions. Discussion Point:
Discuss goals of emotion regulation skills training. Get feedback about
individual goals. Ask participants to write down their individual goals
on General Handout 1.

99

4.  Distress Tolerance Skills Distress tolerance is the ability to
    tolerate and survive crisis situations without making things worse.
    Also, these skills teach us how to accept and fully enter into a
    life that may not be the life we hoped for or want. Present the
    distress tolerance goals by types of skills you are teaching: 
    Crisis survival skills: These skills enable us to tolerate painful
    events, urges, and emotions

when we cannot make things better right away.  Reality acceptance
skills: These skills permit us to reduce suffering by accepting and
living

a life that is not the life we want.  (Supplemental) Skills when the
crisis is addiction: These skills enable us to back down from

addiction and live a life of abstinence. Discussion Point: Discuss goals
of distress tolerance skills training. Get feedback about individual
goals. Ask participants to write down their individual goals on General
Handout 1.

5.  Analyzing Behavior (Supplemental) Present these skills if you intend
    to teach Sections VI and VII of general skills (see below).  Chain
    analysis and missing-links analysis are ways to figure out the
    causes of problem be-

haviors and plan for problem solving.

E. Format of Skills Training 1. Order and Length of Skills Modules
Review the order and length of skills modules, if this has not been
discussed in a previous interview. The specifics here will depend on the
nature of your particular skills training program and where in the cycle
of modules the orientation session falls. (See also Chapter 3 of this
manual.)

99

2.  Session Format Briefly review the overall session format: beginning
    ritual, review of skills practice since the last session, break,
    presentation of new material, and a closing wind-down.

F. Options for Solving Any Problem Note to Leaders: If the optional
General Handout 1a is used at orientation, highlight the role of DBT
skills in each component of solving life's problems. Remind participants
of the options if at a future point they reject all or most suggestions
for solving a problem.

130 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: General Handout 1a

Tell clients: "The options for responding to pain are limited. There may
be an infinite number of really painful things that can happen to you.
But there are not an infinite number of responses you can make to pain.
In fact, if you sit back and think about it, there are only four things
you can do when painful problems come into your life: You can solve the
problem, change your feelings about the problem, tolerate the problem,
or just stay miserable (and perhaps even make it worse)." 1. Solve the
Problem Say to clients: "First, you can try finding a way to end or
change the problem situation, or by figuring out a way to avoid the
situation or get out of it for good. This is the first thing you could
do---solve the problem." Give these examples as needed: Example: "If the
distress comes from conflict in your marriage, one solution could be to
avoid spending time with your spouse; another solution could be to get a
divorce and leave the relationship; alternatively, you could get couple
counseling and change the relationship so that the conflict is
resolved." Example: "If the problem is that you are afraid of flying,
you could solve this by avoiding flying; alternatively, you could find a
treatment program aimed at reducing fear of flying." Give these examples
of skills that can help with problem solving:  Walking the middle path
(from interpersonal effectiveness skills)  Problem-­solving skills (from
emotion regulation skills)

2.  Feel Better about the Problem Tell clients: "A second way of
    responding to pain is by changing your emotional responses to it.
    You could work at regulating your emotional response to the problem
    or figure out a way to make a negative into a positive." Give these
    examples as needed: Example: "Remind yourself that conflict is a
    normal part of marriage and that it is nothing really to be
    distressed about. Alternatively, develop more positive relationships
    outside of your marriage, so that the negative aspects of conflict
    with you partner are not very important." Example: "Work on feeling
    better about having a fear of flying; alternatively, join a phobia
    support group." Give these examples of skills that can help with
    feeling better about the problem:  Emotion regulation skills 
    Mindfulness skills

3.  Tolerate the Problem Say to clients: "When you can't solve the
    problem that is generating distress and you can't feel better about
    it, you can still alleviate some of the distress." Give these
    examples as needed: Example: "In a marriage full of conflict, you
    might not be able to solve the problem through divorce or by
    improving the relationship. You might also not succeed in feeling
    better about the problem. But you will be less distressed and
    miserable about it if you practice radical acceptance of the
    problem." Example: "If you simply cannot get rid of your flying
    phobia and also can find no way to like it or feel good about it,
    then you can reduce the suffering it causes you by radically
    accepting it: It is what it is." Give these examples of skills that
    can help with tolerating the problem:  Distress tolerance skills 
    Mindfulness skills

6. General Skills: General Handouts 2--3 • 131

4.  Stay Miserable Tell clients: "The fourth option is that you can stay
    miserable. You could, of course, also do something to make matters
    worse!"\* Give this example of how to stay miserable:  Use no
    skills!

<!-- -->

II. 

Overview: Introduction to Skills Training (General Handout 2) Main
Point: Very briefly, describe the topics that will be covered. Let
participants know if you are not going to cover the biosocial theory of
emotion dysregulation. If you are not covering it, be sure to read it
yourself and decide if you want to give the handout to participants. If
you do give it out, you might want to suggest that participants read it
before the next session, so that you can answer any questions at that
time. General Handout 2: Overview: Introduction to Skills Training. This
overview handout can be reviewed briefly or skipped, depending on time.
Do not teach the material while covering this page unless you are
skipping the related handouts. Worksheet: None.

This introduction is aimed at providing a good grasp of the guidelines
and rules that are important for your skills training program as well as
the assumptions that underlie skills training.

A. Guidelines for Skills Training This is the first and most important
topic. It covers the requirements and the expectations for skills
training. This topic and its handout (General Handout 3) may not be as
important if you are teaching skills in individual sessions.

B. Skills Training Assumptions This topic and its handout (General
Handout 4) describes the seven assumptions that underpin DBT skills
training.

C. Biosocial Theory This topic and its handout (General Handout 5)
provide a detailed review of the biosocial theory that underpins our
thinking about emotion dysregulation.

III. Orientation to Skills Training (General Handouts 3--4) Main Point:
     For skills training to go smoothly, each participant should know
     and understand the guidelines and assumptions that underpin DBT
     skills training. General Handout 3: Guidelines for Skills Training.
     When you are discussing these guidelines, it is necessary not only
     to present them, but also to address possible misconceptions about
     how to "get around" the guidelines. It is useful to ask
     participants to take turns in reading the guidelines and explaining
     how they understand and interpret them.

\*The fabulous idea of adding on "you can make things worse" was sent to
me in an e-mail from a person who had gone through DBT skills training.
Unfortunately, I cannot find the e-mail to give proper credit to this
person. I hope to hear from her for a correction in the future.

132 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: General Handout 3

General Handout 4: Skills Training Assumptions. When you are introducing
the assumptions of skills training, it is useful to make the distinction
between the guidelines in General Handout 3 (which are behavioral
standards to be followed while in skills training) and assumptions
(which are beliefs that cannot be proved, but that all participants
agree to abide by anyway). General Worksheet 1: Pros and Cons of Using
Skills. The worksheet is designed to help participants decide whether
they are willing to practice and use the skills you are teaching them.
Its major use is to communicate that the goal is to be effective and
skillful in getting what participants want (i.e., in reaching their own
goals). It is not about doing whatever participants want, following
rules, giving in, or doing what other people want. This worksheet can
also be used as an exercise to improve the likelihood of being effective
when participants are overcome with emotions (e.g., when they want to
yell, scream, catastrophize, or do something destructive instead of
skillful). It can also be used as a teaching tool for how to figure out
goals. Skip this worksheet if you also teach other handouts that have
associated worksheets during this session. If you are using a
pros-and-cons worksheet for the first time with participants, begin by
describing what is meant by "pros and cons." Then put the basic 2 × 2
grid up on the board, and work through several examples of pros and cons
with participants. With drug addictions, for example, make a list of
pros and cons of using drugs, and then a list of pros and cons of
stopping the use of drugs. Stress the importance of filling out each of
the four quadrants. Instruct participants to keep a copy of the
completed worksheet, since it can be very hard for them to remember why
not to engage in crisis behaviors when they are in emotion mind. For
more detailed instructions in teaching pros and cons, see the teaching
notes for Distress Tolerance Handout 5: Pros and Cons (Chapter 10,
Section V).

99A. Guidelines for Skills Training Discuss the guidelines on General
Handout 3, and get each participant to agree to them. This is an
important part of the treatment process, not a precursor to the process.
Also discuss possible misconceptions about how to "get around" the
guidelines. It can be useful after discussion of the guidelines to go
around the room and ask each group member for an individual commitment
to abide by them. In an open group, the guidelines should be discussed
each time a new member enters the group. Often it is a good idea to have
old members explain the guidelines to new members. Although the term
"rules" is ordinarily not used, the expectation is that the guidelines
will be followed as if they are rules. Note that presentation of the
guidelines in an authoritarian way will probably alienate some clients,
especially those for whom issues of control are important. 1.
Participants Who Drop Out of Skills Training Are Not Out of Skills
Training There is only one way to drop out of skills training: missing
four consecutive skills training sessions. Clients who miss 4 weeks of
scheduled skills training sessions in a row have dropped out and cannot
reenter for the duration of the time in their treatment contract. For
example, if a client has contracted for 1 year, but misses 4 weeks in a
row during the sixth month, then he or she is out for the next 6 months.
At the end of the contracted time, the person can negotiate with the
skills trainer(s) and the group about readmission (if he or she was in a
group and it is continuing). There are no exceptions to this guideline.
This guideline is the same as the rule for individual DBT psychotherapy.
Mention that although it is technically possible to repeatedly miss
three sessions in a row and come to the fourth session, it would be a
violation of the spirit of the rule. The message to communicate is that
everyone is expected to come to skills training sessions each week.
Presentation of this guideline offers an opportunity to discuss what
constitutes an acceptable reason for missing a session. Not being in the
mood, non-­serious illness, social engagements, fear, beliefs that "No
one in the group likes me," and so forth do not qualify. Serious
illness, very important events, and unavoidable trips out of town do
qualify as acceptable reasons.

6. General Skills: General Handout 3 • 133

2.  Participants Who Join the Skills Training Group Support Each Other
    There are many ways to be a supportive person when attending skills
    training sessions. As the group leaders, review with clients what is
    needed to be supportive.

<!-- -->

a.  Confidentiality

The importance of the confidentiality rule is self-­evident. What may not
be obvious is that the rule extends to "gossiping" outside sessions. The
general notion here is that interpersonal problems between or among
clients should be dealt with by the persons involved, either within or
outside sessions. There are two exceptions to the confidentiality rule.
First, clients can discuss what happens in skills training sessions with
their individual therapists; this exception is important so that they
can maximize the benefits of the therapy. But caution clients not to
reveal other clients' last names unless absolutely necessary. The other
exception has to do with the risk of suicide. If one client believes
that another is likely to commit suicide, he or she can and should
summon help. b. Regular Attendance

Regular attendance---­especially coming on time and staying for the
entire session---is supportive. It is very hard to keep coming to a
group when other people in the group do not treat it as important by
coming to each session on time and staying until the end. c. Practicing
between Sessions

It is hard to keep practicing skills in a group when you are the only
one who routinely practices between sessions. It can make the practicing
member feel different or feel guilty that one person's practicing
highlights others not practicing. Note to Leaders: Developing a group
norm of coming on time and practicing skills between sessions is very
important, but such a norm can be hard at times to develop. Discussing
the importance of building norms at the start of each new module can be
very helpful. My experience is that most skills training members want
such norms to develop. See Chapter 4 for ideas on how to reinforce
coming on time and doing homework that is assigned.

d.  Validating Each Other and Avoiding Judgments
e.  Giving Helpful, Noncritical Feedback When Asked

Members need to make every effort to validate each other and give
helpful, noncritical feedback. This can set a tone of trust and support
at the very beginning. Discuss this guideline, as well as how hard it
may be for some members. In subsequent sessions when these guidelines
are violated, you leaders can step in with guidance on how to replace
judgments with nonjudgmental descriptions, critical feedback with
helpful suggestions, and defensiveness with acceptance of other's
comments. f. Accepting Help from a Person Who Is Called for Help

It is not acceptable for a client to call someone; say, "I am going to
kill myself," or "I am going to use drugs"; and then refuse to let that
other person help. The inability to ask for help appropriately is a
special problem for many individuals. Thus this rule begins the process
in the skills training context of teaching how to reach out to peers for
help when needed. Like the other rules, this rule is usually a relief to
clients. The rule itself was suggested by one of our group clients.
Before this guideline was added, we occasionally had instances of a
participant's calling another participant in desperate emotional pain,
obliquely threatening suicide or other dys-

134 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: General Handout 3

functional behavior, extracting a promise of confidentiality from the
one called, and then hanging up after no apparent progress was made in
the call. The helper was left with a very difficult dilemma: If the
helper really cared about the caller, he or she would do something to
help. Yet the helper clearly had not been able to do anything, and if he
or she asked for outside help it would be violating a confidence. The
resulting helplessness and anguish were enormous. One of the strengths
of group skills training is that members often build a strong supportive
community among themselves. At times, they are the only ones who can
really understand their mutual experiences. Since everyone's problems
are public in the group, members need not be ashamed to ask one another
for help. Not only is the opportunity for problem solving helpful to the
caller, but the helper has a chance to practice generating problem
solutions and reasons for living. In addition---and this point should be
made to clients---such calls offer group members a structured chance to
practice observing their own limits on how much help they are willing to
give. 3. Participants Who Are Going to Be Late or Miss a Session Call
Ahead of Time This rule serves several purposes. First, it is a courtesy
for clients to let you skills trainers know not to wait for latecomers
before starting. Although we have a general rule in our groups of
starting on time, it is difficult not to hold off on important material
or announcements for the first few minutes, in the expectation that
missing clients will show up any minute. This is a special problem in
those weeks where only one or two clients are present at the beginning.
Second, it introduces an added response cost for being late and
communicates to clients that promptness is desirable. Finally, it gives
information as to why a client is not present. In a group context, when
a person does not come to a session and gives no explanation ahead of
time, group members (including the leaders) almost always start worrying
about the welfare of the absent member. Sometimes, however, clients miss
for reasons having nothing to do with problems. Thus not calling causes
unnecessary worry for the group members. Just the fact that others will
worry is often news to some group members; for others, the worry is a
source of emotional support and may reinforce not calling. In any case,
the rule offers a vehicle for addressing the behavior. Presentation of
the rule is an opportunity to discuss the need for courtesy and empathy
to the feelings of other group members, as well as the responsibility of
each member to contribute to group cohesion. 4. Participants Do Not
Tempt Others to Engage in Problem Behaviors a. Participants Do Not Come
to Sessions under the Influence of Alcohol or Drugs

The value of not using drugs or alcohol before coming to a skills group
is reasonably self-­ evident; there is little need for extensive
discussion of it. However, it does offer an opportunity to discuss the
emotional pain that skills training attendance is likely to cause much
of the time. Accurate expectations are essential here to head off
demoralization. Once again, you can suggest that as clients learn
emotion regulation skills, they will be better able to cope with the
stress of skills training. b. If Participants Have Already Used, They
Should Come to Sessions Acting Clean and Sober

If a client has used drugs or alcohol, it may not be so clear why he or
she should come to skills training anyway and act as if clean and sober.
The reason is that for clients with substance use disorders, a rule
saying not to come to skills sessions when using just gives these
individuals with poor self-­regulation a good excuse for not coming.
Instead, my position is that skills learning is context-­dependent, and
thus, for individuals with substance problems, learning and practicing
skills when under the influence of drugs or alcohol are particularly
important. That is definitely the time when skills are needed.

6. General Skills: General Handout 3 • 135

c.  Participants Do Not Discuss Problem Behaviors That Could Be
    Contagious to Others

Descriptions of dysfunctional behaviors can lead to behavioral
contagion. In my experience, communications about self-­injury, substance
use, bingeing or purging, and similar behaviors elicit strong imitation
effects among individuals with disordered emotion regulation. These
urges to imitate can be very difficult to resist. Use the example of a
person addicted to drugs listening to another person talking about
drugs, and most participants will get the point immediately: The drug
user trying to get off drugs will immediately have an urge to use drugs.
Just as in individual DBT, clients in skills training must agree not to
call or communicate with one another after a self-­injurious act. Our
group members usually welcome this rule. Before I instituted this rule,
clients often complained that once they had given up dysfunctional
behaviors themselves, it was very scary to listen to others describing
their episodes of these behaviors. 5. Participants Do Not Form Sexual or
Confidential Relationships Outside Skills Training Sessions The key word
in the fifth rule is "private." Clients may not form relationships
outside the sessions that they then cannot discuss inside the sessions.
DBT actually encourages friendships among group clients outside
sessions. In fact, the support that members can give one another with
daily problems in living is one of the strengths of group DBT. However,
it also provides the possibility for interpersonal conflict that is
inherent in any relationship. The key is whether interpersonal problems
that arise can be discussed in the sessions (or, if that is too
difficult or threatens to get out of hand, with you leaders privately).
To the extent that such issues can be discussed and appropriate skills
applied, a relationship can be advantageous. Troubles arise when a
relationship cannot be discussed and problems increase to such an extent
that one member finds it difficult or impossible to attend meetings,
either physically or emotionally. In presenting this rule, alert members
that it is unacceptable for one member to demand complete
confidentiality about problems from another member. This is especially
crucial when it comes to plans for destructive behavior, important
information that one person lies about in meetings, and other situations
creating an untenable awkwardness for one member of the pair. As
discussed in Chapter 3, current sexual partners should be assigned to
different groups at the onset. Thus this rule functions to alert group
members that if they enter into a sexual relationship, one member of the
pair will have to drop out of the group. To date, we have had several
sexual relationships begin among group members; each created enormous
difficulties for the partners involved. In one case, the initiating
partner broke off the relationship against the wishes of the other,
making it very hard for the rejected partner to come to group sessions.
In the other, one member was seduced reluctantly, leading to trauma and
tension in the group. Generally, this rule is clear to everyone
involved. Without the rule, however, dealing with an emerging sexual
relationship between clients is very tricky, since post hoc application
of rules is unworkable with individuals who have disordered emotion
regulation.

Note to Leaders: Exempted from the guideline above are skills training
groups for friends and families, where couples, partners, and multiple
family members often join. It is not reasonable or feasible to outlaw
private relationships in these groups or in the multifamily skills
groups commonly held with adolescents. In these situations, however, it
is important to note that when relationship conflicts threaten the
group, the leaders will approach the conflicts in a manner similar to
that described above. That is, the topic will be discussed either in
group (if it offers an opportunity to practice skills) or individually
with one of the skills trainers (if the individuals having conflict do
not have the requisite skills to address the conflict effectively within
the group).

136 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: General Handouts 3--4

6.  Additional Guidelines Discuss any other guidelines you may wish to
    follow that are not on General Handout 3, and be sure that everyone
    writes them onto this handout.
7.  Advanced Groups In advanced groups, the DBT four-­session-miss
    guideline may be modified. If so, discuss the criteria for
    determining whether an individual has or has not officially dropped
    out of skills training. For example, you may want to discussed what
    an "excused" session is (e.g., a session missed because of a
    physical illness, family emergency, vacation out of town, wedding,
    or funeral) and what an "unexcused" session is (e.g., a session
    missed because of fatigue, bad mood, psychiatric hospitalization, or
    a solvable problem).

99B. Skills Training Assumptions An assumption is a belief that cannot
be proved, but that all participants in skills training (clients and
leaders alike) agree to abide by anyway. 1. People Are Doing the Best
They Can That is, given the multiplicity of causes in the universe
(genetics, biological events, environmental events, consequences of
previous behavior), each person at this one moment in time is what he or
she is. Given who we each are and the fact that all behavior is caused,
we are doing the best we can at this one moment, given the causes that
have affected us. 2. People Want to Improve This is similar to the Dalai
Lama's statement that the common characteristic of all people is that
they want to be happy. 2 3. *People Need to Be Better, Try Harder, and
Be More Motivated to Change The fact that people are doing the best they
can, and want to do even better, does not mean that their efforts and
motivation are sufficient to the task. The asterisk at the start of this
assumption indicates that this is not always true. In particular, when
progress is steady and at a realistic rate of improvement with no let-up
or episodic drop in effort, doing better, trying harder and being more
motivated is not needed. 4.* People May Not Have Caused All of Their Own
Problems, but They Have to Solve Them Anyway This assumption is true for
adults, because the responsibility for their own lives rests with them.
The asterisk before this assumption indicates that this is not always
true. With children and adolescents, as well as some disabled persons,
parents and other caregivers must assist them with this task. For
example, young children or disabled individuals cannot get themselves to
treatment if parents or caregivers refuse to take them. 5. New Behaviors
Must Be Learned in All Relevant Contexts Behaviors learned in one
context often do not generalize to different contexts, thus it is
important to practice new behaviors in all the environments where they
will be needed. (This is one of the main reasons it is important for
participants to practice new skills in their daily environments.) 6. All
Behaviors (Actions, Thoughts, Emotions) Are Caused There is always a
cause or set of causes for our actions, thoughts, and emotions, even if
we don't know what these causes are.

6. General Skills: General Handout 4 • 137

7.  Figuring Out and Changing the Causes of Behavior Works Better Than
    Judging and Blaming This assumption is very much related to the
    previous one. When we agree that all behavior is caused, this leads
    to the understanding that blaming and being judgmental ("This should
    not be") are not effective in changing that situation or behavior.
    Note to Leaders: It is important to point out that our culture often
    encourages and models being judgmental, and so it's easy to respond
    in a judgmental manner. It is also important not to judge the
    judging. Letting go of judging is likely to get us to our goals of
    changing behavior more effectively.

C. Committing to Learning Skills It is important to remember that you
can never get too much commitment from clients to learning skills.
Commitment in skills training is particularly important, because
learning skills requires a fair amount of homework practice, and such
practice not only takes time but can be difficult to do. Even if you
have met individually with participants and worked on commitment, if
time permits it can be very useful to review commitment in the group.
The aim here is to focus attention on whether participants are still
committed to coming to skills classes, doing the homework practice and
generally putting substantial effort into learning new, skillful ways to
solve problems and work toward their individual goals. Discussion
Points: 1. Ask participants whether they are still committed to skills
sessions and practice. Is there anyone who was never committed in the
first place? If yes, ask, "Are you willing to commit to coming and
practicing now?" Discuss. 2. Ask about difficulties participants may
encounter with transportation, coming on time, and staying until the end
of sessions. Troubleshoot difficulties with the group. 3. Ask about
fears and concerns about coming to the group. Ask, "Who thinks it will
be too difficult to share their homework with others? Who will be
reluctant to ask questions when learning new skills?" Discuss.

99D. Diary Cards 1. What Is a Diary Card? The DBT diary card is designed
to track behaviors that clients are trying to decrease, as well as
skills they are trying to increase. For the most part, the top half of
the card tracks behaviors to be decreased, and the bottom half tracks
skills to be practiced and increased. The top half is designed primarily
for review in individual sessions. Because it is also important for
individual therapists to track use of skills, clients rate the skills
they use ("Used Skills") on a 7-point scale in one column on the top
half. The bottom half, in contrast, lists the most important DBT skills
taught. Participants are instructed to circle the skills they use each
day. See Figure 4.1 in Chapter 4 for a sample diary card. Only the
bottom half of the card (pertaining to skills) is reviewed in skills
training sessions. If you are conducting a skills-­training-only program,
and participants are either getting individual therapy elsewhere or are
not in any individual therapy, give out only the bottom half of the
card. In our friends-and-­family skills program, we give out only the
bottom half of the skills card. We do the same with parents in the
adolescent multifamily skills program. The teens, however, have the
complete card, which they review with their individual therapists. An
exception here should be made if the skills trainers are also providing
case management and/or crisis intervention to skills participants, in
which case it makes sense to give them the complete card. Ask each
participant to bring the diary card every week to the skills training
session, but review only the

138 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: General Handouts 4--5

bottom part of the card for even those who bring a complete card. My
thinking on this issue (to block sharing of information on the top part
of the card) is summarized in Chapter 3 in the discussion of the fourth
skills training guideline: Participants do not tempt others to engage in
problem behaviors. 2. Does the Diary Card Have to Be Printed on Card
Stock? The first diary cards were printed on card stock with a front and
a back. It soon became clear, however, that card stock was very hard to
fold up and keep somewhere inconspicuous when clients were homeless or
when they were out in public (such as at work or at school). So we
changed it to standard 8.5 × 11 paper. There are now many versions of
our DBT diary cards online and also in computerized apps. Look up "DBT
diary card" in your search engine and you will find them. As you will
see, there are many variations. 3. How Is the Diary Card Used? Go over
the instructions in Chapter 4, Table 4.2, for filling out the diary
card. In addition, do the following:  Tell clients to check each skill
and circle it each day if they make any attempt to practice

the skill. Degree of skill practice (front of card) is rated according
to the scale at the bottom of the card. Thus participants should rate
their use of the skills they are learning. Note that maladaptive coping
or problem solving (e.g., drinking, self-­cutting) do not count as using
skills.  Emphasize that clients need to practice skills already taught
and learned, not just new ones. This is crucially important in learning
and change.  Troubleshoot problems in filling out the cards. Engage in
problem solving for difficulties.  Stress the confidentiality of cards.
Discuss ways to keep the cards confidential. Give out alternative cards
with only acronyms if necessary. Suggest that participants not put their
real names on cards, and that they use numbers or pseudonyms instead.
Some participants do not want to use diary cards that can be understood
by anyone else if they are found. In these instances, diary cards can be
revised to use acronyms instead of the names of skills.

IV. Biosocial Theory of Emotion Dysregulation (General Handout 5) Main
    Point: Biosocial theory is an explanation of how and why some people
    have so much difficulty with emotion regulation and behavioral
    control. General Handout 5: Biosocial Theory. This handout covers
    both the biological and the social aspects of emotion regulation and
    behavioral control. In standard DBT, the information on this handout
    is ordinarily covered in individual therapy. In adolescent treatment
    it is discussed with both parents and teens. It is an optional
    handout for a skills-only program. For a more detailed review of the
    biosocial theory, see Chapter 1 and the references at the end of
    that chapter. Worksheet: None.

Note to Leaders: As you will see, the biosocial theory puts a large
emphasis on biology and on the behavior of others in the participants'
social environment. Almost everyone will be comfortable with the
emphasis on biology as an important factor in emotion dysregulation and
behavioral dyscontrol. However, if not handled skillfully, the emphasis
on the social environment can make many participants uncomfortable, and
it can make those involved in their caregiving or others in their
current environment particularly uncomfortable or defensive. Great care,
empathy for others, and sensitivity are needed in

6. General Skills: General Handout 5 • 139 working with individuals who
may not have been effective parents, or others who might fit into the
invalidating category. That said, I have never watered down the theory
to soothe parents or caregivers in a participant's social environment.
Because I have not judged those in the social environment, I have
generally found that parents, relatives, and others are grateful for the
understanding and the guidance the theory gives them.

99A. Biological Factors and Emotional Vulnerability: The "Bio" in
Biosocial 1. Characteristics of Emotionally Vulnerable Individuals
Individuals who are emotionally vulnerable:  Are more sensitive to
emotional stimuli.  Experience emotions more often than others.  May
feel like emotions hit them for no reason, out of the blue.  Have more
intense emotions than others---­emotions that feel like being hit by a
ton of

bricks.  Have long-­lasting emotions.

2.  Biological Influences on Vulnerability This vulnerability to high
    emotionality is highly influenced by biological factors:  Genetics. 
    Intrauterine factors during pregnancy.  Brain damage or physical
    disorders after birth.

3.  Individual Variation in Emotionality Some people are just more
    emotional than others.

99

Discussion Point: Ask participants to check off characteristics of
emotional vulnerability that fit them. Discuss. Discussion Point: Ask
participants whether they have siblings or family members who have been
markedly different in emotionality ever since (it seems) they were born.
Discuss how this is probably due to biological differences. Discussion
Point: Individuals with serious brain disorders, traumatic brain
injuries, and some other serious physical disorders that they acquired
after birth will often have much more difficulty managing emotions than
they had before the injury or disorder.

B. Biological Factors and Impulsivity 1. Characteristics of Impulsive
Individuals Individuals who are impulsive:  Find it hard to inhibit
behaviors.  Are more likely to do things that get them in trouble.  Have
behaviors that often seem to come out of nowhere.  Have moods that get
in the way of organizing behavior to achieve goals.  Have trouble
controlling behaviors that are linked to their moods.

99

2.  Biological Influences on Impulsivity Genetics and other biological
    factors also influence impulsivity.

140 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: General Handout 5

99

3.  Individual Variation in Impulsivity Some people are just more
    impulsive than others.

99

Discussion Point: Ask participants to check off characteristics of
impulsivity on General Handout 5 that fit them. Discuss. Discussion
Point: Ask participants whether they have siblings or family members who
have been markedly different in impulsivity ever since (it seems) they
were born. Discuss how this is probably due to biological differences.
Discussion Point: Individuals with serious brain disorders or traumatic
brain injuries often will have much more difficulty managing impulses to
act without thinking than before the injury or disorder. Discuss.

99C. The Invalidating Environment: The "Social" in Biosocial 1.
Characteristics of the Invalidating Environment The invalidating
environment is characterized by:

99

 Intolerance toward expressions of private emotional experiences,
particularly those not sup-

ported by observable public events. Example: Telling a child, "Nobody
else feels like you do, so just stop being a crybaby."  Intermittent
reinforcement of extreme expressions of emotion, while simultaneously
com-

municating that such emotions are unwarranted. Example: Ignoring screams
for help when a child falls off a tricycle until the screams get on the
adult's nerves too much, and then responding in a cold and stern manner.
Communications that specific emotions are invalid, weird, wrong, or bad.

Example: Telling a child, "That is such a dumb thing to say!" 
Communications that emotions should be coped with without support.

Example: Saying, "If you are going to keep crying, go to your room and
come down when you get control of yourself."

99

 Not responding to emotions that call for a response or action.

Example: Saying, "I can see you are upset about losing your textbook for
tomorrow's exam," but not doing anything to help find the book. 
Confusing one's own emotions with the emotions of others.

Example: Saying, "I'm tired; let's all go to bed." Discussion Point:
Elicit from participants other examples of invalidation in their own
lives. Discuss.

99D. The Ineffective Environment: A Second "Social" in Biosocial Note to
Leaders: I am using the term "parent" here, but it can mean "nonparental
caregiver."

1.  Reasons for Ineffective Parental Teaching For several reasons,
    parents may be ineffective at teaching children emotion regulation
    and behavioral control.

6. General Skills: General Handout 5 • 141

a.  No Parent Is Perfect at Effective Parenting

Most parents go through periods with their children where for a limited
time it appears that they must be ineffective parents. This is normative
in parenting. At these times, many parents get professional help in
parenting. b. Many Parents Simply Do Not Know How to Be Effective
Parents

Many parents may not have had effective parenting themselves, and thus
never learned what to do---how to discipline a child, and how to attend
to and reinforce positive behaviors. These parents may not be aware that
their parenting style does not fit what their children need.

99

c.  Parents May Be Perfectionists

Parents may be so perfectionistic or so highly concerned about
appearances that they overemphasize internalizing all emotions and
characterize impulsivity as a character flaw that can be remedied only
if there is sufficient motivation. This is rarely sufficient alone.

99

d.  Some Parents Have Serious Disorders

Parents who have serious physical or mental disorders may not be able to
attend to their children. They may themselves be highly emotionally
dysregulated and impulsive.

99

e.  Parents May Be Overstressed

Some parents may be so overwhelmed that they cannot give their children
the attention and coaching the children need. Severe illness in other
family members, high-­stress jobs, insufficient financial resources,
multiple children, the absence of a second parent, and many other
factors can interfere with the most caring parent's being able to give a
child what is needed. Discussion Point: Ask participants if their
parents have (or had) any of these characteristics. Ask parents if any
of these descriptions fit them. Discuss.

2.  Reasons for Ineffective Adult Environments Sometimes adults get in
    environments that are ineffective and sometimes even destructive.
    Examples include:

<!-- -->

a.  Work Environments

Adults' work environments often excessively punish behaviors that don't
meet the workplace standards, fail to reinforce effective behaviors, and
fail to communicate respect. Any or all of these factors can lead to
high emotionality in a vulnerable person. Although impulsive behaviors
may not show up in the work setting, the stress of the workplace may
lead to excess impulsivity outside work. b. Adult Relationships

Many adult relationships can lead to high emotionality. This is
particularly the case when partners or friends ignore effective
behaviors and excessively punish unwanted behaviors. For many
individuals who are vulnerable, an environment without nurturing and
caring can lead to extreme sadness, loneliness, shame, and other extreme
emotions. At times, sadness may spark high anger as well.

99

c.  Insensitive Individuals

Insensitive individuals who are very important to a person who is overly
sensitive to invalidation can set off extreme emotional reactions when
they invalidate the person's core beliefs, hopes, goals,
accomplishments, or personal characteristics.

142 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: General Handout 5

Discussion Point: Ask participants whether they have been or are
currently in any of the ineffective environments. Discuss.

99E. It's the Transaction That Counts 1. Escalation of Communication A
primary function of emotions is to communicate. When the communication
is not received, the sender ordinarily escalates the communication. The
more important the communication, the more the sender escalates it. 2.
Escalation of Invalidation At the same time, however, if the receiver
does not believe the communication, each time the individual tries to
communicate the same thing, the receiver will escalate invalidation. 3.
Further Escalation of Both As emotions escalate, invalidation escalates
further---and as invalidation escalates further, emotions and their
communication escalate further in turn. 4. What the Transaction Looks
Like A transaction looks like Figure 6.1, where A communicates to B and
then B responds to A, who then communicates to B, and so on. In other
words, each party in a transaction influences the other. A and B can
represent two individuals, an individual and his or her environment, or
two environments. The key idea is that over time, both sides influence
each other. Note to Leaders: Describe the following scenario in as
dramatic a fashion as possible. Act it out. It can also be helpful to
put it on the board as you are acting it out.

99

Example: Invalidation looks a lot like the following interchange.
Sender: There's a fire. R eceiver: You're overreacting. What's wrong
with you? There's no fire. Sender: Um, there's a fire here! R eceiver:
You're crazy! Just blow it out! \[After many cycles of being invalidated
for describing the situation, the sender responds in one of two ways:\]
Sender: OK, there's no fire. (What's wrong with me??) R eceiver: Good
job! \[Or, when the sender is really desperate:\]

A1 A A2 A A3

B B1 B B2 B B3

FIGURE 6.1. Transactional change diagram.

6. General Skills: General Handouts 5--6 • 143

Sender: FIRE!!! FIRE!!! HELP!!! R eceiver: Oh, no!! What can I do to
help? Discussion Point: Ask participants to describe a transaction like
this that has occurred in their lives. Probe for examples where
participants were calling out "Fire!" when there was one, and situations
where they themselves were invalidating someone else's cry of "Fire!"
Discuss. Discussion Point: Often people who have been invalidated learn
to exaggerate their communications to be sure the other person pays
attention. Alas, once someone gets in this habit, the environment
ordinarily gets in the habit of ignoring the person's communications.
Elicit times when participants have exaggerated, and times when those
they interact with have done so. Discuss ways to reduce the tendency to
exaggerate.

5.  Summary In summary, highlight that each of us is influenced by our
    biological makeup, which then influences our behavior, which then
    influences our environment, which in turn reacts to and influences
    us in a never-­ending transactional relationship over time. Such a
    transactional point of view is largely incompatible with blame,
    although it is not incompatible with identifying important causal
    factors in our own and others' behavior. Caution: Remember that this
    biosocial theory fits individuals with very high emotion
    dysregulation. DBT skills, however, are effective for many other
    disorders, and it is important to provide a biosocial model that
    fits the disorder.

<!-- -->

V.  

Overview: Analyzing Behavior (General HAndout 6) Main Point: The ability
to analyze our own behavior allows us to determine what causes it and
what maintains it. Knowing this is important for any of us if we want to
change our own behavior. General Handout 6: Overview: Analyzing
Behavior. This overview handout can be reviewed briefly or skipped,
depending on time. Do not teach the material while covering this page
unless you are skipping the related handouts. Worksheet: None.

This section is aimed at helping clients develop the ability to analyze
and understand ineffective, problematic behaviors and to identify
missing effective behaviors that are needed.

A. Chain Analysis of Problem Behavior A "chain analysis" is a series of
questions to guide clients through figuring out what factors have led to
problem behaviors and what factors might be making it difficult to
change those behaviors.

B. Missing-Links Analysis A "missing-links analysis" is a series of
questions to guide clients through analyzing the factors associated with
not engaging in effective behaviors that are needed or expected.

VI. Chain Analysis of Problem Behavior (General HAndouts 7--7a) Main
    Point: Changing behavior requires us to understand the causes of the
    behavior we want to change. A behavioral chain analysis guides
    understanding of the chain of events leading to and following
    specific behaviors.

144 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: General Handouts 7--7a

General Handout 7: Chain Analysis. The ability to conduct a chain
analysis of problem behaviors is a critical skill in DBT for both
therapists and clients. The skill can be taught in a group setting as
part of your standard curriculum, or it can be taught by individual
therapists. Conducting chain analyses of problem behaviors by using
General Worksheet 2 (see below) is a critical part of DBT. However,
there are many ways to teach it, and there are many places and times to
teach it in the course of therapy. In many treatment programs,
individual therapists teach their clients how to do it in the course of
individual therapy. It is ordinarily taught in residential and inpatient
treatment programs.3, 4 Inclusion of the chain analyses in skills
training per se is optional. When participants are not in individual
therapy, teaching chain analysis can be incorporated into skills
training when there is time and it appears useful. General Handout 7a:
Chain Analysis, Step by Step. This handout gives step-by-step
instructions on how to do a chain analysis. It is important to review
this handout in detail and link it closely with General Worksheet 2.
General Worksheet 2: Chain Analysis of Problem Behavior. This is the
worksheet for doing a chain analysis. Review this worksheet with
participants, and link each item on it to the same item on Handout 7 or
7a. Note that two pages are given for listing behavioral links in the
chain of events. Participants should use only as much space as needed
and one page is often sufficient. General Worksheet 2a: Example: Chain
Analysis of Problem Behavior. This is a sample, completed chain analysis
worksheet.

99A. What Is Chain Analysis? Any behavior can be understood as a series
of linked components. These links are "chained" together, because they
follow in succession one after the other; one link in the chain leads to
another. For behaviors that are well rehearsed (practiced a lot), it may
appear that the episode cannot be broken down into steps---that it "all
happens at once." A "chain analysis" provides a series of questions
(e.g., what happened before that, what happened next) for unlocking
these links that sometimes feel stuck together. The purpose of a chain
analysis is to figure out what the problem is (e.g., being late for
work, impulsively quitting a job); what prompts it; what its function
is; what is interfering with the resolution of the problem; and what
aids are available to help solve the problem.

99B. Why Conduct Chain Analyses?

A chain analysis is an invaluable tool for assessing a behavior to be
changed. Although performing a chain analysis requires time and effort,
it provides essential information for understanding the events that lead
up to a particular problem behavior (i.e., behaviors participants want
to change). Many attempts to solve a problem fail because the problem at
hand is not fully understood and assessed. By conducting repeated chain
analyses, a person can identify the pattern linking different components
of a behavior together. Figuring out what the links are is the first
step in finding solutions to stopping the problem behavior. When any of
the links of the chain can be broken, the problem behavior can be
stopped.

99C. How to Do a Chain Analysis Note to Leaders: Following are two
examples you can use to help participants see how to do a chain
analysis. Chain analysis is better taught by example than by going over
the steps below didactically. Ordinarily it is not a good idea in a
group setting to demonstrate chain analysis by using a problem from the
participants, as it may be very complicated and you may not have time to
finish. You can use the

6. General Skills: General Handout 7a • 145 completed example on General
Worksheet 2a. If you end before completing it, participants should read
the example as a homework assignment. If doing chain analyses is an
important part of your treatment, make reviewing and correcting them in
sessions part of homework review.

99

Example 1: Ask participants to go to General Worksheet 2a (the completed
example of behavioral chain analysis). Review this example step by step,
noting what information is being asked for, and highlighting how the
information helps in understanding and ultimately changing the problem
behavior. Point out that the questions on the worksheet correspond to
the stepped descriptions in General Handout 7 and to the step-by-step
instructions on General Handout 7a. Discuss the process and any
difficulties participants have with the instructions and worksheet. The
chain analysis is structured to identify the critical pieces of
information necessary to understand and solve a problem behavior. Steps
1--5 are about understanding the problem. Steps 6--8 are about changing
the problem behavior. Going from the beginning of General Handout 7 to
its end, ask participants to identify: 1. What exactly was the problem
behavior? 2. What event in the environment started the chain of events
(prompting event)? 3. What were the vulnerability factors for that
particular day? 4. What was the chain of events, link by link, that led
from the prompting event to the problem behavior? 5. What were the
consequences of the behavior in the environment? The next steps are
these: 6. Identify skillful behaviors to replace problem links in the
chain, and so to decrease the probability of this behavior's happening
again. 7. Develop prevention plans to reduce vulnerability to prompting
events and to starting down the chain. 8. Repair the negative
consequences of the problem behavior for the environment and for
oneself.

99

A special note on Step 8: When one is repairing negative consequences,
it is extremely important to first figure out what has actually been
harmed. This is very hard for many individuals to do. For example,
someone who betrays a person and says mean, untrue things about the
person may try to repair by bringing flowers or candy, as if the damage
done was to remove the person's flowers or candy. The repair that is
necessary is to apologize, retract what was said, and also refrain from
gossip in order to rebuild the person's trust. A detailed description of
each of these steps is given in General Handout 7a. Note to Leaders: In
the beginning, it may be very difficult for participants to identify
separate steps that are part of a problem behavior. In other words, it
is difficult for them to identify the steps that took place between
Point A (when they were not engaging in the problem behavior) and Point
B (when they were). With patience, a chain analysis can break this down
into separate links.

Example 2: Give participants a clean copy of General Worksheet 2 (the
blank worksheet for chain analysis). Go through the following example,
and ask participants to track on the handout where they would put the
information. At the end, discuss the value of the worksheet. Step 1. The
problem behavior: I yelled at my partner and stormed out of the room,
slamming the door. Step 2. The prompting event: I came home from work
and my boyfriend was on the couch asleep \[beginning of the chain of
events leading to yelling and slamming the door\]. Step 3. What made me
vulnerable: The night before he had come home really late and was

146 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: General Handouts 7a--8

tired. He and I had not gone out together after work in a really long
time and I got him to agree to go out the next night. I was really
looking forward to going out when I got home. Step 4. The specific
behaviors and events that were links in the chain: 1st. When I saw him
asleep I thought, "He is sleeping again. We're not going out." 2nd. I
thought, "He does not love me." 3rd. I got furious right away. 4th. I
wanted to hurt him like he hurt me. Step 5. The consequences of the
behavior---the harm my behavior caused: a. In the environment: He was
very hurt that I assumed he did not love me. b. For myself: I felt
guilty. I realized that I had ruined the evening for both of us. Step 6.
I can check the facts next time, since when I finally did in this
situation, I found out he had taken a nap so that we would be able to
have a really good time together. Step 7. I can check the facts in my
relationship with my partner when I start thinking he does not love me.
Step 8. Plans to repair, correct, and overcorrect the harm: I will make
every effort to treat my partner as if he constantly loves me. I will
also apologize to him and to make up our evening out that I ruined, I
will plan an evening together for both of us that he will really like.
Discussion Point: Discuss other ideas for some or all of the questions
as you go through the example. Note to Leaders: Convey to participants
the importance of not getting "hung up" by trying to do the analysis
perfectly and identify all the parts of the chain exactly right. What is
most important is that participants start using the chain analysis, as
opposed to feeling overwhelmed by the complexity of doing it perfectly.
Point out to participants that doing a chain analysis is a skill like
any other, which means that practice matters and that people get better
at doing the skill quickly. In our experience, conducting chain analyses
over time leads participants to increased awareness of their thoughts
and feelings. Note to Leaders: When completing a chain analysis,
participants should focus on identifying the key dysfunctional links
(thoughts, events, actions) that seem to contribute most to linking the
prompting event with the problem behavior. One way to determine quickly
whether a particular link is key is to imagine the probability of the
problem behavior's occurring if that link had not been there. It is
important to point out that links in a chain can be functional or
dysfunctional, depending on whether the client responds to that link by
moving farther away or closer to doing the problem behavior.

VII. Analyzing Missing Links (General Handout 8) Main Point: Sometimes
     the problem is not the presence of problem behavior, but the
     absence of effective behavior. Analyzing missing links helps us
     identify what is interfering with effective behaviors that are
     expected or needed. General Handout 8: Missing-Links Analysis. This
     handout gives step-by-step instructions for how to do a
     missing-links analysis. General Worksheet 3: Missing-Links
     Analysis. This is the worksheet for analyzing missing links. It can
     also be used during sessions to analyze missing homework as a way
     to teach the skill. If it is not used as a teaching tool during a
     session, review the worksheet to be sure participants understand
     its use.

6. General Skills: General Handout 8 • 147

99A. What Is Missing-Links Analysis? A "missing-links analysis" is a
series of questions to help a person figure out what got in the way of
behaving effectively. Its purpose is to show where in the chain of
events something happened (or failed to happen) that interfered with
effective behavior when it was needed or expected. Two types of
effective behaviors can be missing. 1. Expected Behaviors Expected
behaviors are ones you have agreed to do (e.g., get to work on time),
have been instructed to do (e.g., skills training homework), have
planned to do (e.g., clean your room), or have desperately hoped to do
(e.g., exercise in the mornings). 2. Needed Behaviors Needed behaviors
are skillful behaviors that constitute effective responses in a specific
situation (e.g., skillful interpersonal behavior to calm down a
stressful interaction) or to address specific problems (e.g., getting up
on time when your alarm clock is broken).

B. When Is Missing-Links Analysis Used? Missing-links analysis and
problem solving are likely to be sufficient when the problem is not
knowing what was expected or needed, unwillingness to do what was
expected or needed, or never having the thought enter your mind to do
what was needed or expected. Missing-links analyses together with chain
analyses may be useful in figuring out the problem when you know what
the effective behavior is but still do not do it. See below for an
example.

C. Why Bother? A missing-links analysis can be an invaluable tool for
assessing situations when effective behaviors are repeatedly missing. As
noted in discussing chain analysis, attempts to solve a problem often
fail because the problem at hand is not fully understood and assessed.
An advantage of the missing-links analysis is that the questions can
usually be asked and answered very rapidly.

99D. How to Do It Tell clients: "Answer the questions on General Handout
8 until further questions would not be helpful or don't make sense. As
soon as you get to that point, start problem solving." For example, if a
person did not know that an effective behavior was needed or expected,
it is pointless to ask whether he or she was willing to do what was
needed or expected. If a person is willful right from the start and
decides not to engage in effective behavior, solving that problem is
more important than asking whether the person thought about engaging in
the behavior at a later point. If the thought of doing something
effective never came to mind, asking what got in the way of effective
behavior (other than never thinking of it) would not be very useful.
General Worksheet 3 (the missing-links analysis worksheet) is structured
to identify the critical pieces of information necessary to understand
and solve the missing behavior.

99

Practice Exercise: Ask one participant to volunteer to have a missing
behavior analyzed, and go through the questions and problem solving
described on General Handout 8 and listed below. If time allows, do
several examples. 1. "Did you know what effective behavior was needed or
expected?" If no, ask, "What got in the way of knowing?" Then stop
questions and move to problem solving for what got in the way. If yes,
move to Question 2.

148 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: General Handouts 7--8

2.  "Were you willing to do the needed or expected effective behavior?"
    If no, ask, "What got in the way of willingness to do an effective
    behavior?" Then stop questions and move to problem solving for lack
    of willingness. If yes, move to Question 3.
3.  "Did the thought of doing the needed or expected effective behavior
    ever enter your mind?" If no, stop questions and move to problem
    solving for a way to get the thought to enter the participant's
    mind. If yes, move to Question 4.
4.  "What got in the way of doing the needed or expected effective
    behavior right away?" Move to problem solving for what got in the
    way. Make a concerted effort to generate a wide range of possible
    solutions. This can take more time than simply asking and answering
    questions. In a group setting, ask group members to help generate
    solutions. Refer to the problem-­solving skill in the Emotion
    Regulation module if necessary (see Chapter 9, Section XI of this
    manual, and Emotion Regulation Handout 12: Problem Solving).
    Discussion Point: Elicit from participants patterns of effective
    behaviors that are missing in their lives---or, if they cannot yet
    articulate a pattern, instances when they did not do something that
    was really important to do. Practice Exercise: Ask one participant
    to volunteer to have a missing behavior analyzed, and ask another
    group member to volunteer to practice analyzing the missing
    behavior. Coach the person doing the analyzing. When doing so would
    not be disruptive to a group, encourage participants to analyze each
    other's missing homework behaviors. Practice Exercise: When a person
    comes to skills training without doing all the homework assigned,
    hand out copies of General Worksheet 3 to each participant and have
    them fill it out as you ask the missing-links questions.

<!-- -->

VIII. Missing-Links Analysis Combined with a Chain Analysis (General
      Handouts 7--8) A complete analysis of missing behavior requires
      that you combine a missing-links analysis with aspects of a chain
      analysis of the same behavior. This should happen when the factors
      that contribute to you not doing something are complicated or are
      somehow preventing you from doing what is needed even when you
      know what that is. When this is the case, you start with a
      missing-links analysis and after question 4 switch to a chain
      analysis. Use the example below or one of your own to teach this.
      Example 3: Missing behavior: I missed 45 minutes of a 1-hour
      weekly meeting at work that started at 8:30 a.m. (Start with
      question 1 on General Handout 8 here.)

<!-- -->

1.  Did I know what effective behavior was needed or expected? Yes
2.  Was I willing to do what was needed? Yes
3.  Did the thought of doing what was needed or expected ever enter my
    mind? Yes
4.  What got in the way of doing what was needed or expected right away?
    A chain of events. (Start with question 2 on General Handout 7 or 7a
    here.) Step 2. Describe the prompting event that started the chain
    of events: After I got up on time and

6. General Skills: General Handouts 7--8 • 149

made a cup of coffee, I brought in the morning newspaper. On the front
page, there was an article about a scandal in our city that I was
interested in and wanted to read \[beginning of the chain of events
leading to being late\]. Step 3. What made me vulnerable: I had gone to
bed late the night before. I had gotten little sleep, was very tired and
moving slowly, and had little resistance to temptation. Step 4. The
specific behaviors and events that were links in the chain: 1st. As I
was turning to the second page of the article, I glanced at the clock
and saw that I did not have a lot of time. 2nd. I thought "Oh, well, I
will dress really fast and get there on time." 3rd. The second page was
really interesting, so I sat down for just a minute to read it. 4th. I
was thinking I still had time. 5th. Just as I looked up at the clock and
realized I really had to get a move on, . . . 6th. . . . the phone rang
and it was my mother. 7th. I picked up the phone and started talking to
her. 8th. Mom started chatting about something going on at home. 9th. I
started worrying about getting off the phone to get to the meeting on
time. (I still had time if I really put some energy into getting
dressed, out of the house, and into the car to drive to work.) 10th. I
felt guilty getting off the phone with Mom so fast. 11th. I stayed on
the phone for 10 minutes (time I didn't have) listening to Mom. 12th. I
finally did get off the phone. 13th. I saw the clock and realized I
would be late by at least 10 minutes. 14th. I decided since I was going
to be late anyway, I might as well not hurry. 15th. I finished reading
the article. 16th. Then I dressed and left for work an hour after I
usually leave. Step 5. The consequences of the behavior---the harm my
behavior caused:    a. In the environment: It took up the time of the
people in the meeting who had to tell me what happened; it took time
waiting to see whether I would be coming at the beginning; it made
people feel less like I am a team player. People at the meeting were
distressed that I was so late.    b. For myself: I felt guilty, and it
also took a lot of my time to find out what had happened in the meeting.
Step 6. Skills to replace problem links: 2nd. Replace "Oh, well, I will
dress really fast," with "I'd better dress now to be on the safe side;
remind myself that when I read the paper before work, I am often late."
3rd. Don't sit down in the kitchen in the morning when I am tired. 7th.
When I am running late, don't pick up the phone. 10th. Practice
interpersonal skills to tell Mom I will call her later (and then call
her!). 14th. Do pros and cons about giving up and giving in to being
more late than necessary. Rush to get to work just a little bit late,
rather than writing it off, relaxing, and being very late. Step 7. Ways
to reduce my vulnerability in the future:  Go to bed earlier to get more
sleep (to reduce vulnerability).  Call Mom once a week, if only for a
really brief chat (to reduce vulnerability).

150 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: General Handouts 7--8

Ways to prevent precipitating event from happening again:  Stop taking
the newspaper.  Pick the paper up off the porch, but do not open it
before work.

Step 8. Plans to repair, correct, and overcorrect the harm: I can
apologize to my colleagues for being late, tell them I realize it is
distressing when I come late, and let them know I will work harder at
being on time in the future. I can be early for the weekly meetings of
this group for the next 2 months, and I can offer to be the person who
follows up on providing information to others who are late or miss a
meeting. I can also offer to help other staff members out with tasks,
and/or say yes when asked to help others out. Discussion Point: Discuss
other ideas for some or all of the questions as you go through the
example.

References 1. Safer, D. L., Telch, C. F., & Chen, E. Y. (2009).
Dialectical behavior therapy for binge eating and bulimia. New York:
Guilford Press. 2. Dalai Lama. (2009, May 1--2). Meditation and
psychotherapy. Conference held at Harvard University, Cambridge, MA. 3.
Swenson, C. R., Witterholt, S., & Bohus, M. (2007). Dialectical behavior
therapy on inpatient units. In L. A. Dimeff & K. Koerner (Eds.),
Dialectical behav-

ior therapy in clinical practice: Applications across disorders and
settings (pp. 69--111). New York: Guilford Press. 4. Swenson, C. R.,
Sanderson, C., Dulit, R. A., & Linehan, M. M. (2001). The application of
dialectical behavior therapy for patients with borderline personality
disorder on inpatient units. Psychiatric Quarterly, 72(4), 307--324.

Chapter 7

Mindfulness Skills

Mindfulness skills are central to DBT (hence the label "core"
mindfulness skills for the first group of skills described below). The
core skills are the first skills taught, and they underpin and support
all of the other DBT skills. They are reviewed at the beginning of each
of the other three skill modules and are the only skills highlighted
throughout the entire treatment. DBT mindfulness skills are
psychological and behavioral translations of meditation practices from
Eastern spiritual training. Mindfulness skills are as essential for
therapists and skills trainers to practice as they are for participants.
Indeed, clinicians' practice of mindfulness has been found to be
associated with a better therapeutic course and better outcomes.1 Thus
mindfulness practice is ordinarily the first agenda item in DBT
treatment team meetings. Mindfulness has to do with the quality of
awareness or the quality of presence that a person brings to everyday
living. It's a way of living awake, with eyes wide open. As a set of
skills, mindfulness practice is the intentional process of observing,
describing, and participating in reality nonjudgmentally, in the moment,
and with effectiveness (i.e., using skillful means). In formulating
these skills, I have drawn most heavily from the practice of Zen. But
the skills are compatible with Western contemplative and other Eastern
meditation practices, as well as with emerging scientific knowledge
about the benefits of "allowing" experiences rather than suppressing,
avoiding, or trying to change them. Both Eastern and Western
psychologies, as well as spiritual practices, are converging on the same
insights. Mindfulness practice per se was and is central to
contemplative spiritual practices across denominations and beliefs, and
the mindfulness practices included here may be incorporated into any
individu-

al's spiritual practices and beliefs. DBT, however, is specifically
designed to be nondenominational (i.e., compatible with an array of
beliefs and traditions), and thus practices are purposely provided in a
secular format. No spiritual or religious convictions are expected or
necessary for practicing and mastering these skills. The mindfulness
skills can also be thought of as the components that together make up
the foundation for meditation practices taught in many psychological and
stress reduction treatment packages (e.g., Mindfulness-Based Cognitive
Therapy, 2 Mindfulness-Based Relapse Prevention, 3 Mindfulness-Based
Stress Reduction4). In some ways, the mindfulness skills in DBT can be
thought of as skills for beginners in mindfulness---that is, skills for
individuals who cannot yet regulate themselves well enough to practice
formal mindfulness meditation. They can also be thought of as skills for
persons advanced in mindfulness---the skills such persons need to
practice in everyday life. In this sense, these skills are the
application of mindfulness meditation to everyday life.

What Is Mindfulness? "Mindfulness" is the act of consciously focusing
the mind in the present moment without judgment and without attachment
to the moment. When mindful, we are aware in and of the present moment.
We can contrast mindfulness with automatic, habitual, or rote behavior
and activity. When mindful, we are alert and awake, like a sentry
guarding a gate. We can contrast mindfulness with rigidly clinging to
the present moment, as if we could keep a present moment from changing
if we cling hard enough. When 151

152 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES

mindful, we are open to the fluidity of each moment as it arises and
falls away. In "beginner's mind," each moment is a new beginning, a new
and unique moment in time. We can contrast mindfulness with rejecting,
suppressing, blocking, or avoiding the present moment, as if "out of
mind" really did mean "out of existence" and "out of influence" upon us.
When mindful, we enter into each moment. "Mindfulness practice" is the
repeated effort of bringing the mind back to awareness of the present
moment, without judgment and without attachment; it includes, therefore,
the repeated effort of letting go of judgments and letting go of
attachment to current thoughts, emotions, sensations, activities,
events, or life situations. In sum, mindfulness is a practice of
entering into the current moment without reserve or grudge, entering
into the cosmic process of existence with awareness that life is a
process of constant change. Mindfulness practice teaches us to move into
the moment and become aware of everything in it, functioning from there.
"Mindfulness everyday" is a way of living. It's a way of living with our
eyes wide open. It is very difficult to accept reality with our eyes
closed. If we want to accept what's happening to us, we have to know
what's happening to us. We have to open up our eyes and look. Now a lot
of people say, "I keep my eyes open all the time." But if we look at
them, we'll see that they are not looking at the moment. They're looking
to their past. They're looking to their future. They're looking to their
worries. They're looking to their thoughts. They're looking to everybody
else. They're looking absolutely everywhere else, except at the moment.
Mindfulness as a practice is the practice of directing our attention to
only one thing. And that one thing is the moment we are alive. The very
moment we are in. The beauty of mindfulness is that if we look at the
moment, just this moment, we will discover that we are looking at the
universe. And if we can become one with the moment---just this
moment---the moment cracks open, and we are shocked that joy is in the
moment. Strength to bear the suffering of our lives is also in the
moment. It's just about practice. It's not a type of practice where
listening to it just once and going through it just once gets us there.
Mindfulness is not a place we get to. Mindfulness is a place we are. It
is the going from and coming back to mindfulness that is the practice.
It's just this breath, just this step, just this struggle. Mindfulness
is just where we are now, with our eyes wide open, aware, awake,
attentive. It

can be extremely difficult. Things may come up that are difficult to
bear. If that happens, we can step back, notice, let go. This moment
will pass. Difficulty may come up again. It may be difficult again. We
can look at it, let it go, let it pass. If it becomes too difficult at
some moment, we can just gently stop. We can come another day, wait, and
listen again. "Meditation" is the practice of mindfulness while sitting
or standing quietly for a period of time. Meditation is sometimes
mistakenly thought to be the core of mindfulness. However, it is
important not to confuse meditation and mindfulness. Although meditation
implies mindfulness, the reverse is not necessarily so: Mindfulness does
not require meditation. This distinction is very important. Although
everyone can practice mindfulness, not everyone can practice meditation.
Some cannot sit or stand still. Some are too terrified to look at their
breath or watch their mind. Some cannot practice meditation now, but
will be able to at a later point. "Mindful meditation" is the activity
of attending to, gazing, watching, or contemplating something. In Zen,
for example, one is often given the instruction "Watch your mind." In
other spiritual practices, one may be given words, texts, or objects to
focus the mind on. In an art gallery, one stands or sits and gazes at
artistic works. We attend to the chirp of the birds or the car engine
sounding different than before. We watch the sun set and gaze at
children frolicking in the park. Each of these is mindful activity.
Although the term "meditation" is sometimes used to refer to thinking
about something as in connection to the universe or the miracle of life,
the more common understanding in secular circles is that of mindfulness.
Just as common is the understanding that when one meditates, one is
(usually) sitting quietly and is focusing on one's breath, one's bodily
sensation, a word, or some other focus dictated by one's individual
practice or tradition. Meditation as a contemplative or mindfulness
practice is both a secular practice, as in meditating on or
contemplating art, and a religious or spiritual practice, as in
contemplative prayer. Indeed, in all the major religions of the world,
there is a tradition---­ however broad or narrow---of contemplative
practice. This tradition within religions, often referred to as the
"mystical" tradition, recommends mindfulness practices of various sorts
and emphasizes spiritual experiences that may result from these
practices. Whether mindful meditation and prac-

7. Mindfulness Skills • 153

tice are secular or spiritual depends completely on the orientation and
beliefs of the individual. For the spiritual person, mindfulness can be
both a secular and a spiritual or religious practice. In meditation and
in mindfulness, there are two types of practices: "opening the mind" and
"focusing the mind." Opening the mind is the practice of observing or
watching whatever comes into awareness. In sitting meditation, it is
simply noticing thoughts, emotions, and sensations that enter awareness
without holding onto or pursuing them. It is like sitting and watching a
conveyor belt going by---­noticing what is going by on the conveyor belt,
but not shutting off the belt to examine objects more closely. It is
like sitting on a hill watching a harbor and noticing the boats entering
and leaving without jumping onto one of the boats. For beginners or for
persons with attention difficulties, opening the mind can be very
difficult, because it is so easy to get caught up in a passing thought,
emotion, or sensation and to lose the focus on awareness. For these
individuals, focusing the mind is usually recommended. When focusing the
mind, one focuses attention on specific internal or external events. For
example, when focusing on internal events, one might focus attention on
a specific sensation succession (a series of sensations), emotions
arising, thoughts going through the mind, or repeated words or phrases
that have been decided before. For example, some schools of meditation
give out mantras, or specific words to say with each breath. One
instance of this is the "wise mind" practice (described below) of saying
the word "wise" while breathing in and the word "mind" while breathing
out. Another example is counting breaths (up to 10 and then starting
over), which is a typical instruction in Zen. Guided mindfulness
exercises given by clinicians or via meditation recordings give
instructions of where and how to focus the mind. When focusing the mind
externally one might focus on a leaf, a painting, a candle, another
person or persons, or scenery, as in a walk in nature, a sunrise or
sunset, and so forth. There are also two stances one can take in
practicing: either getting distance by pulling back and watching, or
moving forward and becoming "what is" (by moving into what is being
watched). Contrasts of these stances, stated in metaphorical language,
are standing on a high mountain and picturing one's emotions as boulders
far down below versus entering fully into the experience of one's

emotions; sitting on the edge and watching the emptiness within oneself
versus entering into and becoming the emptiness; noticing
self-­consciousness at a party versus throwing oneself completely into a
party; and watching one's own sexual responses versus entering entirely
into one's own sexual response.

Core Mindfulness Skills States of Mind and the Mindfulness "Wise Mind"
Skill The core mindfulness skills are covered in Sections I--X of this
module. In DBT, three primary states of mind are presented: "reasonable
mind," "emotion mind," and "wise mind" (Section III). A person is in
reasonable mind when he or she is approaching knowledge intellectually;
is thinking rationally and logically; attends only to empirical facts;
and ignores emotion, empathy, love, or hate in favor of being planful,
practical, and "cool" in approaching problems. Decisions and actions are
controlled by logic. The person is in emotion mind when thinking and
behavior are controlled primarily by current emotional states. In
emotion mind, cognitions are "hot"; reasonable, logical thinking is
difficult; facts are amplified or distorted to be congruent with current
affect; and the energy of behavior is also congruent with the current
emotional state. Wise mind is the synthesis of emotion mind and
reasonable mind; it also goes beyond them: Wise mind adds intuitive
knowing to emotional experiencing and logical analysis. In
Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy, two other states of mind are also
discussed: "doing mind" or "doing mode" and "being mind" or "being
mode."5 Doing mind focuses on getting things done. It is multitasking,
task-­oriented, and driven. In contrast, being mind is "nothing-to-do"
mind, where the focus is on experiencing rather than doing. These two
states of mind are relevant to DBT mindfulness skills, because wise mind
can also be considered as a synthesis of doing mind and being mind.
Mindfulness skills are the vehicles for balancing emotion mind and
reasonable mind, being mind and doing mind, and other extreme sets of
mind and action to achieve wise mind and wise action. There are three
"what" skills (observing, describing, and participating). There are also
three "how" skills (taking a nonjudgmental stance, focusing on one thing
in the moment, and being effective).

154 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES

Mindfulness "What" Skills

Describing

The mindfulness "what" skills are about what to do: "observe,"
"describe," and "participate" (Sections IV--VI). The ultimate goal of
mindfulness skills practice is to develop a lifestyle of participating
with awareness. Participation without awareness is a characteristic of
impulsive and mood-­dependent behaviors. Generally, paying special
attention to observing and describing one's own behavioral responses is
only necessary when one is learning new behaviors, when there is some
sort of problem, or when a change is necessary or desirable. Learning to
drive a stick-shift car, to dance, and to type are familiar examples of
this principle. Consider beginning piano players, who pay close
attention to the locations of their hands and fingers, and may either
count beats out loud or name the keys and chords they are playing. As
skill improves, however, such observing and describing cease. But if a
habitual mistake is made after a piece is learned, a player may have to
revert to observing and describing until a new pattern has been learned.
This same deliberate reprogramming is necessary for changing impulsive
or mood-­ dependent behavior patterns. Observing ourselves with curiosity
and openness to what we will find can also, in time, lead to greater
understanding and clarity about who we are. We find our "true selves"
only by observing ourselves.

A second mindfulness "what" skill (Section V) is that of describing
events and personal responses in words. The ability to apply verbal
labels to behavioral and environmental events is essential for both
communication and self-­control. Learning to describe requires that a
person learn not to take emotions and thoughts as accurate and exact
reflections of environmental events. For example, feeling afraid does
not necessarily mean that a situation is threatening to life or welfare.
Many people confuse emotional responses with precipitating events.
Physical components of fear ("I feel my stomach muscles tightening, my
throat constricting") may be confused in the context of a particular
event ("I am starting an exam in school") to produce a dysfunctional
thought ("I am going to fail the exam"), which is then responded to as a
fact. Thoughts ("I feel unloved" or "I don't believe anyone loves me")
are often confused with facts ("I am unloved").

Observing The first "what" skill (Section IV) is observing--- that is,
attending to events, emotions, and other behavioral responses, without
necessarily trying to terminate them when they are painful or prolong
them when they are pleasant. What the participants learn here is to
allow themselves to experience with awareness, in the moment, whatever
is happening--- rather than leaving a situation or trying to terminate
an emotion. Generally, the ability to attend to events requires a
corresponding ability to step back from the event. Observing walking and
walking are two different activities; observing thinking and thinking
are two different activities; and observing one's own heartbeat and the
heart's beating are two different activities. This focus on
"experiencing the moment" is based on Eastern psychological approaches,
as well as on Western notions of nonreinforced exposure as a method of
extinguishing automatic avoidance and fear responses.

Participating The third mindfulness "what" skill (Section VI) is the
ability to participate without self-­consciousness. A person who is
participating is entering completely into the activities of the current
moment, without separating him- or herself from ongoing events and
interactions. The quality of action is spontaneous; the interaction
between the individual and the environment is smooth and based in some
part on habit. Participating can, of course, be mindless. We have all
had the experience of driving a complicated route home as we
concentrated on something else, and arriving home without any awareness
of how we got there. But it can also be mindful. A good example of
mindful participating is that of the skillful athlete who responds
flexibly but smoothly to the demands of the task with alertness and
awareness, but not with self-­consciousness. Mindlessness is
participating without attention to the task; mindfulness is
participating with attention.

Mindfulness "How" Skills The other three mindfulness skills are about
how one observes, describes, and participates; they include taking a
nonjudgmental stance ("nonjudgmentally"), focusing on one thing in the
moment ("one-­ mindfully"), and doing what works ("effectively").

7. Mindfulness Skills • 155

Nonjudgmentally Taking a nonjudgmental stance (Section VII) means just
that---taking a nonevaluative approach, not judging something as good or
bad. It does not mean going from a negative judgment to a positive
judgment. Although individuals often judge both themselves and others in
either excessively positive terms (idealization) or excessively negative
terms (devaluation), the position here is not that they should be more
balanced in their judgments, but rather that judging should in most
instances be dropped altogether. This is a very subtle point, but a very
important one. The problem with judging is that, for instance, a person
who can be "worthwhile" can always become "worthless." Instead of
judging, DBT stresses the consequences of behavior and events. For
example, a person's behavior may lead to painful consequences for self
or others, or the outcome of events may be destructive. A nonjudgmental
approach observes these consequences, and may suggest changing the
behaviors or events, but would not necessarily add a label of "bad" to
them. DBT also stresses accurate discrimination of one thing from
another and description of what is observed. In discriminating, one
determines whether a behavior meets a required definition or not. For
example, a lawyer or judge can discriminate whether a certain behavior
breaks the law or not. A diving judge can discriminate whether a diver's
form matches the required form for the dive or not. Behavior may not be
good or bad, but it can meet criteria for being against the law or for
fitting the ideal model for a particular dive.

One-­Mindfully Mindfulness in its totality has to do with the quality of
awareness that a person brings to activities. The second "how" skill
(Section VIII) is to focus the mind and awareness in the current
moment's activity, rather than splitting attention among several
activities or between a current activity and thinking about something
else. Achieving such a focus requires control of attention---a
capability that many individuals lack. Often participants are distracted
by thoughts and images of the past, worries about the future, ruminative
thoughts about troubles, or current negative moods. They are sometimes
unable to put their troubles away and focus attention on the task at
hand. When they do become involved in a task, their attention is often
divided. This problem is readily observable in their difficulties in
attend-

ing to skills training sessions. The participants need to learn how to
focus their attention on one task or activity at a time, engaging in it
with alertness, awareness, and wakefulness.

Effectively The third "how" skill (Section IX), being effective, is
directed at reducing the participants' tendency to be more concerned
with being "right" than with what is actually needed or called for in a
particular situation. Effectiveness is the opposite of "cutting off your
nose to spite your face." As our participants often say, it is "playing
the game" or "doing what works." From an Eastern meditation perspective,
focusing on effectiveness is "using skillful means." The inability to
let go of "being right" in favor of achieving goals is often related to
experiences with invalidating environments. A central issue for people
who have been frequently invalidated is whether they can indeed trust
their own perceptions, judgments, and decisions---that is, whether they
can expect their own actions to be correct or "right." However, taken to
an extreme, an emphasis on principle over outcome can often result in
these individuals' being disappointed or alienating others. In the end,
everyone has to "give in" some of the time. People often find it much
easier to give up being right for being effective when it is viewed as a
skillful response rather than as a "giving in."

Other Perspectives on Mindfulness Three sets of supplementary
mindfulness skills are included: mindfulness practice from a spiritual
perspective; skillful means: integrating doing mind and being mind; and
wise mind: walking the middle path (Sections XI--XVI). These skills add
to and expand the core mindfulness skills described above, and each can
be aligned with a spiritual perspective to a greater or lesser degree.
They can be integrated into the teaching of the core skills, can be
taught in an advanced skills course, or can be used in individual
treatment settings as needed and as appropriate for the specific client.

Mindfulness Practice: A Spiritual Perspective The focus on mindfulness
from a spiritual perspective (Sections XI--XII) is included for a number
of

156 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES

reasons. The practice of mindfulness itself has its origins in age-old
spiritual practices. For many individuals, spirituality and religious
practices are very important in their lives. Such practices can be
important sources of strength and can also provide coping resources in
difficult moments. Religious affiliation, in addition, can provide a
community that often furnishes important spiritual and interpersonal
support. Leaving out a recognition---and, indeed, a recruiting---of
spirituality as a source of strength and sustenance when we discuss
mindfulness practices, particularly mindful meditation, runs the risk of
ignoring the spiritual diversity of the populations we treat. Including
handouts on mindfulness from a spiritual perspective provides an avenue
for helping clients strengthen their own spirituality and integrate it
into their practices of mindfulness. In contrast to the psychological
goals of mindfulness, the goals of mindfulness from a spiritual
perspective include experiencing ultimate reality as it is (something
that is defined differently across cultures and religious practices),
cultivating wisdom, letting go of attachments and radically accepting
reality as it is, and increasing love and compassion toward self and
others. For many, the practice of mindfulness also includes
reflectiveness and the cultivation of ethical qualities. It is important
here to keep in mind that spirituality and religion are two different
things. Although there are many definitions of spirituality, a working
definition is that it can be viewed as the "acknowledgment of a
transcendent being, power, or reality greater than ourselves" (p. 14).6
In particular, from this perspective, spirituality is a quality of the
individual that has to do with regard for the spiritual, transcendent,
or nonmaterial. As a practice, spirituality focuses on beliefs that in
the universe "there is more than meets the eye"; that is, reality is not
limited to what we can know via the material and sensory world. A
spiritual perspective on mindfulness is designed to include every
person. It is important here to recognize that spirituality can cover a
vast terrain---from the community as a higher power (as is often said in
12-step groups), to humanistic views, mystical experience, religious
practices, and (in DBT) wise mind. Whereas spirituality is a quality of
the individual, a religion is an organized community of individuals.
Religions focus on beliefs, rituals, and practices oriented to bringing
individuals within the community into closer relationship with the
transcendent. Both spirituality and religion emphasize values and

moral actions, and both can provide meaning, purpose, and hope to life.
In particular, both can create meaning for those living lives of intense
suffering. Purpose and hope can be extremely important in finding a way
to build a life experienced as worth living.

Wise Mind from a Spiritual Perspective; Loving Kindness Wise mind from a
spiritual perspective (Section XIII) outlines different types of
spiritual practices, as well as providing a list (see Mindfulness
Handout 7a) of some of the many names and terms used with reference to
the transcendent. It also provides a description of the experience of
wise mind from this perspective. Many spiritual and religious practices
share elements with mindfulness practices, including silence, quieting
the mind, attentiveness, inwardness, and receptivity. These are
characteristics of deep spiritual experiences. Many individuals have
such experiences without any realization of their importance or
validity. This handout helps both clients and clinicians understand such
experiences. The emphasis across spiritual paths on love and compassion
for even enemies is captured here in the mindfulness practice of loving
kindness (Section XIV). Although written as a practice of wishing self
and others well, it can also be practiced as brief prayers for the
welfare of self and others.

How to Talk about Spirituality with Skills Training Participants 1. Do
not be afraid to ask participants whether they are spiritual. If you
need to define what you mean, you can say simply that it is the belief
that "there is more to reality than what we can know through our
senses." For those who are spiritual, you can ask whether they believe
in God, a higher power, or the like. 2. Not only do you need to respect
the spirituality (or its absence) of participants, but it is also
important to set the tone in such a way that other group participants
also act in a respectful manner. 3. Do no harm. Do not impose your own
spirituality (or lack of it) on participants. 4. Find a path and a
language that can be translated in multiple ways. Many of the notes
provided in this chapter are aimed at giving you multiple ways to talk
about various topics re-

7. Mindfulness Skills • 157

lated to spirituality. You can also try to pick up on the language used
by participants.

across a wide variety of religious denominations and spiritual paths.

Notes for Agnostic Skills Trainers and Therapists

Skillful Means: Balancing Doing Mind and Being Mind

You do not need to be spiritual to teach mindfulness practice from a
spiritual perspective. However, I suggest not teaching it if none of
your participants are spiritual. A few clarifying points addressing
common questions may make it easier for you to teach these skills.

Among the growing number of treatments combining mindfulness meditation
and yoga practices with behavioral interventions are Jon Kabat-Zinn's
Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction,7 as well as Mindfulness-Based
Cognitive Therapy2 and Mindfulness-Based Relapse Prevention. 3 The
latter two are also based on the work of Kabat-Zinn.4 These treatments
stress the differences between "doing mode" and "being mode." To bring
these ideas into the fold of DBT, I have added the skill of skillful
means (Section XV), and a handout focusing on the synthesis of these two
concepts and titled Skillful Means: Balancing Doing Mind and Being Mind
(Mindfulness Handout 9). Doing mind focuses on achieving goals; being
mind focuses on present experiencing. Put another way, doing mind is
"something-to-do" mind, and being mind is "nothingto-do" mind. From a
spiritual point of view, the difference between Martha and Mary in the
Biblical story is that Martha was distracted by preparing what was
needed for Jesus when he was visiting them, and Mary chose the "better
part" by sitting at his feet and listening.8 Being mind is the
contemplative life path, and doing mind is the active life path. (For
more on this topic, put the term "contemplative vs. active life" into
your search engine.) The polarity between them is similar to that
between reasonable and emotion mind. Wise mind brings the two into a
synthesis. Without aspects of both being mind and doing mind, it is
difficult if not impossible to lead a balanced life.

1.  How do spirituality and therapy and skills go together? The goal of
    psychotherapy and skills training is change. Change, however,
    requires acceptance of what is. The essential element across all
    spiritual and humanistic traditions is acceptance. Mindfulness
    emerged from spiritual contemplative practices. The common elements
    of contemplative practices are compassion, love, radical acceptance,
    and wisdom.
2.  Isn't this Buddhism or some other religion that I am not part of? As
    noted in the earlier discussion of mindfulness, mindfulness is a
    practice that is nondenominational and transconfessional (i.e., it
    is compatible with an array of beliefs and traditions). Thus it is
    important to recognize that the "ultimate reality" that the
    spiritual person seeks to encounter can go by the name of God,
    Yahweh, the Great Spirit, Allah, Brahman, Atman, "no self,"
    "emptiness," "essential essence," "essential nature," "the ground of
    being," "higher power," or a wide variety of other names. It is
    important for skills trainers to assist participants in linking the
    skills here to their own practices and terms.
3.  Isn't Zen a religion? Zen is a practice, not a religion. Zen,
    Christian centering prayer, and many other contemplative and
    meditation practices across religions and cultures are similar in
    that they each focus on experiencing ultimate reality, however this
    is defined or understood. Although Zen was originally associated
    with Buddhism, as it has moved into Western culture it has expanded
    to embrace atheists, agnostics, and individuals

Wise Mind: Walking the Middle Path "Walking the middle path" is living
life between the extremes, or finding the synthesis between the extremes
(Section XVI). This skill is, to a degree, a summary of previous skills
with a few additions. The idea here is that mindfulness brings together
opposites, finding the truth in alternate and opposite sides. As
discussed previously, mindfulness skills focus on the synthesis of
reasonable mind and emotion mind, as well as between doing mind and
being mind. From a spiritual perspective, mindfulness skills bring
together the material and the mystical---form and emptiness as one. (For
a dis-

158 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES

cussion of mysticism, see Mysticism: Its History and Challenge by Bruno
Borchert.)9 The two new oppositions have to do with finding the
synthesis between acceptance on the one side and change on the other. In
the first dichotomy, the main focus is on recognizing that one can give
up attachments, as in radical acceptance of the moment, without at the
same time suppressing the desire for change. The paradoxical point is
that the very effort to reduce desire is itself a failure to radically
accept desire. The supplementary skills in Chapter 8 include walking the
middle path in the context of interpersonal relationships, with a
particular emphasis on parent--teen relations. From a spiritual
perspective, the middle path brings together the material and the
mystical, form and emptiness, wise mind and the cloud of unknowing.10,
28, 68 It is represented in the skills of replacing self-­denial and
asceticism with moderation, and replacing self-­ indulgence and hedonism
with just enough satisfaction of the senses.

Managing Yourself Mindfully: Tips for Skills Trainers What to Do When
You Feel Judgmental We skills trainers are often as likely to get
judgmental as are our skills training participants. Like our
participants, when we feel judgmental we often fail to take action or
confront others and say what needs to be said, because we are afraid of
coming across as judgmental to those we are working with. We start
backing off and backing up, which lands us out of the moment and out of
the flow. It is hard not to close up when we are afraid of something,
and this is what usually happens when we will not confront another
person for the fear of looking judgmental. As a skills trainer, what can
you do to counteract this? With colleagues, it can be helpful to start
off by stating your fear of sounding judgmental and ask for help in
reducing your judgmentalness. Practicing being nonjudgmental yourself is
critical for the effectiveness of DBT in general, and for teaching
mindfulness in particular. Consistent practice not only makes teaching
nonjudgmentalness and confronting participants in a positive way much
easier, but it also gives you support for getting back into the flow.
Although as a clinician you can speak about feeling judgmental with
colleagues, you do not have the

same luxury with skills training participants. Many individuals simply
cannot tolerate the thought of their skills trainers' being judgmental,
and they may blame themselves for the trainers' feelings of annoyance or
irritation. What can you do to ease the situation at hand or prevent
such a problem from unfolding?  First, practice what you preach. It is
very difficult to engage in modeling nonjudgmentalness with participants
if you are not consistently practicing the skill yourself. Practicing
will help you quickly ease back into being nonjudgmental during a
session if you start having difficulties.  Second, practice opposite
action when you feel judgmental. The best way to do this is to start
making validating statements in a situation that fills you with judgment
(such as making comments about how the participants' behaviors are
understandable, given current events or their history; how their
behavior could not be otherwise, given the facts; etc.). Be sure to
validate all the way, remembering to use a nonjudgmental voice tone.
Keep talking until your judgmentalness goes down. Such comments
constitute opposite action, and they are not unlike doing cognitive
therapy on yourself. That is, as you speak to the participants, you are
stating the nonjudgmental thinking that will ease you into nonjudgmental
thinking yourself.  Third, remember that acceptance is not a blank check
for approval. Although you may feel both the necessity and,
simultaneously, the impossibility of acceptance when faced with extreme
demands, egregious behavior, or untenable attacks, bear in mind that
acceptance also entails accepting limits.  Fourth, counteract the
threat. Judgmentalness and the anger that it breeds often have to do
with your own fears, such as "If I cannot control this participant, he
will commit suicide," "If I cannot get this point across, this
participant will never get along with her daughter," or "I can't stand
this one more second." In a skills training group, a very common threat
is that one member's dysfunctional behaviors in the group will ruin
skills training for other members. The function of judgmentalness here
is often aimed at controlling these dysfunctional behaviors. In my
experience, however, one of the fastest ways to lose control of another
person is to try to control them. Although when a participant is highly
suicidal, extremely aggressive, or passive, it can be very hard to
control your own efforts to con-

7. Mindfulness Skills • 159

trol the participant, nonetheless such self-­control is often of
paramount importance. How to do it? Use your skills! Check the facts
(see Emotion Regulation Handout 8) and analyze clearly whether your
feared outcomes are likely. Observe (see Mindfulness Handout 4) what is
really going on, and ask wise mind (see Mindfulness Handout 3) whether
your feared outcomes constitute a true catastrophe. Cope ahead (see
Emotion Regulation Handout 19) can be useful for getting better at
handling situations that you know precipitate judgmentalness in you.
When you are with a participant or group, cheerlead yourself silently:
In your mind, keep repeating cheerleading self-­statements that
counteract the threat (see Distress Tolerance Handout 9). I have used
self-­statements such as "Find the synthesis," "Therapy will work if I
let it," "I can stand this," "I can manage this," "This is not a
catastrophe," "My team will help me," and so on. At other times the
threat is that you may be the cause of the problem you are trying to
solve. This thought is such a threat that rather than try to solve the
problem, you may immediately move to judgmental blaming of the
participant. Opposite action for shame (see Emotion Regulation Handout
10) can be useful here. Talk with your participants and/or with your
team about what you might have done to cause the immediate problem.

What to Do When You Slip Out of the Present Often enough, we skills
trainers respond not to a participant's action at the moment, but to a
future action that could happen as a result of it. During a group
session, for example, our thoughts about a participant may have the
following trajectory: "What you are doing doesn't upset me, but it could
get worse and upset the group; then other participants may drop out or
not improve. My treatment will be a failure." When we are in a highly
stressful moment with a participant who is angry at us or is attacking
another group member, we have the option of throwing ourselves into the
interaction of the moment matter-of-­factly without malice, or we can sit
there fuming and wait for the participant to come under control. Instead
of treating the participants, we sometimes are waiting for them to quit
being who they are. In a sense, we are washing dishes and thinking about
having a cup of tea. As a skills trainer, what can you do to move
yourself back into the present?

Remind yourself that all you have to do in this moment is apply the
treatment you are doing. When you start thinking that you have to do
therapy and control the participant, then you can get yourself into a
mess. When you focus on thinking that all you have to do is apply the
appropriate consequence to a functional or dysfunctional behavior when
one appears, you will be in a much better place and shape. Ask yourself:
What drives the need to hold up expectations and compare one reality to
another? When your gauge inevitably misses the mark, you will get upset.
To what extent is this going on with you?  Take hold of the current
moment. If you find yourself slipping out of the moment and the
nonjudgmental state, start observing physical sensations---the way you
breathe, the way your body is positioned. Taking hold of the moment
prevents venturing into the past or future. Being out of the moment may
narrow your focus, reducing it to tunnel vision. It may also make
getting distracted by other thoughts easier for you.

To Teach Mindfulness, Practice Mindfulness Practice mindfulness both at
home and at work. Ask yourself: Can a person who cannot play the piano
teach piano? Can a person who has never done therapy teach therapy? Can
a person who cannot hold a tennis racquet correctly teach tennis?
Although there are types of behaviors you can teach even when you cannot
do the behavior yourself (e.g., gymnastics), this is not the case with
mindfulness. Thus it is extremely important that you, as a skills
trainer, also have some type of mindfulness practice. Finding a
mindfulness teacher can be very helpful, as can joining mindfulness
practice groups, reading meditation/mindfulness/contemplative practice
books (e.g., contemplative prayer books, Zen books), and attending
mindfulness retreats led by teachers who have adequate credentials. Go
to my website or blog to find Zen mindfulness retreats that I lead
(www.linehaninstitute. org/retreats.php;
http://blogs.uw.edu/brtc/marsha-­ linehans- ­mindfulness-­retreats). There
are many other teachers in the United States and internationally who
also provide mindfulness and contemplative prayer retreats. Be sure to
read the descriptions of the retreats, as schedules vary; in addition,
some are primarily silent, and others have much more talking and
discussion.

160 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES

Selecting Material to Teach There is a great deal of material for each
skill in the mindfulness teaching notes on the following pages. You will
not cover most of it the first time you teach specific skills. The notes
are provided to give you a deeper understanding of each skill, so that
you can both answer questions and add new teaching as you go. As in
Chapter 6 (and throughout Part II of this manual), in this chapter I
have put a checkmark () next to material I almost always cover. On this
manual's special website (www.guilford.com/ skills-training-manual), I
have put a star () on each handout that covers a standard DBT core
skill not to be skipped. If I am in a huge rush, I may skip everything
not checked (and on handouts without a star, I might skip them entirely
or only review a few segments).

Also in this chapter (and in the rest of Part II), I have indicated
information summarizing research in special features called "Research
Points." The great value of research is that it can often be used to
sell the skills you are teaching. When you are teaching mindfulness
skills (or any other DBT skills, for that matter), it is important that
you have a basic understanding of the specific skills you are teaching.
The first several times you teach, carefully study the notes, handouts,
and worksheets for each skill you plan to teach. Highlight the points
you want to make, and bring a copy of the relevant teaching note pages
with you to teach from. Be sure to practice each skill yourself, to be
sure you understand how to use it. Before long, you will solidify your
knowledge of each skill. At that point, you will find your own favorite
teaching points, examples, and stories and can ignore most of mine.

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handouts 1--1a • 161

Teaching Notes I.

Goals of This Module (Mindfulness Handouts 1--1a) Main Point: The goal
of practicing mindfulness skills for most people is to reduce suffering
and increase happiness. For some, a goal of mindfulness is to experience
reality as it is. Mindfulness Handout 1: Goals of Mindfulness Practice.
Briefly review the goals and benefits of mindfulness practice. Provide
enough information to orient participants to the module, link the module
to participant goals, and generate some enthusiasm and motivation for
learning mindfulness skills. Summarizing one or two research findings
can be very useful. It is common to cover the goals of practicing
mindfulness and wise mind in one session. If you only have two sessions
for mindfulness, start on some of the mindfulness "what" skills in the
first session also. When time is short, you can skip this handout and
teach the information orally and quickly. Mindfulness Handout 1a:
Mindfulness Definitions (Optional). This is an optional handout that you
can give with or without review. The need for this handout depends on
the sophistication level of the participants. If you do not give out
this handout, it is important that you weave in at least some of its
points as you teach. Mindfulness Worksheet 1: Pros and Cons of
Practicing Mindfulness (Optional). The worksheet is designed to help
participants decide whether they have anything to gain from practicing
mindfulness, particularly when they are feeling willful or apathetic and
don't want to practice. It can be reviewed quickly if participants
already know how to fill out a pros-and-cons worksheet. If not, instruct
participants to fill out pros and cons both for practicing mindfulness
skills and for not practicing. Also instruct them in how to rate
intensity of emotions from 0 (the emotion is not there at all) to 100
(it would be impossible for the emotion to be more extreme). Explain
that over time they will get better at rating their emotions, and the
numbers will start to take on meaning. Numbers only mean something with
reference to the person doing the rating. For example, an 80 for one
person may be a 70 for another.

A. Goals of Mindfulness Practice

99

Discussion Point: Either before or after reviewing the handout, ask
participants to check off each goal that is important to them in the
boxes on the handout, and then share their choices. In what areas of
their lives do they believe mindfulness might be of help? Note to
Leaders: With some participants, convincing them of the importance of
mindfulness skills--- which many have never heard of---can be a very
hard sell. In these cases, it can be useful to let them know how
widespread the teaching and practice of mindfulness are in many
settings. For example, mindfulness practice is being taught in business
schools, medical schools, and middle and high schools; it is also moving
slowly into corporations.

99

1.  Reduce Suffering and Increase Happiness  Reduce pain, tension, and
    stress.  Increase joy and happiness.  Improve physical health,
    relationships, and distress tolerance.  Other goals that
    participants might have can also be discussed and written in the
    handout.

162 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 1

Point: There is some evidence that the regular practice of mindfulness
has beneficial effects. 99 Research The major effects found for
mindfulness alone include the following. Review several of these but not
too many. •• Increased emotional regulation.5 •• Decreased in both
distractive and ruminative thoughts and behaviors.11 •• Decreased
dysphoric mood.12 •• Increased activity of brain regions associated with
positive emotion.13 •• Enhanced immune response.13 •• Decreased
depression, anxiety.14, 15 •• Decreased anger and emotional
irritability, confusion and cognitive disorganization, and
cardiopulmonary and gastrointestinal symptoms.16 •• Reduction of pain
symptoms, improvement of depressive symptoms in patients with chronic
pain, and improvements in coping with pain.17 •• Decreased psychological
distress and increased sense of well-being.18 •• Decreased risk of
depression relapse or reoccurrence.19 •• Increased healing of
psoriasis.20 •• Improved functioning of the immune system in patients
with HIV.21 Most of these findings have been obtained with individuals
who have practiced mindful meditation and yoga every day for eight or
more weeks. Even very brief mindfulness practice, however, can be
beneficial. In two of these studies, the mindfulness practice was very
brief. More permanent and long- lasting gains, however, are likely to
require a longer period of reasonably faithful practice.

99

2.  Increase Control of Your Mind Tell participants: "To a certain
    extent, being in control of your mind is being in control of your
    attention---that is, what you pay attention to and how long you pay
    attention to it."  Increase your ability to focus your attention.
    Say to participants: "In many ways, mind-

fulness practice is the practice of controlling your attention. With a
lot of practice, you get better at it."22 Explain that mindfulness
reduces automaticity of attentional processes. 25  Improve your ability
to detach from thoughts, images, and sensations. Explain that often we
react to thoughts and images as if they are facts. We get entangled in
the events in the mind and cannot tell the difference between a fact in
the world and thoughts or images of the world. Mindfulness, practiced
often and diligently, can improve your skills of seeing the difference
between facts and images and thoughts about facts. Research Point:
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy,23 originally called Comprehensive
Distancing Therapy,24 focuses on just this: getting enough distance so
that people can detach from their thoughts, images, and emotions. The
central component of the therapy is teaching individuals how to step
back and observe their minds---to see thoughts as thoughts, images as
images, and emotions as emotions. Cognitive therapy also stresses the
ability to differentiate thoughts, images, and emotions from facts. 
Decrease reactivity to mental events. Say to clients: "Mindfulness is
the practice of observ-

ing what is going on inside yourself as well as outside, without doing
anything to change it. Thus, in some ways, you can consider it as a
practice of observing things without reacting to or trying to change
them. The ability to experience without reacting is essential in many
situations. Mindfulness practice improves your ability to be less
immediately reactive to everyday situations. It gives you a chance to
take whatever time is needed before you react." Discussion Point: Draw
from participants examples of how their inability to control their
attention creates problems. Examples may include inability to stop
thinking about things (e.g., the past,

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 1 • 163

the future, current emotional pain or hurt, physical pain); inability to
concentrate on a task when it is important to do so; and inability to
focus on another person or to stay on a task because of distraction.

3.  Experience Reality as It Is

99

Ask participants: "If you walk across a dark room, is it better to see
the furniture or not? Is it easier with the light on or with it off?"
Explain that a fundamental goal of mindfulness is to reduce
mindlessness---both of what is going on around us, and of what we
ourselves are doing, thinking, and feeling. The idea is that if we truly
experience each present moment of our lives---if we let go of mental
constructs, ideas, and judgments about what is---then we will ultimately
see that our worst imaginings of reality are not true. We will at some
point see that life itself is unceasing change, and also that clinging
to any moment of reality is ultimately not in our best interests.

99

a.  Be Present to Your Own Life

Tell clients: "Mindfulness is the practice of being in the present. It
is being present to your own life. Many people find at some point that
their life is whizzing by and they are missing a lot of it. Children are
growing up; friends that we care about are moving away; we are getting
older. It is easy to be so focused on distractions, the past, or the
future that we actually miss many positive things in our lives."
Example: "If you are walking in the forest, and you slightly change
directions without knowing this, it may not take long before you are
really far from where you were originally going." Point: Explain to
clients that being present to our lives is the opposite of avoiding our
lives and 99 Research trying to avoid or suppress our experiences. ••
Suppression increases the frequency of the very thoughts and emotions we
are trying to suppress.26, 27 •• Avoidance has no permanent effect on
our well-being. When we avoid situations and events that prompt
difficult emotions, this temporarily decreases the painful emotions, but
it has no permanent effect on our response to these same situations and
events in the future. When we avoid and escape painful emotions now,
they will be painful in the future. •• Escape often causes more problems
and rarely solves problems.

b.  Be Present to Others

Mindfulness is focusing on the present moment and on the people we are
with now. It is very easy to be around people but far away---thinking
about something or someone else, looking for someone else to talk to,
wishing we were somewhere else, planning what we will do next, dreaming
about other things, focusing on our pain or our suffering. We are not
present to the people around us. Others, of course, often notice this.
They may eventually pull away from us; it is hard for them to be ignored
in this way. c. Experience Reality as It Is  Connection to the universe.
Everyone and everything in the universe is connected. As

physicists would point out, the universe is a network of interconnected
atoms, cells, and particles that are constantly moving and changing. We
touch the air around us that touches everything else around us, and on
and on. Each move that we make interacts with the entire universe at
some point. It is this point that we need to get across. However,
knowing that we are interconnected is one thing; experiencing it is
another. 28 Many people feel

164 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handouts
1--1a

isolated and alone. Their experience of themselves is as outsiders. But
once we see that the world and universe is an interconnected network, we
can see that there is really no outside or inside. Thus our experience
is built on the delusion of separation. Mindfulness is aimed at
enhancing our experience of the universe as it is, without delusion or
distortion.  Essential "goodness." Many individuals experience
themselves as bad, unworthy, or some-

how defective. Mindfulness is the practice of seeing ourselves as we
are---ultimately simply ourselves and inherently neither good nor bad,
but rather just as we are. From this perspective, all things in the
universe, including ourselves, are good. (Although the use of the term
"goodness" may seem to contradict the notion that "good" and "bad" are
concepts in the mind of the observer, we cannot deny the use of "good"
as an adjective and "goodness" as a term to denote a quality of
something. Thus it is important not to move too far into a rigid notion
that we can never use the term "good," as in my saying "Good boy" to my
dog when he does something I have taught him, or "Good job" to a
colleague at work. Once we have given up "good" and "bad" as judgments,
we can revert to using them as shorthand comments about what is
observed.)  Essential validity. "Validity" here means that each person
has inherent significance which

cannot be taken away or discounted. Each person's voice and needs
warrant being heard and taken seriously. Each person's point of view is
important. Discussion Point: Elicit from participants their own
experiences of being connected to the universe, as well as experiences
of being an outsider. Discussion Point: Elicit from participants their
own experiences of being bad or unworthy, or of not being taken
seriously. Discuss. Note to Leaders: Sometimes individuals will be put
off by references to Eastern meditation practice. You need to be very
sensitive to this point. You can either divorce meditation from any
religion or relate it to all religions. 1. The fact that meditation is
now commonly used in the treatment of chronic physical pain and stress
management programs, is increasingly being used in the treatment of
emotional disorders, and is part of many wellness programs suggests that
it can be practiced and be effective outside of any spiritual or
religious context. 2. Eastern meditation practice is very similar to
Christian contemplative prayer, Jewish mystical tradition, and forms of
prayer taught in other religions. Be alert to difficulties on this topic
and discuss them. It is important not to push mindfulness onto religious
participants if they start out by thinking of it as incompatible with
their religion. Suggest that they practice what they can. Tell them to
discuss it with others of the same religion. Give them time.

Discussion Point: Ask participants how what you have said about
mindfulness so far seems similar or different from their own spiritual
practices.

B. Mindfulness Definitions 1. Universal Characteristics of Mindfulness
a. Intentionally Living with Awareness in the Present Moment

Explain that this means waking up from automatic or rote behaviors to
participate and be present to our own lives.

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 1a • 165

b.  Without Judging or Rejecting the Moment

Point out that this means noticing consequences, as well as discerning
helpfulness and harmfulness---but letting go of evaluating, avoiding,
suppressing, or blocking the present moment. c. Without Attachment to
the Moment

Emphasize that this means attending to the experience of each new
moment, rather than ignoring the present by clinging to the past or
grasping for the future. Example: "You can't be attached to having a
newborn baby in the house, because quickly the baby will grow into a
toddler." 2. Mindfulness Skills "Mindfulness skills" are the specific
behaviors that, put together, make up mindfulness. 3. Mindfulness
Practice a. What It Is

"Mindfulness practice" is the intentional practice of mindfulness and
mindfulness skills. There are many methods of mindfulness practice. b.
How It Can Be Practiced

Mindfulness can be practiced at any time, anywhere, while doing
anything. Intentionally paying attention to the moment, without judging
it or holding on to it, is all that is needed. c. Meditation

The similarities in meditation methods are much greater than the
differences. Similarities are as follows:  Instructions to focus
attention. The focus is generally on either "opening the mind" to

attend to all sensations and thoughts as they arise and fall away, or
"focusing the mind" (which varies in what is attended to and may be a
sacred word; a mantra given by a teacher; a word selected by the
meditator; a story, event, phrase, or word; one's breath; sensations of
the body and mind; or a large variety of other objects of focus). 
Emphasis on observing nonjudgmentally, without attachment or avoidance. 
Emphasis on letting go of intellectual analyses and logic, discursive
thoughts, and distractions to gently bring oneself back to the practice,
over and over again.  Letting the word or the practice do the work,
allowing oneself to go into the "cloud of unknowing"29 and leave behind
the "cloud of forgetting."  Carrying the practice into everyday life.
d. Contemplative or "Centering" Prayer

Contemplative or "centering" prayer is a Christian mindfulness practice.
Similar to meditation as described above, it emphasizes selecting a word
to focus on. The difference is that contemplative prayer emphasizes a
sacred word, interior silence, and the relationship with God within.30
(See the work of Thomas Keating.31) e. Mindfulness Movement

Mindfulness movement has many forms:  Dance (all religions; indigenous
cultures)  Martial arts (primarily Eastern religions)  Walking or hiking
with focused awareness on walking/moving and on the natural world 
Ritual music making (e.g., drumming)

166 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handouts
1a--2

C. The Importance of Practicing Mindfulness Skills Emphasize to clients:
"Mindfulness skills require practice, practice, practice. Mindfulness
practice can be very difficult at first. Focusing the mind can take a
lot of energy. Distractions may be frequent, and it is very easy to find
that a few minutes after you started practicing your mindfulness skills,
you have fallen out of it and are doing something else." Discussion
Point: Discuss with participants the crucial importance of behavioral
practice in learning any new skill. Behavioral practice includes
practicing control of one's mind, attention, overt behavior, body, and
emotions. Draw from participants their beliefs about the necessity of
practice in learning: "Can you learn without practice?"

Example: "Mechanics have learned how to assess what is wrong with a car
when it breaks down. It takes practice to be able to do that."

II. 

Overview: Core Mindfulness Skills (Mindfulness Handout 2) Main Point:
Three sets of skills form the backbone of mindfulness practice: wise
mind; the "what" skills of observing, describing, and participating; and
the "how" skills of practicing nonjudgmentally, one-­ mindfully, and
effectively. Mindfulness Handout 2: Overview: Core Mindfulness Skills.
Use this handout for a quick overview of the skills. Do not teach the
material from this handout unless you are skipping the related
skill-­specific handouts. Mindfulness Worksheets 2, 2a, 2b: Mindfulness
Skills Practice; Mindfulness Worksheet 2c: Mindfulness Core Skills
Calendar. These worksheets offer four variations for recording
mindfulness skills practice. Each worksheet covers all of the
mindfulness skills, and any one of them can be used with Mindfulness
Handout 2 if you are using this handout as a review. Worksheet 2
provides space for recording practice of skills only twice between
sessions; thus this worksheet can be a good starter worksheet with
individuals you are trying to shape into more frequent skills practice.
Worksheet 2a instructs participants to practice and gives multiple
opportunities for each skill. Worksheet 2b calls for practicing each
skill two times. Worksheet 2c is for those who like writing diaries and
provides space for describing practice daily. These worksheets can be
given again and again for each of the mindfulness skills if you do not
want to use the worksheets specific to each skill. Either assign one
worksheet to all participants (and bring copies of only one worksheet to
the session), or allow participants to choose which worksheet they wish
to fill out; giving them a choice increases their sense of control and
may improve compliance. Bring new worksheets weekly to give to
participants, so that they can incrementally mark the skills they
practice.

99A. Wise Mind Define "wise mind" for clients as "finding inside
yourself the inherent wisdom that each person has within."

99B. "What" Skills Tell clients that the "what" skills are "the skills
that tell you what you should actually do when you practice mindfulness.
There are three 'what' skills: observing, describing, and
participating."

99C. "How" Skills Explain to clients that the "how" skills are "the
skills that teach you how to practice your mindfulness skills. Without
the 'how' skills, you can veer far away from mindfulness itself. There
are three 'how' skills: acting nonjudgmentally, one-­mindfully, and
effectively."

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 3 • 167

III. Wise Mind (Mindfulness Handouts 3--3a) Main Point: Each person has
     inner wisdom. "Wise mind" is the mindfulness practice of accessing
     this inner wisdom. Entering the state of wise mind, we integrate
     opposites (including our reasonable and emotional states of mind),
     and we are open to experiencing reality as it is. Mindfulness
     Handout 3: Wise Mind: States of Mind. Because wise mind is a
     critical skill in DBT, this is not a handout that can be skipped.
     As you go through the concepts of "emotion mind," "reasonable
     mind," and "wise mind," it can be useful to draw the overlapping
     circles from the handout on the board and then fill them in. When
     trying to describe wise mind, it can be useful to draw a picture of
     a well in the ground (see Figure 7.1, p. 170) and use the drawing
     to explain the concept of "going within." You cannot ordinarily
     cover all the points about wise mind in one session; however, over
     several sessions you can cover most if not all points. Mindfulness
     Handout 3a: Ideas for Practicing Wise Mind (Optional). It is useful
     to have this handout available, as it gives instructions for the
     various wise mind practice exercises. Mindfulness Worksheet 3: Wise
     Mind Practice. This worksheet lists several ways to practice wise
     mind, all described in more detail in Handout 3a. If you do not
     teach each type of wise mind practice, briefly describe them or
     tell participants that you will cover other ways of getting to wise
     mind in future classes. If you teach a different practice exercise,
     ask participants to write that exercise on their worksheet so that
     they will remember what it is. Next to each exercise on Worksheet
     3, there are four boxes. Instruct participants to check off one box
     for every day they practice that exercise. If they practice more
     than four times in a week, put extra check marks outside the boxes.
     Review also how to rate wise mind practice. Note that the ratings
     are for how effective their practice was for getting into their own
     wise mind. These are not ratings of whether or not the practice
     calmed them or made them feel better. Also note at the bottom that
     the worksheet asks participants to list any and all wise things
     they did during the week. With some individuals, this may be an
     important worksheet or portion of a worksheet to give every week,
     even when you are not specifically teaching skills in the
     Mindfulness module. Mindfulness Worksheets 2, 2a, 2b, 2c:
     Mindfulness Core Skills Practice. These worksheets cover practice
     of all the core mindfulness skills, including the "what" and "how"
     skills. See the Section II overview for how to use these
     worksheets.

99A. Wise Mind Wise mind is the inner wisdom that each person has. When
we access our inner wisdom, we can say that we are in wise mind. Inner
wisdom includes the ability to identify and use skillful means for
attaining valued ends. It can also be defined as the ability to access
and then apply knowledge, experience, and common sense to the situation
at hand. For some people, accessing and applying their own inner wisdom
are easy. For others, it is very hard. But everyone has the capacity for
wisdom. Everyone has wise mind, even if they cannot access it at a
particular point.

99B. Reasonable Mind and Emotion Mind Reasonable mind and emotion mind
are states of mind that get in the way of wise mind. Often what
interferes with accessing our own wisdom is our state of mind at the
time. We can be in different states of mind at different times. In one
state of mind, we can feel, think, and act very differently than we do
in another state of mind. Example: A person might say, "I was out of my
mind when I said that," meaning "I was not thinking clearly when I said
that."

168 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 3

99

1.  Emotion Mind Say to clients: "Emotion mind is your state of mind
    when your emotions are in control and are not balanced by reason.
    Emotions control your thinking and your behavior. When completely in
    emotion mind, you are ruled by your moods, feelings, and urges to do
    or say things. Facts, reason, and logic are not important."

99

Discussion Point: Elicit from clients which emotions usually get in the
way of their acting wisely. a. Vulnerability Factors

Factors that make us all vulnerable to emotion mind include (1) illness;
(2) sleep deprivation/ tiredness; (3) drugs or alcohol; (4) hunger,
bloating, overeating, or poor nutrition; (5) environmental stress (too
many demands); and (6) environmental threats. Example: "You can wake up
in emotion mind and be immediately worrying about work." Discussion
Point: Elicit other vulnerability factors from participants. b. Benefits
of Emotions

Emotions, even when intense, can be very beneficial. Intense love fills
history books as the motivation for relationships. Intense love (or
intense hate) has fueled wars that in turn have transformed cultures
(e.g., fighting to stop oppression and murders as in the battle against
the Nazis). Intense devotion or desire motivates staying with very hard
tasks or sacrificing oneself for others (e.g., mothers running through
fires for their children). A certain amount of intense emotion is
desirable. Many people, particularly those with emotional problems, have
more intense emotions than most. Some people are the "dramatic" folks of
the world and will always be so. People with intense emotions are often
passionate about people, causes, beliefs, and the like. There are times
when emotion mind is the cause of great feats of courage or
compassion---when if reason were there at all, a person would not
overcome great danger or act on great love. c. Problems with Emotions

Problems occur when emotions are ineffective and control us. Emotions
are ineffective when the results are positive in the short term but
highly negative in the long term, or when the emotional experience
itself does not fit the facts of our lives and is very painful, or when
it leads to other painful states and events (e.g., anxiety and
depression can be painful in themselves). d. Different Effects of
Emotions

Sometimes people become so emotional that they shut down and act like
automatons. They may dissociate and appear very, very calm. Or they may
isolate themselves, staying very quiet. They appear cool, deliberate,
and reasonable, but their behavior is really under the control of
overwhelming emotions that they would experience if they let go and
relaxed. This is emotion mind; emotions are in control. At other times,
of course, emotion mind looks, thinks, talks, and acts in very extreme
ways.

99

e.  The Difference between Strong Emotion and Emotion Mind

Tell clients: "Don't confuse being highly emotional with emotion mind."
Emotion mind is what occurs when emotions are in control at the expense
of reason. People often have intense emotions without losing control.
For example, holding one's newborn baby, walking up to receive an award,
or finding out a loved one has died can each elicit intense emotions of
love (for the baby), pride (at getting the award), or grief (over the
loved one's dying). Each of these would be emotion mind only if the
emotions crowded out reason and effectiveness.

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 3 • 169

99

2.  Reasonable Mind Say to clients: "Reasonable mind is the extreme of
    reason. It is reason that is not balanced by emotions and values. It
    is the part of you that plans and evaluates things logically. When
    completely in reasonable mind, you are ruled by facts, reason,
    logic, and pragmatics. Emotions, such as love, guilt, or grief, are
    irrelevant."

<!-- -->

a.  Benefits of Reason

Reason can be very beneficial. Without it, people could not build homes,
roads, or cities; they could not follow instructions; they could not
solve logical problems, do science, or run meetings. Explain to clients:
"Reason is the part of you that plans and evaluates things logically. It
is your cool part. But, again, when you are completely in reasonable
mind, you are ruled by facts, reason, logic, and pragmatics. Values and
feelings are not important."

99

b.  Problems with Reason

Reasonable mind is cold and dismissive of emotions, needs, desires, and
passion. This can often create problems. Example: A hired assassin
coolly and methodically planning the next murder is in reasonable mind.
Example: A task-­focused person attending only to what must be done next,
and ignoring even loved ones who want at least a nod hello, is in
reasonable mind. Say to clients: "It is hard to make and keep friends if
you are only in reasonable mind. Relationships require emotional
responses and sensitivity to others' emotions. When you ignore your own
emotions and treat other people's emotions as unimportant, it is hard to
maintain relationships. This is true about relationships in multiple
settings---in families, with friends, and in work environments."
Discussion Point: When other people say that "If you could just think
straight, you would be all right," they mean "If you could be
reasonable, you would do OK." Elicit from participants times other
people have said or implied that if they would just not distort,
exaggerate, or misperceive things, they would have far fewer problems.
How many times have participants said the same thing to themselves?
Discussion Point: Discuss pros and cons of emotion and reason. Draw from
participants their experiences of being in reasonable mind and in
emotion mind.

99C. Wise Mind as the Synthesis of Opposites Explain to clients: "Wise
mind is the integration of opposites: emotion mind and reasonable mind.
You cannot overcome emotion mind with reasonable mind. Nor can you
create emotions with reasonableness. You must go within and bring the
two together." Note to Leaders: You do not need to cover each of the
following points on wise mind every time through. Give just enough to
get your point across. After making a few points, do one of the
exercises described below before continuing with more information. You
will be covering this section many times. Expand on your points a bit
more each time through. (See Chapter 7 of the main DBT text for a fuller
discussion of wise mind.)

99

1.  Everyone Has Wise Mind Everyone has wise mind; some people simply
    have never experienced it. Also, no one is in wise mind all the
    time.

170 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 3

Note to Leaders: Participants will sometimes say that they don't have
wise mind. You must cheerlead here. Believe in participants' abilities
to find wise mind. Use the metaphor that wise mind is like having a
heart; everyone has one, whether they experience it or not. Use the
"well" or "radio channel surfing" analogies below. Remind them that it
takes practice to access and use wise mind.

2.  Wise Mind Is Sometimes Experienced as a Particular Place in the Body
    People sometimes experience wise mind as a particular point in the
    body. This can be the center of the body (the belly), or in the
    center of the head, or between the eyes. Sometimes a person can find
    it by following the breath in and out. Discussion Point: Elicit from
    participants where they think (or suspect) wise mind is within
    themselves.

3.  It Is Not Always Easy to Find or Even Be Sure about Wise Mind

99 \$ Story Point: "Wise mind is like a deep well in the ground." (See
Figure 7.1; show clients a copy of

this figure, or draw it on the whiteboard or blackboard.) "The water at
the bottom of the well, the entire underground ocean, is wise mind. But
on the way down, there are often trap doors that impede progress.
Sometimes the trap doors are so cleverly built that you actually believe
there is no water at the bottom of the well. The trap door may look like
the bottom of the well. Perhaps it is locked and you need a key. Perhaps
it is nailed shut and you need a hammer, or it is glued shut and you
need a chisel. When it rains emotion mind, it is easy to mistake the
water on top of the trap door for wise mind." Emotion mind and wise mind
both have a quality of "feeling" something to be the case. The inTrap
door tensity of emotions can generate The experiences of certainty that
mimic Well the stable, cool certainty of wisWithin dom. Continue the
"well within" analogy above: "After a heavy rain, water can collect on a
trap door within the well. You may then confuse the still water on the
trap door FIGURE 7.1. The well within: An illustration of wise mind.
with the deep ocean at the bottom of the well." Discussion Point: Ask
participants for other ideas on how to tell the difference between wise
mind and emotion mind. There is no simple solution here. Suggest: "If
intense emotion is obvious, suspect emotion mind. Give it time; if
certainty remains, especially when you are feeling calm and secure,
suspect wise mind."

99

Example: Extreme anger often masquerades as wise mind. When really
angry, we often think we are absolutely right in everything we think! 4.
Wise Mind Is the Part of Each Person That Can Know and Experience Truth
It is where a person knows something to be true or valid. It is where
the person knows something in a centered way. 5. Wise Mind Is Similar to
Intuition Wise mind is like intuition---or, perhaps, intuition is part
of wise mind. It is a kind of knowing that is more than reasoning and
more than what is observed directly. It has qualities of direct

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 3 • 171

experience; immediate knowing; understanding the meaning, significance,
or truth of an event without having to analyze it intellectually;32 and
"feelings of deepening coherence."33 6. Wise Mind Is Free of Conflict

99

Tell clients: "In wise mind, you are free from conflict, making wise
action almost effortless (even when it is difficult beyond words). Wise
mind has a certain peace." Example: "You are determined to pass a
difficult college course or get a good evaluation at work. You have an
assignment that will take up a lot of your time, and you would really
like to just sit home and relax. But you think about the consequences of
failing and know you will work on it."

99

Example: "You are with your daughter in a boat on the river. You know
how to swim, but your child does not, and she falls into the water. You
immediately jump into the river to save her, even though the water is
freezing." Example: "You are deciding on a major for a program you're
taking. One choice involves taking only classes you're likely to do well
in without a lot of effort, but you don't like the job options
afterward; the other choice involves taking more challenging classes,
but getting specialized training for jobs you really like. In wise mind,
you make the decision to go with what you like, even if it's harder."
Note to Leaders: It is important here to point out that a goal of
mindfulness and wise mind is not to make life all effort and work, work,
work. Most people do not have to work all the time at keeping themselves
regulated, doing things to keep their life on track, and moving toward
their goals. The idea is to practice skills enough so that life gets
easier and better. Wise mind is the road to that: In wise mind, it is
easier to act in our own best interests instead of being controlled by
our moods and emotions.

7.  Wise Mind Depends on Integrating Ways of Knowing Wisdom, wise mind,
    or wise knowing depends upon integration of all ways of knowing:
    knowing by observing, knowing by analyzing logically, knowing by
    what we experience in our bodies (kinetic and sensory experience),
    knowing by what we do, and knowing by intuition. 34
8.  Finding Wise Mind Consistently Can Take a Lot of Practice \$ Story
    Point: "Learning to find wise mind is like searching for a new
    channel on the radio. First you hear a lot of static, and you can't
    make out the lyrics of the music---but over time, if you keep tuning
    in, the signal gets louder. You will learn to know right where the
    station is, and the lyrics become a part of you, so that you can
    access them automatically---just like you can finish the lyrics
    immediately if someone starts singing a song you know really, really
    well." Discussion Point: Elicit feedback from participants on their
    own experiences of wise mind. Discussion Point: Wise mind is getting
    to the heart of a matter. It is seeing or knowing something directly
    and clearly. It is grasping the whole picture when before only parts
    were understood. It is "feeling" the right choice in a dilemma, when
    the feeling comes from deep within rather than from a current
    emotional state. Elicit similar experiences and other examples from
    participants. Discussion Point: Wise mind may be the calm that
    follows the storm---an experience immediately following a crisis or
    enormous chaos. Sometimes a person may reach wisdom only when
    suddenly confronted by another person. Or someone else may say
    something insightful that unlocks an inner door. Elicit similar
    experiences and other examples from participants.

172 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 3a

99D. Ideas for Practicing Wise Mind 1. About the Exercises Conduct at
least one or two practice exercises for going into wise mind, and be
sure to describe several different methods of getting into wise mind. Of
the exercises described below, I have found these to be most important:
1, 2, 4 (or 5), 6, and 8. Participants ordinarily have no idea what you
are talking about until you do some practice exercises with them. Start
with either Exercise 1 (stone flake on the lake) or 2 (walking down the
spiral stairs) to give participants a sense of going within, or 3
(breathing "wise" in, "mind" out). Then select one or two more that you
have tried yourself, or that you think your participants would like or
find useful. You can give out Mindfulness Handout 3a: Ideas for
Practicing Wise Mind. Although each exercise is also listed on
Mindfulness Worksheet 3: Wise Mind Practice, having a handout can be
useful, since participants often write all over, turn in, or throw away
their worksheets. Briefly describe the exercises you do not do with
them, so that, if they wish, they can practice these others by
themselves. Recommend that participants keep their eyes open when
practicing mindfulness. The idea is to learn to be mindful and in wise
mind in everyday life. Most of each day is lived with eyes open.
Learning to be mindful with eyes closed may not generalize to everyday
life with eyes wide open. That said, however, some teachers recommend
closing eyes during many mindfulness and contemplative practices.
Although it can be a matter of preference, it can also be a practice of
willingness (distress tolerance) and mindfulness itself to keep eyes
open and simply notice the discomfort (usually not too long lasting). At
the beginning of mindfulness practice, this is definitely not a point
worth arguing about. Encourage participants who are used to mindfulness
or contemplative prayer with their eyes closed to try it for a while
with eyes open. The first two exercises below (1 and 2) call for eyes
closed. 2. General Steps for Leading Mindfulness Practice Exercises 
Practice an exercise yourself before you try to teach it.  Tell a story,
present a problem, or describe a situation that hits on a universal
theme, to

get the attention and interest of participants.  Relate the story,
problem, or situation to yourself, to highlight the importance of the
skill

or exercise being taught. This modeling can be particularly useful if
participants are emotionally attached to you as the leader, since you
are clearly asking them to try something that is important in your own
life and you believe may be important in their lives also. Example: "I
was faced with a really big decision about where to send my child to
kindergarten. Two schools were very good but had different strengths and
weaknesses. I needed to be clear about what was really most important to
me. In making my decision, it was important for me to access wise mind."
Orient participants to the reason for the exercise or practice. People
are less likely to try

an exercise if they have no idea how it relates to themselves and their
own personal goals. Make it clear that "this is an exercise that helps
you get into wise mind," and explain how.  Remind participants to get in
a "wide-awake" posture (i.e., one where they will be likely to stay
awake). Ordinarily, participants in a skills training group will be
sitting in a chair. If so, it is best for them to keep both feet on the
floor and sit in a posture that is likely to keep them both alert and
comfortable.  Give clear and concise instructions telling participants
exactly what to do. See below for scripts. Demonstrate exercise if need
be. Do not instruct participants to do more than one thing at the same
time (e.g., count your breath and pay attention to sensations as they
arise). If the instructions are brief and easily remembered, give
instructions at the start of the practice. If the instructions are
complicated and what participants do changes over time, give an overview
before starting and then give instructions in sequence during the
exercise. Even

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 3a • 173

for brief instructions, it can be helpful to make occasional guiding
comments during the exercise to help individuals keep their focus. So
that you don't distract participants during exercise, speak in a soft
but steady voice, with brief instructions and pauses.  Instruct
participants on what to do if they get distracted. Tell participants
that if they get distracted, notice that they have stopped the exercise,
or get lost, they should simply notice this and gently bring themselves
back to the practice, starting over at the beginning. Remind
participants to avoid judging themselves. The practice of noticing
distractions and then coming back to the practice is the practice. 
Signal the start and end of the practice. You can do this by using a
mindfulness bell (e.g., "To start, I will ring the bell three times, and
to stop, I will ring the bell once"), or you can signal verbally (e.g.,
"Start now," and at the end, "When you are ready, open your eyes," or
"Bring yourself back to the room.").  Invite participants to share and
comment on their experiences. This sharing is a critical part of the
practice and should not be skipped. Going around the circle will usually
be the quickest way, as it eliminates long waits between sharing. Allow
individuals to say they don't want to share if they wish. In most
groups, it is best to discourage cross-talk (i.e., responding to others'
comments, discussing others' experiences). However, it can be useful to
allow questions of fact or interpretation (e.g., "Did you say X?" or "I
don't understand what you mean by XYZ; can you say more?").  Give
corrective feedback and troubleshoot. This is a critical part of
mindfulness teaching. It is particularly important to remind
participants consistently that the goal of mindfulness practice is
mindfulness practice. 3. Scripts for Exercises Note to Leaders: When
reciting your script, your tone of voice and pace are of crucial
importance. Try to use a low, gentle, semihypnotic tone; speak slowly;
and leave pauses as you go. Bring people out of imagery gently.

99

a.  Exercise 1: Imagining Being a Stone Flake on the Lake

Start instructions with a soft voice, with pauses ( . . . ) as you go,
using the following script (or something similar): "Sit in a comfortable
but attentive position. Close your eyes. . . . As you sit there, focus
your mind on your breath. . . . Attend to your breath coming in . . .
and your breath going out . . . as you breathe naturally in and out. . .
. " Then say something like this: "Imagine you are by a lake on a warm
sunny day. . . . It is a large, clear, very blue lake. . . . The sun is
shining warmly on the lake. . . . Imagine that you are a small . . .
stone . . . flake from a piece of stone near the lake, and imagine being
gently tossed out onto the lake . . . out to the middle of the lake . .
. skimming onto the cool, . . . clear, . . . blue . . . waters of the
lake. . . . Imagine that you are slowly . . . very slowly floating down
in the lake . . . noticing all that is in the lake as you gently float
down . . . floating down in the cool, clear blue waters . . . gazing at
what is around you . . . and now settling on the clear bottom of the
lake, . . . at the center of the lake . . . gazing at the clear waters
and what is nearby. . . . And when you are ready, open your eyes, come
back to the room, trying to maintain your awareness of that clear center
that is within you."

99

b.  Exercise 2: Imagining Walking Down the Inner Spiral Stairs

As with Exercise 1 above, start instructions with: "Sit in a comfortable
but attentive position. Close your eyes. . . . As you sit there, focus
your mind on your breath. . . . Attend to your breath coming in . . .
and your breath going out . . . as you breathe naturally in and out. . .
. " Then say something like this:

174 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 3a

"Imagine there is an inner spiral staircase within you. . . . Imagine
that you are walking down the staircase . . . going at your own pace . .
. making the staircase as light or as dark as you wish . . . with as
many windows as you wish . . . walking slowly down . . . and as you
walk, noticing if you are tired or afraid . . . sitting down on the
steps if you wish . . . walking down the stairs . . . as steep or as
shallow as you wish . . . light or dark . . . noticing as you walk down
moving toward your very center . . . toward your own wise mind . . .
toward wisdom . . . simply walking down at your own pace . . . stopping
and sitting when you arrive at a still point. . . . And when you are
ready, open your eyes, come back to the room, trying to maintain your
awareness of that clear center that is within you."

99

c.  Exercise 3: Breathing "Wise" In, "Mind" Out

Start instructions "Finding wise mind is like riding a bike; you can
only learn it by experience. Keeping your eyes open, find a good place
to rest your eyes . . . " as described above for Exercises 1 and 2. Then
say: "As you breathe in . . . say silently to yourself the word 'Wise' .
. . and as you breathe out . . . say silently to yourself the word
'Mind.' . . . Continue saying 'Wise' as you breathe in . . . and 'Mind'
as you breathe out." Note to Leaders: You can substitute "Wise mind in"
and "Wise mind out." You or participants may have other words that work
better for various individuals, and that is fine.

d.  Exercise 4: Asking Wise Mind a Question (Breathing In) and Listening
    for the Answer (Breathing Out)

Start instructions as described above for Exercise 3. Then say: "As you
inhale, ask yourself a question (e.g., What can I feel good about
myself? Should I accept this job?). As you exhale, listen (don't talk,
don't answer) for the answer. . . . Keep asking with each breath in and
listening with each breath out. . . . See if an answer comes to you. . .
. If not, perhaps there is no answer now." Note to Leaders: The practice
of asking wise mind a question and listening for the answer is in line
with research showing that the impact of self-talk in interrogative form
(questions) on future behavior may be different from the impact of
declarative talk (assertions). Self-posed questions may lead to thoughts
about intrinsic motivation to pursue a goal, leading the person to form
intentions about that goal and increasing the likelihood of the person's
performing behaviors linked to the goal.35

e.  Exercise 5: Asking, "Is This Wise Mind?"

Start instructions as described above for Exercise 3. Then say: "Bring
to mind something you want to do or something you don't want to do, an
opinion you have, or something you are doing right now. . . . Focus your
mind on your breath . . . notice your breath coming in and your breath
going out as you breathe naturally . . . in and out. As you inhale, . .
. .ask yourself, 'Is this wise mind?' . . . ('Is eating a second dessert
wise mind?' 'Is not going to my therapy session wise mind?'). As you
exhale, listen (don't talk, don't answer) for the answer. . . . Keep
asking with each breath in and listening with each breath out. . . . See
if an answer comes to you. . . . If not, perhaps there is no answer now,
or perhaps you are too ambivalent to know the answer." Note to Leaders:
Exercise 5 is one you should definitely practice with participants.
Accessing wise mind is one of the most important DBT skills. The
questions can be anything: "What do I have to be proud of---

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 3a • 175 to help me feel good
about myself?" "Should I continue to smoke pot?" "Do I really love him?"
(While storming out of skills training early:) "Is this wise mind?"
(When adamantly disagreeing with someone:) "Is this wise mind?"

f.  Exercise 6: Attending to the Breath/Letting Attention Settle into
    the Center Note to Leaders: Attending to one's breath is the most
    universal mindfulness practice. It can be woven into teaching about
    wise mind without a lot of orientation beforehand. It can be done
    with just a few breaths, while clients are sitting down, standing,
    or walking. It is very important to help participants let go of
    expectations about breathing. Expecting breaths to become slow or
    deep, expecting any other specific type of breath, or expecting to
    relax or feel differently while practicing can induce panic
    responses and actually interfere with experiencing wise mind. For
    some individuals, simple focusing on breathing for any extended
    length of time is not possible. As one participant once said, "I
    don't do breathing." For many, a focus on breath alone allows their
    mind to generate trauma memories, ruminating thoughts, and traumatic
    and/or painful images. Extreme emotion and/or dissociation may be
    the result. Others get agitated immediately when they focus on their
    breathing. For these individuals, a shaping process is needed, and
    it may take a long time and/or exposure-based treatment before
    meditative breath focus becomes possible. For others, difficulties
    with attention or with sitting or standing still can make prolonged
    attention to breathing very difficult. The difficulties those with
    severe disorders often have with meditation practices are the
    principal reason why DBT does not require meditation (i.e., focus on
    breath) for individuals who cannot tolerate it.

Start instructions as described above for Exercise 3. Then say: "As you
sit there, focus your mind on your breath . . . attend to your breath
coming in and your breath going out . . . as you breathe naturally in
and out. . . . Attending to your breath coming in and out, . . . letting
your attention settle into your center . . . at the bottom of your
breath when you inhale . . . just near your gut or in the center of your
forehead. That very centered point is wise mind . . . as you breathe in
and out . . . keeping your attention there at your very center . . . in
your gut." g. Exercise 7: Expanding Awareness Note to Leaders: Begin
this exercise by having participants attend to the breath for a few
minutes and then expand their awareness. It is important that
participants keep their eyes open during this exercise. You might add to
the instructions, "Keeping your eyes focused where they are now, expand
your awareness to the walls or to the floor or table." Most people will
definitely notice the difference when taking this extra step.

Start instructions as described above for Exercise 3. Then say: "As you
inhale and exhale normally, not changing your breathing . . . let your
attention settle into your center . . . just near your gut. . . . As you
breathe in and out . . . keeping your attention there at your very
center . . . in your gut, gently expand your awareness to the greater
space around you . . . not changing the focus or your eyes, but
expanding the focus of your awareness . . . with widened awareness,
keeping your primary awareness at your center." Discussion Point: Ask
participants to share their experience with expanding awareness, and to
discuss how this is different from activities where they are so focused
on a task, a game, or an interaction that they become oblivious to
everything around them. The ability to be focused but aware of our
surroundings is like that of a mother who, while working at home, is
constantly

176 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 3a

aware of where her young child is. Contrast this with becoming lost in
computer games, watching TV, or engaging in any other behavior patterns
that can become addictive. Discuss the implications of this contrast
with participants. h. Exercise 8: Dropping into the Pauses between
Inhaling and Exhaling

Start instructions as described above for Exercises 3. Then say: "As you
inhale, bring your attention up with your breath . . . notice the very
top of your breath . . . at the top of your chest. Notice the very
slight pause before your exhale. . . . As you reach this pause, drop
yourself and your attention into the pause. . . . Notice as you exhale,
letting your attention travel down with your breath. At the very bottom
of your exhalation, before you inhale, drop yourself and your attention
into that pause. . . . Continue breathing in and out, dropping yourself
into the pauses, into wise mind." Note to Leaders: Some participants
simply cannot do Exercise 8. It sounds incomprehensible and weird to
them. Other participants, perhaps those with a poetic bent, love the
exercise. Be prepared with another exercise when you plan to use this
one.

99E. Review of Between-­Session Practice Exercises for Wise Mind
Mindfulness Handout 3a lists all of the ideas described above for
practicing wise mind. It is important to go over some of these if they
are not practiced in the session.

IV. Mindfulness "What" Skills: Observe (Mindfulness Handouts 4--4a) Main
    Point: There are three mindfulness "what" skills and three
    mindfulness "how" skills. "What" skills are what we do when
    practicing mindfulness, and "how" skills are how we do it. The three
    "what" skills are observing, describing, and participating.
    Observing is paying attention on purpose to the present moment.
    Mindfulness Handout 4: Taking Hold of Your Mind: "What" Skills.
    First, give a brief overview of each "what" skill. The key points
    are on this handout. Point out that a person can only do one thing
    at a time---­observe, or describe, or participate---but not all three
    at once. If you are trying to teach all the core mindfulness skills
    in two sessions, cover wise mind and the "what" skills in their
    entirety in the first session. Observing, the first "what" skill, is
    fundamental to all mindfulness teaching and thus must be covered
    until participants understand what the practice is. Be sure to
    conduct practice exercises for observing before moving to the next
    skill. You will have a chance to do further teaching on these skills
    during the review of homework practice in the next session. These
    skills are best learned by practice, feedback, and coaching.
    Mindfulness Handout 4a: Ideas for Practicing Observing (Optional).
    This multipage handout gives instructions for three types of
    observing exercises: "coming back to your senses," "focusing the
    mind," and "opening the mind." It's useful to have this handout in
    the session. If you distribute the handout, be sure to describe (at
    least briefly) the differences between these three types of
    observing. For some groups of participants, these handouts may be
    overwhelming or confusing, and giving specific practice assignments
    may be more useful. Mindfulness Worksheet 4: Mindfulness "What"
    Skills: Observing, Describing, Participating; Mindfulness Worksheet
    4a: Observing, Describing, Participating Checklist; Mindfulness
    Worksheet 4b: Observing, Describing, Participating Calendar. These
    three worksheets offer three different formats for recording
    practice of mindfulness "what" skills. Worksheet 4 asks participants
    to practice mindfulness skills only twice between sessions.
    Worksheet 4a instructs participants to practice and gives

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 4 • 177 multiple
opportunities for each skill, as well as multiple check boxes for each
skill. Worksheet 4b is aimed at participants who like to write. Assign
one worksheet to all participants, or allow participants to choose;
choosing may give them a greater sense of control and possibly improve
adherence. For participants new to mindfulness skills, asking them to
practice all three "what" skills in a single week can be too much. It
can be useful to ask which skill each participant has the most trouble
with. For example, a person who has ADHD, or who ruminates a lot or gets
completely lost in the moment, may want to practice observing first and
then later practice the other skills. Observing is also a good first
skill for a person who suppresses or avoids emotions or other
experiences. A person who frequently distorts information or
misinterprets what is going on may want to practice describing first.
However, the skill of describing depends on accurate observation, so be
sure the person has learned the skill of observing before you move to
describing. The person who is usually an observer of others and does not
jump in and participate in events may want to practice participating
first. Although you ultimately want everyone practicing all the skills,
it is often best to start with the skill a person wants to practice or
believes is most needed. Mindfulness Worksheets 2, 2a, 2b, 2c:
Mindfulness Core Skills Practice. These worksheets cover practice of all
the core mindfulness skills, including both the "what" and "how" skills.
See Section II of this chapter for how to use these worksheets.

99A. The Mindfulness "What" and "How" Skills There are three mindfulness
"what" skills and three mindfulness "how" skills. "What" skills are what
we do when practicing mindfulness, and "how" skills are how we do it.
Each "what" skill is a distinct activity. Like walking, riding a bike,
or swimming, the "what" skills are three separate activities. Thus
"what" skills are practiced one at a time: We are either observing, or
describing what has been observed, or participating in the moment. This
is in contrast to the "how" skills (nonjudgmentally, one-­mindfully, and
effectively), which can be applied all at once. Note to Leaders: You
need not cover each of the points below every time through. Cover just
enough to get your point across. You will be covering this section many
times. Expand on your points a bit more each time through. Either before
starting or after giving just a few points, do one or two exercises from
the list at the end of this section. One of the brief introductory
exercises followed by the lemon exercise can be very useful and
engaging.

B. Why Observe?

99

1.  We Observe to See What Is Say to participants: "Observing is like
    walking across a room full of furniture with your eyes open instead
    of closed. You can walk across the room either way. However, you
    will be more effective with your eyes open. If you don't like the
    furniture in the room, you might want to close your eyes, but
    ultimately it's not very effective. You keep running into the
    furniture." We all walk through life with our eyes closed sometimes,
    but opening our eyes and actually observing what's there can be very
    helpful. The good thing about observing is that it brings us into
    contact with the real, factual, present moment. That's where we all
    actually live---in the here and now. We can't experience the past;
    we can't experience the future; and if we're living in the past or
    the future, we're not really living. Observing is all about learning
    to feel fully alive in the here and now.

99

Discussion Point: Observing is the opposite of multitasking. As an
example, discuss multitasking and driving, with an emphasis on how
multitasking might interfere with seeing and responding to what is right
in front of you---­including other people.

178 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 4

2.  We Observe to Get Information into Our Brains So That We Can Change
    Research Point: Research shows that information coming into our
    senses will help us change in desired ways. •• Weighing ourselves
    consistently and seeing our weight regularly will often make our
    weight go down (if we feel too fat) or up (if we feel too thin).36
    •• Filling out diary cards is known to be reactive; that is, it can
    change the very behavior it is measuring.37

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants their own tendencies to avoid
reality, particularly tendencies to avoid even noticing reality as it
is. Discuss consequences of such avoidance. Discussion Point: Elicit
from participants, and discuss, any problems they have with attention.

99C. Observing: What to Do 99 1. Notice What You Are Experiencing
through Your Senses Say to clients: "Notice what you are experiencing
through your eyes, ears, nose, skin, and tongue. You observe the world
outside yourself through your five senses: seeing, hearing, smelling,
tasting, and touching. You also observe the world inside yourself
through sensing your thoughts, emotions, and internal bodily
sensations." a. Sense Objects or Events Outside or Inside Your Body

Tell participants: "What you sense depends on where you focus your
attention. Ultimately, you will want to be able to observe events
occurring within your mind and body (i.e., thoughts, sensations,
emotions, images) and events occurring outside your body." Note to
Leaders: When you are helping clients begin a mindfulness practice, it
is important to start with something somewhat difficult but also doable.
When clients are first learning a skill, it is important for them to get
reinforced for it. Shaping is important here as it is in learning any
other new skill.

99D. Observing Practice Exercises We all walk through life with our eyes
closed. Opening our eyes and observing what's there can be very
helpful---and practice in doing this is necessary. 1. Brief Introductory
Exercises

99

The following are very brief exercises that can be done as you first
start teaching observing. You can do one exercise and then share the
experience, or you can do several of these sequentially and then share.
Ask participants to do these things:

99

 "Attend to your hand on a cool surface (such as a table or chair) or a
warm surface (such as

your other hand)."  "Attend to your thigh on the chair."  "Attend to and
try to sense your stomach, your shoulders."  "Listen for sounds." 
"Follow your breath in and out; notice the sensation of your belly
rising and falling."  "Watch in your mind to see the first thought that
comes in." (As a leader, you can facilitate

this by yelling the word "Elephant!" first and then giving instruction.)

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 4 • 179

99

 "Stroke just above your upper lip; then stop stroking and notice how
long it takes before

you can't sense your upper lip any longer."  "Stand, arms relaxed at
your sides, feet about a foot apart. Focus your attention on how

your feet feel connecting with the floor. . . . Without moving your
feet, find the spot where you feel most balanced over your feet."
Discussion Point: Share experiences at end of exercises. b. Sense Your
Mind

Explain to clients: "Observing your thoughts can sometimes be very
difficult. This is because your thoughts about events may often seem to
you like facts instead of thoughts. Many people have never really tried
to just sit back and watch their thoughts. When you observe your own
mind, you will see that your thoughts (and also your emotions and bodily
sensations) never stop following one another. From morning till night,
there is an uninterrupted flow of events inside your mind; you might
notice thoughts, emotions, and other bodily sensations. As you watch,
these will come and go like clouds in the sky. This is what thoughts and
feelings do inside the mind when just observed---they come and go."
Practice Exercise: Instruct participants to sit with their eyes closed
and listen as you say out loud a string of words (e.g., "up," "round,"
"salt," "tall"). Instruct them to observe what word comes into their
minds following each word you say. Discuss the words that entered their
minds.  Some people are terrified to look at their own minds. They've
avoided it for years. For

these individuals, it may be more effective to start observing things
outside their bodies first---for example, sitting on a park bench and
watching people walk by; or holding something in one hand, such as a
leaf or a flower, and noticing the weight of the object, the texture,
the smell, the shape.  Some people can't stop analyzing their minds.
They're paying attention to their own ex-

perience all the time. For these individuals, it might be harder to
start by observing their own minds, particularly if they are very used
to analyzing themselves. In contrast, here it is important in observing
the mind to adopt a curious attitude and simply watch what goes through
the mind. That is, it is important not to try to understand the mind,
figure out the mind, or analyze the mind. These are activities of
"doing" mind. They are goal-­directed. Observing is not goal-­directed,
other than toward noticing. Having a "Teflon mind"---a concept to which
I return later---is essential here. Note to Leaders: Some people
dissociate or sense themselves leaving their bodies when observing. For
people having trouble staying "inside themselves," it can be useful to
suggest that they imagine that the place they go outside themselves is a
flower. The flower is connected to their center by a long stem. Their
center is the root of the flower. Instruct them to imagine coming down
the stem to the root. Have them do this each time and then observe at
the root.

2.  Pay Attention on Purpose to Right Now---As It Happens Mindful
    observing can be thought of as paying attention to present
    experiences on purpose. Instruct clients: "To observe, you simply
    step back, be alert, and notice. When you observe, it is the only
    thing you are doing, nothing else. Don't react, don't label, don't
    describe; just notice the experience. When you observe, you pay
    attention to direct physical sensation."
3.  Observe by Controlling Attention Explain to clients: "When you can
    control your attention, you can control your mind. There are two
    types of attending: focusing the mind and opening the mind."

180 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 4

a.  Focusing the Mind

"Focusing the mind" is the practice of concentrating attention on
specific activities, objects, or events. Many things can be used for
focusing the mind. Give clients these examples:  "The most common
mindfulness practice is observing your breath. Your breath is the

only thing that you can be certain you will always have for as long as
you live. You can lose your arm; you can lose your leg; you can lose
many things. But as long as you are alive, you have breath. Focusing
attention on your breath is a central part of all mindfulness meditation
and contemplative prayer practices."  "Some schools of meditation give
mantras or specific words to say with each breath."  "Guided mindfulness
exercises given by therapists, or meditation recordings, give
intermittent instructions on where and how to focus the mind." 
"Counting breaths in and breaths out up to 10 and then starting over is
a typical instruction in Zen."  "Saying the word 'wise' when breathing
in and the word 'mind' when breathing out is a way to focus your mind.
Some people practice using a word such as 'calm.' " Mindfulness of
current emotions (see Emotion Regulation Handout 22), mindfulness of
current thoughts (Distress Tolerance Handout 15), and mindfulness of
others (Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 12) are other examples of
focusing the mind, as are the exercises described in the "Focusing the
Mind" portion of Mindfulness Handout 4a. b. Opening the Mind

In "opening the mind," instead of focusing on specific activities,
objects, or events, we focus our attention on observing or watching
whatever comes into awareness as it comes in and as it goes out of
awareness. It is noticing thoughts, emotions, and sensations that enter
awareness, without holding onto or pursuing the topics coming into mind.
When opening the mind, we attempt at each moment to expand awareness to
moment-to-­moment experiencing. Thus the object in opening the mind is to
observe the flow of moment-to-moment experience. This is like sitting
and watching an operating conveyor belt, noticing the objects that go by
on the belt, but without shutting down the belt to look at the objects
more closely. Another metaphor for this is sitting on the shore of a
stream in autumn and watching the leaves go by on the water without
following any of the leaves to pay closer attention. In Zen this
practice is called shikentaza, which is mindfulness practice without the
support of focusing on the breath or other techniques for concentrating
the mind. This is also called "choiceless awareness"38 to indicate that
an individual notices anything that comes into awareness, not choosing
one thing to pay attention to. Note to Leaders: For participants who
have attention difficulties (or sometimes even high anxiety), the
practice of opening the mind can be very difficult, because they keep
getting caught up in thoughts, emotions, or sensations that come into
awareness. Focusing the mind is recommended for these participants.

99

4.  Practice Wordless Watching: Observe without Describing What Is
    Observed Observing without describing can be very hard, and for many
    people this takes a lot of practice. Our minds may be in the habit
    of immediately adding labels to anything we observe. We hear "chirp,
    chirp" and think "bird"; we hear "vroom, vroom" and say "car"; we
    sense our breath and say "breath"; we see a picture of a bird on the
    wall and say "bird." We often trade observations for concepts, such
    as hearing "chirp, chirp" and thinking, "I know what that is: a
    bird." But when hearing "chirp, chirp," we aren't actually seeing
    any birds. For all we know, somebody out there could be practicing
    bird calls. It could in fact be a bird, but we didn't observe a
    bird. It was only an observed sound. All we can know for sure is the
    sound we hear. Observing is notic-

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 4 • 181

ing the sound "chirp, chirp." That's it. That's all. In fact, jumping to
label the sound as "bird" gets in the way of paying attention to the
sound. This is like trying to text and drive, or talk on a cell phone
and engage in an in-­person conversation at the same time: No one can
observe well while describing (the second "what" skill) at the same
time. Grasping this idea may be difficult for many participants. They
might even think it is not possible actually to observe something
without the mind's saying anything. For many people, the mind is a
constantly chattering set of thoughts. Discussion Point: Elicit from
participants their own tendencies to label observations.

99

5.  Observe with a "Teflon (or Nonstick) Mind" Allowing emotions,
    thoughts, images, and sensations to come and go is central to
    mindful observing. A "Teflon/nonstick mind" is important in
    practicing opening the mind, and also in practicing focusing the
    mind. In both practices, thoughts, emotions, and images will come up
    in the mind. The idea is to let all experiences---­feelings,
    thoughts, and images---flow out of the mind, rather than either
    grabbing experiences or holding onto them, or pushing experiences
    away. Say to clients: "Observing inside your mind can be like
    sitting on a hill looking down on a train that's going by. Some of
    the train cars are thoughts, strung together. They come into view.
    They go out of view. Some of the train cars are emotions, feelings.
    Each thought and feeling arises, comes closer, then passes, and goes
    away down the tracks and around the hill out of sight. The trick is
    not to get caught in the content of the thought or feeling. Watch,
    observe, but do not get on the train."

99

a.  Avoid Pushing Away Experiences

"Experiential avoidance"39 is trying to suppress or avoid experiencing
what is happening in the present, in the moment. Some individuals may be
afraid to observe their thoughts. Some thoughts are scary, and others
may be thoughts a person would like to not have. If worried about any
particular thought, a person may try to get rid of it, to shut it out of
the mind. Research Point: However, there is scientific evidence27, 40
that trying to shut out thoughts is the best way to keep having them.
The harder a person tries to shut them out, the more they will pop back
into the mind. The best way to get rid of unwanted thoughts is to step
back and simply observe them. They will go away by themselves. The
attempt to avoid or suppress our own experiences is associated with
higher, not lower, emotion dysregulation.41, 42

b.  Avoid Holding on to Experiences

"Experiential hunger" is trying to hold on to positive experiences. We
try to create positive experiences at the expense of noticing what is
currently in our lives. People often overindulge in drugs, alcohol, sex,
fast driving, and other exciting activities, seeking an emotional high
or a thrill. Everyday life seems boring. We may try to hold on to a
sense of security or a sense of being loved. Holding on to damaging
relationships, or being overly demanding of those we love, are often
efforts to hold on to a false sense of safety and security. Life is too
scary otherwise. It is even possible to become overly "addicted" to
spiritual experiences. Mindfulness meditation and/or prayer can become
efforts to have "spiritual highs." Individuals constantly seeking
reassurance or frequently demanding proof of unwavering love fall into
the same category. When this happens, the individuals can become like
ocean fish swimming around and around, constantly searching for the
water.

182 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 4

Note to Leaders: It is essential to help participants observe in a
nonattached way. Thus whatever happens in their minds is "grist for the
mill," so to speak. No matter what they do, they can just "step back"
and observe. Get feedback. Work with participants until they get the
idea of observing. Check how long each person can observe. It is common
to have to start and restart many times in the course of 1 or 2 minutes.

6.  Observe with a "Beginner's Mind" Each moment in the universe is
    completely new. This one moment, right now, has never occurred
    before. In "beginner's mind," we focus our minds on noticing the
    experience of each moment, noticing that each moment is new and
    unique. It is easy to forget this. We forget to observe and notice
    the moment. A new moment may be very much like a previous moment. We
    may find ourselves saying "same old, same old," but actually
    everything is changing, is constantly new. In reality, we are always
    in "beginner's mind"; that is, every moment is indeed new and
    unique. In observing, we take the stance of an impartial observer,
    investigating whatever appears in our conscious minds or strikes our
    attention. Say to clients: "Nothing has ever been in your mind that
    has not gone away. If you just watch your mind, thoughts, images,
    emotions, and sensations all eventually go away. It is a fascinating
    thing. If you just sit there and look at them, they go away. When
    you try to get rid of thoughts they keep coming back."
7.  Practice, Practice, Practice to Train the Mind to Pay Attention
    Emphasize to clients: "Learning to observe your own mind takes
    patience and practice. It means training your mind to pay attention.
    It may seem impossible to ever get your attention under control, but
    it is possible. It just takes practice, practice, and more
    practice." \$ Story Point: An untrained mind is like a TV that gets
    100,000 different channels, but the person watching the TV doesn't
    have a remote control. The mind keeps turning to the same stations
    over and over and over again---most of which are painful for
    participants.

\$ Story Point: A Zen metaphor compares an untrained mind to a puppy.
The untrained mind causes problems just like a puppy that pees where
it's not supposed to, chews up its owner's favorite shoes, eats garbage,
and throws up. Likewise, the untrained mind wanders all over, gets
itself (and the person) in trouble, and ruminates about things that make
the person feel worse.

99

8.  Keep Bringing the Mind Back to Observing Say to clients: "Observe by
    bringing your mind back to observing over and over, each time that
    you notice being distracted. Most people, when they practice
    observing, find that their minds frequently and sometimes very
    quickly start thinking about something---and before they know it,
    they become lost in their thoughts, unaware of the present moment,
    no longer observing. Whenever your attention is drawn away from
    observing and awareness, gently but resolutely push distractions to
    the side as if you are dividing the clouds in the sky, and return,
    single-­ mindedly, to the object of attention. The idea here is to
    observe being distracted---that is, to observe yourself as you
    become aware that you were distracted. Notice, if you can, when you
    start to become distracted. Practice noticing distractions."
9.  Observing Requires Controlling Action The first rule of observing is
    to notice the urge to quit observing. One of the first things that
    happens when people start practicing observing is that they want to
    quit. They get bored; they get tired; they experience painful
    emotions; their bodies start hurting; they remember something else
    important they need to do; something else catches their interest;
    and on and on and on. Tell participants: "You don't have to act on
    whatever comes into your mind. When you're

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 4 • 183

observing, you might notice you feel sleepy. Notice it, but don't fall
asleep. Instead, bring your attention back to whatever you are
observing. You might notice you're hungry. But don't get something to
eat right now. Instead, notice that you're hungry; notice that your
attention has been pulled into thinking about food. Notice that, and
then bring your attention back to whatever you were observing."
Discussion Point: Elicit from participants estimates of their own
ability to stay focused on observing for any length of time. Discuss
strategies for increasing the ability to continue observing in the face
of temptations to quit. Note to Leaders: A common problem for many
participants is that they forget why they are observing in the first
place. They see no benefit. They may feel worse---­certainly not better
or calmer. They want to quit. At these times it can be helpful to do a
quick review of the pros and cons (see Mindfulness Worksheet 1: Pros and
Cons of Practicing Mindfulness), and to remind them (and have them
remind themselves) that very little can be accomplished in this life
without the ability to observe. Ultimately, this ability will depend
somewhat on the ability to tolerate distress and to inhibit impulsive
urges. This may be quite a task for some participants, requiring much
practice before they can comfortably stay quiet and stay still long
enough to fully observe something within or without.

10. Observing Is Very Simple, but It Can Also Be Surprisingly Hard To
    make the point to participants about the surprising difficulty of
    observing, try one of the following exercises; the first focuses on
    not seeing what is there, and the second on seeing what is not
    there. Practice Exercise 1: Hold up a page or poster, or put up a
    PowerPoint slide, with the sentence below written in the form shown.
    Instruct participants to observe the sentence, and then ask them,
    "What do you see?" The yellow bird flew through through orange
    curtains into blue sky. Take the display down and discuss. People
    ordinarily do not notice that the word "through" is repeated. (It's
    at the end of the first line and the beginning of the second line.)
    Put the display up again, and ask whether participants now see the
    word "through" two times. Discuss participants' experiences. Because
    people know how to read and write, they have expectations about
    words and sentences. If people saw the extra word the first time
    they read the sentence, they probably ignored it; they knew from
    past experience that it probably wasn't supposed to be there. If
    they weren't giving it their full attention, they may not have
    noticed the extra word. Their minds automatically "saw" the words as
    they should be. It's good to practice observing, because it's very
    easy not to see things that are there like the extra word above.
    Practice Exercise 2: Hold up a page or poster, or put up a
    PowerPoint slide, with the image in Figure 7.2. Ask participants
    what shapes they see inside the box. It's clear that there are three
    black circles and that each has a notch, like a missing pie piece.
    In addition, many people see a triangle when they look at the shapes
    in Figure 7.2. But in fact, there is no triangle in the box. The
    notches in the three circles happen to line up with each other. If
    there

FIGURE 7.2. Three notched black circles with a "missing" triangle: An
illustration of how surprisingly difficult observing can be.

184 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 4

were lines that connected the three notches, then there would be a
triangle. But there are no connecting lines, and so there is no triangle
shape. Our minds, however, can provide these "missing" lines, so we
"see" a triangle even though it isn't really there. Discuss
participants' experiences. The mind has the ability to fill in blanks,
so we "see" something we expect even when it's missing. When the mind
isn't fully paying attention, it can also erase something unexpected,
even though it's there. In fact, most people stop paying attention when
they think they know what something is. This can be useful and save us a
lot of time. But it can cause lots of problems when what we think we see
doesn't line up with what's really out there.

11. Observing Can Be Very Painful at Times The trouble with observing is
    that people may wind up seeing things they do not want to see. This
    can be hard. In particular, those with histories of trauma may find
    observing very scary. They are afraid to watch what goes through
    their minds. Some are worried that thoughts and images that
    ordinarily cause enormous anxiety will race through their minds.
    Others are afraid of thoughts and images of the past, particularly
    when these set off intense emotions of sadness or anger. However,
    there is research showing that control of attention can reduce
    rumination.43 Note to Leaders: Remind participants to step back
    within themselves, not outside of themselves, to observe. Observing
    is not dissociating. As described in an earlier Note to Leaders, if
    some individuals have difficulty staying inside instead of going
    outside themselves, suggest that they try imagining that the place
    they go outside themselves is a flower.

12. Practice Exercises for Observing That Require Preparation\* The
    following exercises need supplies and require some advance
    preparation. They are fairly active, most people find them fun, and
    they are very good for younger groups or people who are somewhat
    resistant to practice. They are also very good for people who have
    difficulty sitting still or focusing without much to do, thereby
    opening the door to traumatic images or thoughts.

99

a.  Finding Your Lemon

Hand one lemon to each person. Instruct participants to examine the
lemon (by touching it, holding it, smelling it, etc.), but not to eat
the lemon. After a period of time, collect all the lemons in one place.
Mix up the lemons. Ask participants to come and find their own lemons.
This can be done with other things (e.g., pennies), but be sure that the
objects you choose look reasonably similar and will require examination
to tell the difference. b. Holding Chocolate on Your Tongue

Hand out a small piece of chocolate to each person. Have each person
unwrap the chocolate. Before starting, give these instructions: "Put the
piece of chocolate on your tongues. Hold it in your mouth, noticing the
taste, the texture, the sensations in your mouth. Do not swallow. Notice
the urge to swallow." Start by ringing a bell, and end in 3--5 minutes
by ringing the bell. (Substitute some other sound for the bell if
necessary.) c. Eating or Drinking with Awareness

Give something to eat or to drink to each participant (or have
participants select something from an array of food or drinks). Then
instruct participants to eat (or drink) what they have selected very
slowly, focusing on the feel of the food (or drink) in their hands; the
smell, the \*All exercises in this section (and later in this chapter)
marked with note number 44 are adapted from Miller, A. L., Rathus, J.
H., & Linehan, M. M. (2007). Dialectical behavior therapy with suicidal
adolescents. New York: Guilford Press. Copyright 2007 by The Guilford
Press. Adapted by permission.

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 4 • 185

texture, the temperature, the sound, and the taste of the food (or
liquid) in their mouths; the sensations of swallowing; and urges to eat
or drink more slowly, faster, or not at all. d. What's Different about
Me?44

Two group members pair off and mindfully observe each other. Then they
turn their backs, change three things (e.g., glasses, watch, and hair),
and turn back toward each other. Can they notice the changes? e.
Observation of Music44

Play a piece of music and ask group members to listen quietly and to
observe nonjudgmentally, while fully letting the experience surround
them (their thoughts, emotions, physiological changes, urges).
Variations include playing segments of two or three very different
pieces (in terms of style, tempo, etc.) and having group members observe
changes in the music and their internal reactions. f. Mindfully
Unwrapping a Hershey's Kiss44

Have each group member sit in a comfortable position with a Hershey's
Kiss in front of him or her. Then say: "After I ring the bell the third
time, observe and describe the outside of the Hershey's Kiss to
yourself. Feel the differences in the texture between the paper tag and
the foil. As you begin to unwrap the chocolate, note how the shape and
texture of the foil change in comparison to the paper tag, as well as
the chocolate. Feel the chocolate and how it changes in your hand. If
your mind wanders from the exercise, note the distraction without
judgment, and then return your attention to the chocolate." g. Repeating
an Activity44

Instruct participants: "When the bell rings, sit at the table with your
arms resting on the table. Very slowly, reach several inches to pick up
a pen. Raise it a few inches, and then set it down. Move your hand back
to its original position of rest. While you repeat this action
throughout the time period, experience each repetition with freshness,
as though you have never done it before. You can allow your attention to
wander toward different aspects of the movement: watching your hand or
feeling the muscles contracting. You can even notice your sense of
touch, being aware of the different textures and pressures. Let go of
any distractions or judgments you may have. This activity will help you
to become mindful of a simple activity that you perform often throughout
the day." h. Focusing on Scent

Bring in and distribute scented candles. Then instruct group members:
"Choose a candle. When the bell rings, sit back in your chair and find a
comfortable and relaxed position. Close your eyes, and begin to focus on
the smell of the candle. Let go of any distractions or judgments. Notice
how the smell makes you feel and what images it evokes." Afterward,
discuss observations, emotions, thoughts, feelings, and sensations with
participants: "How did the scent make you feel? What images came to your
mind? Did the smell remind you of anything in particular?" i. Mindfully
Eating a Raisin

Bring in and distribute raisins. Then ask group members to hold a
raisin; observe its appearance, texture, and scent; then put it in their
mouths and slowly, with awareness, begin eating---­noticing the tastes,
sensations, and even the sounds of eating. This can also be done with
candies (sweet tarts, caramels, fruit chews, fireballs, etc.). Eating a
raisin (or other small food) is a very well-known exercise that is
typically done in mindfulness-based treatments.

186 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 4

j.  Observing Emotions

Say to participants: "Notice the emotions you are experiencing, and try
to note how you know you are having those emotions. That is, what labels
do you have in mind? What thoughts, what body sensations, and so on give
you information about the emotions?" k. What's My Experience?

Tell participants: "Focus your mind on your experience this very moment.
Be mindful of any thoughts, feelings, body sensations, urges, or
anything else you become aware of. Don't judge your experience, or try
to push it away or hold onto it. Just let experiences come and go like
clouds moving across the sky." l. Noticing Urges44

Instruct participants: "Sit very straight in your chair. Throughout this
exercise, notice any urges---­whether to move, shift positions, scratch
an itch, or do something else. Instead of acting on the urge, simply
notice it." Then discuss the experience with participants. Was it
possible to have an urge and not act on it? m. Mindfulness of the Five
Senses

The exercises for observing through the five senses are limited only by
your imagination and creativity.  Sight. Have participants pick a
picture on a wall or an object in the room to look at, or

ask them to pass around pictures or postcards. Or light a candle in the
middle of the room, or go for a walk in an area with flowers or other
sights to see. Instruct participants to contemplate or gaze at the
sight.  Touch. Bring things with various textures to pass around.
Instruct participants to close their eyes and hold and examine the
object(s) with their hands, and/or rub the object(s) on their skin. Find
a nearby grassy place to walk barefoot, and ask participants to notice
the feel of the ground on bare feet.  Smell. Bring in aromatic things,
such as spices, herbs, perfumes, perfumed soaps or candles, gourmet
jelly beans, or other foods or aromatic oils. Instruct participants to
close their eyes and focus on their sense of smell.  Taste. Bring
various small but tasty bites to eat. Try to make some tastes very
different and some very similar. Have participants sample each bite to
eat separately. Instruct them to focus on the taste and, if they are
good cooks themselves, to try to inhibit analyzing the taste for what
elements make up the taste.  Sound. Instruct participants to close their
eyes and listen to sounds in the room. Or bring a large mindfulness bell
and ring the bell very slowly (but completely each time). Or put on a
musical recording, instruct participants to listen, and have them make
an effort to keep their attention on the sound only. 13. Practice
Exercises for Awareness Ordinarily, have participants practice the
following exercises with eyes open. Speak in a low and gentle voice
tone. You can give all the instructions at once or you can follow the
script, with pauses ( . . . ). You can do one exercise and then share
the experience, or you can do several of these sequentially and then
share. As described earlier with the scripts for wise mind exercises,
set up the practice as follows, and then continue with one of the
scripts below: "Sit in a comfortable but attentive position. Keeping
your eyes open, find a good place to rest your eyes . . . looking down
with only slightly open eyes, or keeping your eyes more open. You might
want to clear the space in front of you so as to not be too distracted."

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handouts 4--4a • 187

a.  Expanding Awareness While Staying Aware of Your Center

"See if you can let your attention settle into your center . . . at the
bottom of your breath when you inhale . . . just near your gut. That
very centered point is wise mind . . . as you breathe in and out . . .
keeping your attention there at your very center . . . in your gut. . .
. Now, as you keep your center of attention in your gut, expand your
awareness outside . . . noticing in the periphery of your vision the
colors of the walls or floor or table, objects in the room, people
nearby . . . maintaining all the while awareness of your gut . . . your
center point . . . your wise mind." b. Awareness of Threes

"Stay focused on your breathing . . . in and out, for three breaths . .
. and, maintaining your awareness of your breath, expand your awareness
to your hands . . . just holding both in your awareness for three
breaths. . . . Now, expand your awareness even further . . . maintaining
awareness of your breath and of your hands, include in your awareness
sounds . . . staying aware of all three for three breaths . . . letting
go of perfection if you lose awareness of one . . . starting over
again." Note to Leaders: The two exercises above are very good for
working on the ability to focus attention. Many people who have problems
with emotion regulation or impulse control have great difficulties in
controlling attention. With much practice of these exercises, their
control of attention will gradually improve.

c.  Watching Train Cars

"Imagine you are sitting on a hill near train tracks, watching train
cars go by. . . . Imagine that thoughts, images, sensations, and
feelings are cars on the train. . . . Just watch the train cars go by. .
. . Don't jump on the train. . . . Just watch the train cars go by. . .
. If you find yourself riding the train, jump off and start observing
again. . . . Just noticing that you got on the train . . . watching the
train cars . . . watching your mind again." Note to Leaders: There are
many variations on the "train cars" image. For the train cars, you can
substitute boats on a lake, sheep walking by, and so forth.

d.  Watching Clouds in the Sky

"Imagine that your mind is the sky, and that your thoughts, sensations,
and feelings are clouds. . . . Gently notice each cloud as it drifts . .
. or scurries . . . by."

99E. Review of Between-­Session Practice Exercises for Observing It is
important to go over some of these exercises with participants if they
are not practiced in the session. If time is short, leaf through the
pages of Mindfulness Handout 5a with participants, just so they see how
many ways there are for practicing observing. If you have time, ask
participants to review some of the ideas and check off in the boxes
practices they think would be useful for them.

V.  

Mindfulness "What" Skills: Describe (Mindfulness Handouts 4--4b) Main
Point: Describing is the second of the three mindfulness "what" skills;
it is putting into words what is observed.

188 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handouts
4--4b

Mindfulness Handout 4: Taking Hold of Your Mind: "What" Skills. This is
the same handout used to teach the skill of observing. Review the
"Describe" section of the handout with participants. Mindfulness Handout
4b: Ideas for Practicing Describing (Optional). As with previous
practice handouts, this list may be overwhelming; if so, it should be
skipped. Most of the describing practice takes place in writing on the
worksheets, but this handout can be used to find specific exercises to
assign in areas where a participant is having trouble describing
accurately. Mindfulness Worksheets 2, 2a, 2b, 2c: Mindfulness Core
Skills Practice. These worksheets provide for practice of wise mind
skills, "what" skills, and "how" skills. For instructions on how to use
them, see Section II of this chapter. Mindfulness Worksheet 4:
Mindfulness "What" Skills: Observing, Describing, Participating;
Mindfulness Worksheet 4a: Observing, Describing, Participating
Checklist; Mindfulness Worksheets 4b: Observing, Describing,
Participating Calendar. These worksheets are the same as those used in
teaching the skill of observing. Choose one to distribute, or let the
participants choose. The focus in teaching describing is on examining
what is written to be sure that it was actually observed, nothing more,
nothing less. The skill of describing permeates all of the worksheets in
DBT. Each asks participants to describe something they have observed. To
coach participants in describing, it is important to review these
worksheets throughout all the modules, not just in the Mindfulness
module.

A. Why Describe? Note to Leaders: You can jump-start teaching this skill
by using exercises to make the teaching points below before you go on to
explain what you mean by the skill of describing.

99

Practice Exercise: Looking right at one of the participants, ask him or
her to tell you what you are thinking. Insist upon it. When the person
cannot, turn to another person and ask him or her to describe what you
are thinking. Keep at it. Insist, saying, "Other people tell you what
you are thinking; why can't you tell me what I am thinking?" When they
cannot, discuss how often we think we know what another person is
thinking. Elicit times when others have insisted they know what
participants are thinking but really do not.

99

Practice Exercise: Turn to one of the participants and say, "I'm really
tired, it's late." Then ask the participant to describe your intent or
motive for saying that. Insist upon it. When a participant cannot do it
or gets it wrong, ask another participant. Discuss how often we think we
know other people's motives. Elicit times when others have insisted they
know participants' minds but really do not. How does that make the
participants feel?

99

Practice Exercise: Ask one of the participants to describe what you are
doing tomorrow. Insist upon it. When this person can't do it, turn to
another person and ask him or her. Act as if you expect participants to
be able to do this. When they cannot, discuss how often we say something
about the future, like "I can't do this" or "I'll never make this," as
if we are describing facts. Elicit times when others have acted as if
they can describe what participants are going to do or not do---as if
they know the facts. Ask, "Which is worse: describing your own future as
facts, or having others describe it for you?"

1.  Describing Distinguishes What Is Observed from What Is Not Observed
    Describing develops the ability to sort out and discriminate
    observations from mental concepts and thoughts about what we
    observe. Confusing mental concepts of events with events themselves
    (e.g., responding to thoughts and concepts as if they are facts) can
    lead to unnecessary emotional distress and confusion.

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 4 • 189

Example: "When you find out that your child stole money, your mind might
immediately describe that as 'My child is going to end up going to
jail,' and that description causes emotional distress." Responding to
thoughts about events as if they were facts can lead to ineffective
actions when the thoughts do not match the actual event. Example:
"Describing your boyfriend's not being dressed yet when you come home
before going out to your birthday dinner as not loving you may ruin your
chances of having a nice dinner together." 2. Describing Allows Feedback
from the Larger Community Those around us can correct or validate our
perceptions and descriptions of events. Example: Think of how children
learn: They say words, and parents and others correct them until they
become very proficient at accurately describing what they observe.
Example: In Zen, the interview with the teacher, called dokusan, gives
students an opportunity to describe their experiences during their
mindfulness practice. An important component of these interviews is the
teacher's helping the students drop concepts and analyses of the world
and instead respond to what is observed. Example: After a party, one
person often describes events to another and asks whether the other
person saw it the same way. This can also be very important when getting
consultation about interpersonal problems at work or in other settings.
3. Describing Observations by Writing Them Down Allows Observation of
the Information Observing, as discussed above, can change behavior in
desired directions. Describing can also, at times, provide a means of
processing the information we have observed. Many people, for example,
find writing diaries very helpful in organizing the events they observe
throughout their days. Research Point: Describing and labeling emotions
regulates emotions.45 Brain imaging research has shown that when
individuals describe their emotional responses, the very act of labeling
the emotions changes brain responding in the direction of emotion
regulation.46

99B. Describing: What to Do 99 1. To Describe Is to Add Words to an
Observation Describing is putting words on experiences. Describing
follows observing; it is labeling what is observed. True describing
involves just sticking with the facts. Example: If I am looking at a
painting, the words "landscape," "green," "yellow," and "brush strokes"
might come to mind. That would be an example of describing. It's simply
applying basic descriptors to what's there. Example: Describing internal
experience, I could say, "I observe a feeling of sadness arising."
Discussion Point: Discuss the difference between describing and
observing. Again, observing is like sensing without words. Describing is
using words or thoughts to label what is observed.

99

Practice Exercise: Draw the image in Figure 7.3 on a board, or move the
features of your face to mimic an emotional expression similar to that
of a person experiencing sadness, anger, or fear. Exaggerate your
expression somewhat. Then ask participants to describe your face. Almost
always, they will use emotional terms ("sad," "angry," "afraid"). Give a
number of people the opportunity

190 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 4

to speak; then point out that no one observed an emotion. They observed
features of your face (e.g., eyebrows together, creases in the forehead,
lips tight together, etc.). Tell them: "A hint about how to describe
things is to imagine that you are instructing someone in how to draw
something, or instructing a designer on how to put together a setting
for a movie."

FIGURE 7.3. A facial expression for giv-

ing participants practice in describing.

99

2.  If It Wasn't Observed, It Can't Be Described No one has ever
    observed the thoughts, intentions, or emotions of another person.

99

a.  No One Can Observe the Thoughts of Others

Although we can observe thoughts that go through our own minds, we can
only infer or guess what another person is thinking. Assumptions of what
others are thinking are just that: assumptions in our own minds.
Example: "You think I'm lying" is not a description of an observation.
"I keep thinking that you think I am lying" is a description. Example:
"You are just thinking up ways to get out of going to the party with me"
is not a description of an observation. "I think \[or believe\] that you
are trying to come up with ways to get out of going to the party with
me" is a description. Tell participants: "Note also that when the
sentence is framed this way, you clarify that you are describing your
own thoughts." Example: "You disapprove" is not a description. "I think
you disapprove" is a description. "When you do X, I feel \[or think\] Y"
is a good way to describe personal reactions to what others do or say.
Example: Saying, "When you raise your eyebrows and purse your lips like
that \[X\], I start thinking you think I'm lying \[Y\]" is also a form
of describing. Say to participants: "Putting it this way shows that you
are describing your own thoughts, which you can observe." Discussion
Point: Discuss how describing a thought as a thought requires one to
notice that it is a thought instead of a fact. Give examples of the
differences between thinking, "You don't want me," and the other
person's actually not wanting you; or thinking, "I am a jerk," and being
a jerk. Get feedback. Get lots of examples. It is crucial that
participants understand this distinction. Discussion Point: Elicit from
participants times when others have misinterpreted their thoughts.
Discuss how this feels. Practice Exercise: Have participants practice
observing thoughts and labeling them as thoughts. Suggest labeling them
into categories (e.g., "thoughts about myself," "thoughts about others,"
etc.). Use the conveyor belt exercise described earlier in this chapter,
but this time as thoughts and feelings come down the belt, have
participants sort them into categories: "For example, you could have one
box for thoughts of any sort, one box for sensations in your body, and
one box for urges to do something (such as to stop describing)."

99

b.  No One Can Observe the Intentions of Others

Speaking about the inferred intentions of others is not describing and
can cause trouble. This is so because (1) it is extremely difficult to
read other people's intentions correctly; and (2) incorrectly
characterizing others' intentions can be exceptionally painful,
particularly when

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 4 • 191

they are socially unacceptable intentions. People often pay attention to
the effects of what other people do and then assume that these effects
were intentional. Example: "I feel manipulated" translates into "You are
manipulating me." Example: "I am feeling hurt" translates into "You did
that to hurt me." Example: "When you tell me that you are going to quit
school if I don't give you a better grade, I feel manipulated" is a more
accurate example of describing.

99

c.  No One Can Observe the Feelings or Emotions of Another Individual

We cannot see the internal experiential components of emotions. We can,
however, observe many components of emotions, such as facial
expressions, postures, verbal expressions of emotions, and
emotion-­linked actions. But expressive behaviors can be misleading. The
expressions associated with various emotions may be very similar, and
because of this, we may often be wrong in our beliefs about the emotions
of others. Example: Many people sound as if they are angry or irritated
when they are very anxious. Example: People often withdraw from others
when they are ashamed, leading others to say they are angry. We may also
often incorrectly assume that someone who does something must have
wanted to do it, when the person may instead have felt coerced or afraid
to say no. The same is true when thinking about things a person does not
do: We may assume, "If you wanted to, you would have done it." Example:
To someone with an alcohol problem who has fallen off the wagon again,
we may say incorrectly, "You just don't want to stay sober." Example: If
we call a person very late at night and he answers the phone, we may
assume incorrectly that "He wants to talk to me." Discussion Point: It
is sometimes easiest to get this point across by asking participants to
think of times people have "described" their thoughts or feelings
incorrectly. Also ask for times when they have "described" others'
emotions, thoughts, or intentions incorrectly. Highlight here the
difference between inferences and descriptions based on observation.
Note to Leaders: Describing is similar to checking the facts, an emotion
regulation skill. See Emotion Regulation Handout 8.

99

d.  No One Has Ever Observed a Concept, a Meaning, a Cause, or a Change
    in Things

Concepts and meanings are the results of our putting together in our
minds a number of observations to make sense out of them. Causes and
changes are inferred from observing the world and making logical
deductions from our observations. Example: Say to participants, "I see
you hit a ball with a cue, and the ball moves; I infer that hitting the
ball caused the movement. But I did not observe the 'cause,' because
this is a concept, not something I can observe." Conclusions and
comparisons such as "more" or "less," or any differences between things,
are also the results of mental calculations that occur in our minds.
Example: We see a person acting very irritable one day, and very calm
the next day. We may say, "I see you are calmer than you were
yesterday." Actually, the statement is based on comparing in our minds
what we observed on one day with what we are observing today, and then
forming a conclusion. But conclusions about things and how they have

192 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handouts
4--4b

changed are concepts, not things we can observe. We can, of course,
observe the conclusions we draw in our own minds.

C. Describing Practice Exercises Like the introductory exercises for
observing practice described earlier, these are very brief exercises
that can be done as you first start teaching describing. You can do one
exercise and then share the experience, or you can do several of these
sequentially and then share. You can weave the instructions and
questions in as you cover the teaching points. These exercises do not
need a setup.  "Observe and then describe the first thought running
through your mind."  "Observe and then describe a picture on the wall or
an object on the table."  "Observe sounds in the room for a few minutes,
and then describe the sounds you heard."  "Observe sensations in your
body, and then describe one or more of your sensations."  "Observe your
thoughts as if they were on a conveyor belt. As they come by, sort them
by

descriptive category into boxes---for instance, planning thoughts, worry
thoughts."

99D. Review of Between-­Session Practice Exercises for Describing
Mindfulness Handout 4b lists a number of ideas for practicing
describing. It is important to go over some of these with the
participants.

VI. Mindfulness "What" Skills: Participate (Mindfulness Handouts 4--4c)
    Main Point: Participating, the third mindfulness "what" skill, is
    entering wholly into an activity. Mindfulness Handout 4: Taking Hold
    of Your Mind: "What" Skills. This is the same handout as used in
    teaching the skills of observing and describing. Review the
    "Participate" section of the handout with participants. Mindfulness
    Handout 4c: Ideas for Practicing Participating. Participants
    frequently have difficulty finding ways to practice participating.
    This is particularly true for socially shy individuals. This handout
    is brief and can be a useful source of ideas. Mindfulness Worksheet
    2, 2a, 2b: Mindfulness Core Skills Practice; Mindfulness Worksheet
    2c: Mindfulness Core Skills Calendar; Mindfulness Worksheet 4:
    Mindfulness "What" Skills: Observing, Describing, Participating;
    Mindfulness Worksheet 4a: Observing, Describing, Participating
    Checklist; Mindfulness Worksheet 4b: Observing, Describing,
    Participating Calendar. These worksheets are the same as those used
    in teaching the skills of observing and describing. Each asks
    participants to describe their participation practice. It is
    important to point out to participants in homework review that
    practicing skills during the week is the homework, not writing their
    descriptions of their homework experience.

99A. Participating: What Is It? Participating is entering wholly and
with awareness into life itself, nonjudgmentally, in the present moment.
Participating is the ultimate goal of mindfulness. Note to Leaders: Do
not feel you have to go over all these points each time. Remember that
you will be reviewing this skill multiple times and can review new
points at later times.

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 4 • 193

B. Why Participate?

99

1.  The Experience of "Flow" Is Associated with Participating The state
    of "flow" is widely considered an optimal experience---­incompatible
    with boredom, and associated with intense enjoyment and a sense of
    control. It is a critical characteristic of "peak experience."47
    Example: Being fully immersed in an activity like skiing or running
    can give one a sense of maximum well-being or a sense of ecstasy.
2.  Participating Is Incompatible with Self-­Consciousness When we
    "become what we are doing," there is a merging of action and
    awareness, so that we are no longer aware of ourselves as separate
    from what we are doing.
3.  Participating Is Incompatible with a Sense of Exclusion When we
    become what we are doing, we are no longer aware of ourselves as
    separate from what we are doing or from our environment. We lose
    awareness of the separation of ourselves and everything else. We
    forget ourselves, and thus forget ourselves as outside or inside.
4.  In Participating, Effort Seems Effortless In a state of flow, there
    is an effortlessness of action. We are absorbed in what we are
    doing, in what is happening. We are aware of a sense of movement,
    speed, and ease. Life and what we are doing become like a dance.
    Even great effort seems effortless.
5.  In Participating, We Are Present to Our Own Lives and the Lives of
    Loved Ones When we become what we are doing, we do not miss our own
    lives. We also do not miss being part of the lives of others.
    Compassion and love, toward ourselves or others, requires our
    presence.
6.  Participating Is a Fundamental Characteristic of Skillful Behavior
    To be experts in any task, we must practice and "overlearn" that
    task. Expertise in any activity requires mindful awareness of the
    task without the distractions of thinking about ourselves, others,
    or even the task. A person who thinks about running while running
    loses the race. In great acting, an actor becomes the role. A great
    dancer becomes the dance. In the Olympics, gymnasts let their bodies
    do the work.

99C. Participating: What to Do Make one or more of these suggestions to
participants:  "Enter into present experiences. Immerse yourself in the
present."  "Throw yourself completely into activities."  "Don't separate
yourself from ongoing events and interactions. Engage completely;
immerse

yourself in the moment; become involved; join with; opt in."  "Become
one with what you are doing."  "Let go of self-­consciousness by acting
opposite to it. Abandon yourself to the moment. Con-

centrate in the moment such that you and what you are doing become
"merged" as if there is only now, only what you are doing."  "Act
intuitively from wise mind, doing just what is needed in each
situation."  "Go with the flow; respond with spontaneity." Example:
Observing and describing are like "stop, look, and listen."
Participating is like walking across the street. Example: Tell clients,
"If it is raining, just play in the puddles like a kid would; enjoy the
rain."

194 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 4

99D. Choosing When to Observe, When to Describe, and When to
Participate 1. Observing and Describing When Something Is New or
Difficult Instruct participants: "Step back from participating in an
activity when you are making errors or don't know how to do something.
When you are participating, you are very aware, but you are not actively
focusing your attention on yourself and analyzing the details of what
you are doing. At times you must step back, slow down, and pay attention
to what you are doing. In particular, when you notice there's a problem
in your life, you need to step back and actively observe and describe
both the problem situation and your responses to it. You can then figure
out what's wrong, learn the skills needed to solve the problem, and
return to participating." Example: "You can only play the piano really
well if you participate in the act of piano playing---that is, if you
play fully. But if you've learned an incorrect technique, you may want
to learn the correct version. To do so, you have to step back and
observe and describe what you're doing wrong, then practice the correct
way over and over until you're skilled. You can then stop observing and
participate again." Discussion Point: We step back from participating to
understand and improve things. Share examples of participating (e.g.,
driving a car): "When you switch cars to one with a different way of
driving, or if you go to England and have to drive on the left side of
the road, you suddenly need to stop, observe, and describe." Elicit
other examples from participants.

2.  Doing the Most Practice of the Most Difficult Skill Tell clients:
    "Practice most the mindfulness skill you find most difficult.
    Different people have trouble with different skills." Give these
    illustrations:

99

Example: Some people participate all the time, and that's their problem.
They don't notice that they're participating in a way that's driving
others crazy. Other people have a lot of trouble with participating,
especially people who are shy, socially anxious, or afraid of failing.
All they do is stay on the sidelines and observe. Still others have
busy, analytical minds. They also stay back from living in the moment,
but instead of just observing, they are analyzing, thinking, and
ruminating about each event as it occurs. Life is like a running
commentary on the universe. Describing is in overdrive. Discussion
Point: It's important to emphasize practicing the skill that's hardest
or most needed for each participant. Discuss with participants which
"what" skill (observing, describing, participating) is their strength
and which is their weakness. The one they find most needed is the one
they should practice the most. Discussion Point: Discuss the
relationships among the three mindfulness skills. Remind participants:
"When you are observing, observe; when you're describing, describe; when
you're participating, participate."

E. Participating Practice Exercises 1. Laugh Club Explain to
participants that laughing can have very positive effects on health and
happiness. Instruct all to start laughing with you and continue until
you stop. Then start laughing, keeping it up for several minutes. (Do
not worry if some refuse; it can be very difficult not to laugh when
others are laughing.) 2. Sound Ball 44 The game here is throwing and
catching sounds. To throw a sound, a person brings his or her hands up,
bends toward another person, and mimics throwing a basketball to the
other person,

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 4 • 195

while at the same time making a sound ("uuuggggg," "zoopitydo,"
"luloulee," or any other nonsense sound). Generally, the sound is
"thrown" in a drawn-out, sing-song voice. The person "catching the song"
brings his or her hands up near the ears, bends back, and imitates the
sound. That person then throws a different sound to someone else, and so
on. Have everyone stand in a circle and practice the concept until
everyone gets how the game is played. Then start the game. The idea is
to throw and catch sounds as fast as everyone can. 3. Rain Dance Ask
everyone to stand in a circle. Instruct everyone that their task is to
do whatever the person on their left is doing, changing what they are
doing when the person to their left changes. Remind them not to look at
you, just focus on what the person on their left is doing. Start by
rubbing your hands up and down together. Once everyone, including the
person on your left, is rubbing hands, you stop rubbing your hands
together and start snapping your fingers. Follow this with the following
moves: patting your thighs; stepping up and down; patting your thighs
again; snapping your fingers again; rubbing hands together again; and
standing still. This is called the "rain dance" because it sounds like
rain in a forest.

99

4.  Improvisation Improvisation can be a lot of fun and involves the
    practice of mindful participating with spontaneity. It also involves
    letting go of being separate from others and throwing oneself into
    the story plot that is unfolding as each person takes a turn. If you
    have an improv teacher who can come to teach a group class, or if
    one of your group leaders has experience with improv (or is willing
    to read up and experiment with it), this can be a very good way to
    increase participants' (and your own) mindful participation skills.

<!-- -->

a.  Improvisation 1

To begin this exercise, have group members sit or stand in a circle.
Instruct participants that the idea of the mindfulness practice is for
each person to become part of the community that is the circle of
persons. The idea is to become part of the circle, advancing the
community's story. The first person begins by saying a word to start a
story. Each person says only one word as the story goes around the
circle. Each person tries to respond as quickly as possible with a word
that advances the story line that has been told by the time it gets to
him or her. The idea is for participants to give up thinking ahead and
let go of clinging to their own story lines when necessary. (Example: "A
. . . boy . . . once . . . fell . . . from . . . the . . . sky . . . ")
b. Improvisation 2

Have participants stand in a circle. Use the same instructions as above,
except instead of having each person say only one word, ask each person
to say a phrase. (Example: "Once upon a time . . . there was a big bear.
. . . The bear was ferocious . . . but the bear was also kind. . . . A
little boy nearby . . . saw the bear . . . ") 5. Row, Row Your Boat in
Rounds Divide the participants into two, three, or four groups, and then
sing "Row, Row, Row Your Boat" in rounds. Here are the words: (a) "Row,
row, row your boat," (b) "Gently down the stream," (c) "Merrily,
merrily, merrily, merrily," (d) "Life is but a dream." While singing,
the participants are to throw themselves into pantomiming the song: (a)
rowing, (b) hands waving slightly up and down to signify moving down the
stream, (c) hands up and head going from side to side, (d) hands
together and head laid down on hands. 6. Dances There are many circle
folk dances that a group can do to music. Two easy dances are as
follows.48

196 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 4

a.  Shepherd's Dance

Standing in a circle, each person puts both arms out to his or her
neighbors, right hand palm up and left hand palm down on the neighbor's
palm. The dance is done to a count of 4, starting with (1) the left foot
out and pointed straight forward, (2) left foot out pointed to the left,
(3) then pointed out to the back, and then (4) back down on the floor
next to the right foot. Then repeat with the right foot: (1) pointed to
the front, (2) to the right, (3) to the back, and (4) back down next to
the left foot. Then step (1) left foot to left, then right foot left and
down next to the left foot; and repeat the same steps three more times
for (2), (3), and (4). Repeat the two sequences over, and keep repeating
until the music stops. This can be done to any music with a four-count
beat. The music we use is the "Shepherd's Dance."49 When we don't have
this music available we have danced while we sang "We Shall Overcome."
b. Invitation Dance

What makes this next dance special is the instruction at the beginning.
Before you start, suggest to participants: "Invite a person in your life
(living or dead) to dance with you." Then, standing in a circle, have
each person put both arms out in front of him or her, palms up in an
inviting and willing posture. The dance involves two steps to the right
and one step to the left: (1) right foot to right, left foot moves right
and down next to right foot; and (2) repeat. Then (3) left foot to left,
then right foot left and down next to the left foot. Tell participants:
"When you are moving to the right, turn the hips and body toward the
right. Then, when you are moving to the left, turn the left foot toward
the left and bring the right foot down next to it, with hips and body
toward the left. Repeat the sequence, and keep repeating until the music
stops." This can be danced to "Red Rain" by Maria Farantouri
(www.youtube. com/watch?v=BVsHTWLYu9g). (Start first step going right
with beat at approximately 48 seconds in.) This dance can also be done
with "Nada Te Turbe," a hymn that originated in the Taizé religious
community in Spain, and that has a much easier beat to dance to. It is a
Christian song in Spanish, but an English translation can be found on
YouTube (www. youtube.com/watch?v=fvfTVxgkWpo). Any other music with a
similar beat would work. I usually teach the dance first with "Nada Te
Turbe" and then go to "Red Rain." Note to Leaders: The idea of "inviting
others to dance with you in your mind" came from my experience with this
dance, where I always invite all the psychiatric unit inpatients in the
world to dance with me. When I suggested this to my graduate students,
they found it extremely moving, with many in tears. So be prepared for
an emotional response to this. Be sure to have participants share their
experiences after the dances.

7.  Walking Have everyone stand in a single-file line and then walk for
    some minutes at the pace of the leader. Instruct participants to
    space themselves approximately an arm's length from each other.
8.  Backward Writing50 Give each participant a piece of paper and a
    pencil. Instruct them to hold the pencil in the nondominant hand,
    and then to write the alphabet backward from Z to A. A variation is
    writing with a different hand: Ask participants to describe their
    favorite vacation or memory by writing it down, using the hand they
    do not normally write with. Then ask them to discuss what they
    observed about their experience.
9.  Origami Bring in a simple set of origami instructions (the
    instructions for making a box are easy enough to follow). Hand out
    the flat pieces of paper, and ask the group to follow your lead with
    the

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 4 • 197

folds. Walk the group through the steps. When the origami creations are
complete, you can discuss a couple of things with participants. First,
you can discuss participants' ability to stay mindful, noticing of being
judgmental or nonjudgmental, and so on. Second, you can discuss how the
piece of paper that started as a square or rectangle has now changed
form (different function, shape, etc.). 10. Changing Seats In our groups
(and treatment teams!), people tend to want to sit in the same place
they always sit. Before beginning this exercise, wait until all group
members are seated and settled. Give a general instruction to observe
and be mindful of reactions to what is to come. Then ask everyone to get
up and move to a seat on the opposite side of the room. Share in terms
of awareness of willfulness, as well as resistance to change. Ask
participants to share observations of what they see/experience
differently in their new seats. 11. Balancing Eggs This is an exercise
learned from a Chinese psychiatrist who visited my clinic. Bring in a
set of raw eggs at room temperature. Clear a space on a table (don't use
a tablecloth). Give each person an egg. Instruct each person to hold the
egg lightly with his or her fingers with the large end on the table, and
then try to balance the egg in such a way that when the participant
takes the fingers away, the egg stays balanced on its end. Continue
until most participants get their eggs balanced. Note to Leaders: It is
important for you to practice this exercise before you try to teach it
to participants. It takes more concentration and mindfulness than you
might be expecting.

12. Calligraphy Calligraphy is an expressive and harmonious form of
    writing. If you have a calligraphy teacher who can come to a group
    to teach a class (or calligraphy books to work from), practicing
    calligraphy can be a wonderful mindfulness practice, as it requires
    mindful concentration on the moment. To work with this in class, you
    will need supplies, such as paper, pens or brushes, and ink.
13. Ikebana Ikebana is a disciplined form of Japanese flower arranging.
    As with calligraphy, doing it well requires mindful concentration
    and presence to the moment. If you have an ikebana teacher who can
    come to a group to teach a class (or ikebana books to work from),
    this is for many a mindfulness practice. You will also need a few
    flowers and leaves or branches.
14. Becoming the Count Instruct participants: "Become the count of your
    breath. Become only 'one' when you count 1, become only 'two' when
    you count 2, and so on."
15. Tai Chi, Qigong, Hatha Yoga, Spiritual Dance There are very many
    forms of mindful movement, including martial arts, yoga, and dance.
    Practiced with concentration and awareness of present movement of
    the body, each is a long-­ standing form of mindfulness practice.
16. Hand Exercise44 Have the group members stand around an oval or
    rectangular table. Each member is instructed to place his or her
    left hand on the table. Then each member places his or her right
    hand under-

198 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 4

neath the left hand of the person to the right. One person starts the
sequence by picking the right hand off the table and quickly placing it
back down. The person to the right quickly lifts up his or her right
hand. The hand movements continue around the circle in sequence, until
someone does a double tap. This move reverses the direction of the hand
movements, and these continue in the reverse direction until someone
does a double tap again. Anyone who picks up a hand too early or too
late removes that one hand and leaves the other hand on the table (if
the other hand was doing what it was supposed to do). The exercise
continues until only a couple of hands are left. 17. Snap, Crackle, and
Pop44 All group members are instructed to say "snap" when they cross
their chests with their left or right arms and point either immediately
left or right; to say "crackle" when they raise their left or right arms
over their heads and point immediately left or right; and to say "pop"
when they point at anyone around the circle (who need not be immediately
left or right). Any one person starts by saying "snap" while
simultaneously pointing either immediately left or right. Whoever
receives the point says "crackle" while simultaneously pointing
immediately left or right. Whoever receives the point says "pop" while
pointing at anyone in the circle. That person then starts with "snap"
and begins the sequence again. Anyone who misspeaks or misgestures,
while trying to maintain a reasonably fast pace, is out of this portion
of the exercise. These people then become "distracters" and stand
outside the circle trying to distract their peers (verbally, without
physical contact). The "snap--­crackle--pop" sequence continues until
there are only two people remaining in the circle. 18. Last Letter,
First Letter 44 To begin this exercise, have group members sit in a
circle. The first person begins by saying a word. Then the individual to
the right must say a word that starts with the last letter of the word
the first person says. (Sample sequence: "bus," "steak," "key,"
"yellow," etc.) Tell participants: "As you continue around the circle,
let go of any distractions. Notice any judgments you may have regarding
your ability to think of a word quickly." Afterward, discuss
observations with the participants.

99 19. Acceptance by the Chair Remind participants that the focus of
participating is to experience one's unity with the universe. With all
participants seated, ask them to close their eyes and then listen to you
saying: "Focus your attention on your body touching the chair you sit
in. . . . Consider how the chair accepts you totally, holds you up,
supports your back, and keeps you from falling down on the floor. . . .
Notice how the chair does not throw you off, saying you are too fat or
too thin or not just right. . . . Notice how accepting the chair is of
you. . . . Focus your attention on your floor holding up the chair. . .
. Consider the kindness of the floor holding you up, keeping your feet
out of the dirt, providing a path for you to get to other things. . . .
Notice the walls enclosing you in a room, so everyone going by does not
hear everything you say. . . . Consider the kindness of the walls. . . .
Notice the ceiling keeping the rain and winter cold and hot summer sun
from beating down on you. . . . Consider the kindness of the ceiling. .
. . Allow yourself to be held by the chair, held by the floor, and held
by the walls and ceiling. . . . Notice the kindness." You might want to
read the following poem by Pat Schneider.51 It highlights the idea that
love and acceptance are all around us. The point here is to let go of
rigid ideas about where we can find love, acceptance, respect, and
generosity.

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handouts 4--4c, 5--5a • 199

The Patience of Ordinary Things\* It is a kind of love, is it not? How
the cup holds the tea, How the chair stands sturdy and foursquare, How
the floor receives the bottoms of shoes Or toes. How soles of feet know
Where they're supposed to be. I've been thinking about the patience Of
ordinary things, how clothes Wait respectfully in closets And soap dries
quietly in the dish, And towels drink the wet From the skin of the back.
And the lovely repetition of stairs. And what is more generous than a
window?

99F. Review of Between-­Session Practice Exercises for Participating
Mindfulness Handout 4c lists a number of ideas for practicing
participating. It is important to go over some of these with
participants.

VII. Mindfulness "How" Skills: Nonjudgmentally (Mindfulness Handouts
     5--5a) Main Point: "How" skills are how we observe, describe, and
     participate. There are three "how" skills: acting nonjudgmentally,
     one-­mindfully, and effectively. Nonjudgmentalness is letting go of
     evaluating and judging reality. Mindfulness Handout 5: Taking Hold
     of Your Mind: "How" Skills. The "how" skills can be taught in one
     session. First give a brief overview of each skill:
     nonjudgmentally, one-­mindfully, and effectively. The key points are
     on the handout. You will need to spend more time on
     nonjudgmentalness the first time through the skills, as the
     concepts are difficult for most participants to grasp. They can
     also be difficult for skills trainers to grasp clearly, so be sure
     to review them carefully before you teach them. Nonjudgmentalness
     is fundamental to all mindfulness teaching and thus must be covered
     until participants understand what the practice is. It is important
     to pay attention to the nuances of this skill. Be sure to conduct
     practice exercises for nonjudgmentalness before moving to the next
     skill. You will have a chance to do further teaching on these
     skills during the review of homework practice. These skills are
     best learned through practice, feedback, and coaching. Mindfulness
     Handout 5a: Ideas for Practicing Nonjudgmentalness. The first five
     practice ideas for nonjudgmentalness are organized in order from
     easiest to hardest. For individuals who are having difficulties
     reducing judgmentalness, these practice exercises can be assigned
     in order, one exercise per week. Mindfulness Worksheets 2, 2a, 2b:
     Mindfulness Core Skills Practice; Mindfulness Worksheet 2c:
     Mindfulness Core Skills Calendar. These worksheets are the same as
     those used in teaching the "what" skills of observing, describing,
     and participating. Each asks participants to describe their
     mindfulness practice. When the worksheets are used for this skill,
     ask participants to practice the skills of observing, describing,
     and participating nonjudgmentally.

\*From Schneider, P. (2005). The patience of ordinary things. In Another
river: New and selected poems. Amherst, MA: Amherst Writers and Artists
Press. Copyright 2005 by Pat Schneider. Reprinted by permission.

200 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 5

Mindfulness Worksheet 5: Mindfulness "How" Skills: Nonjudgmentalness,
One-­Mindfulness, Effectiveness. This worksheet provides space for
recording only two practices of a "how" skill for the week. Mindfulness
Worksheet 5a: Nonjudgmentalness, One-­Mindfulness, Effectiveness
Checklist; Mindfulness Worksheet 5b: Nonjudgmentalness, One-­Mindfulness,
Effectiveness Calendar; Mindfulness Worksheet 5c: Nonjudgmentalness
Calendar. Worksheets 5a and 5b offer different formats for recording how
skills practice. Worksheet 5c is an advanced worksheet for the single
skill of nonjudgmentalness. It is most useful when you are working with
someone on replacing judgmental thoughts, statements, assumptions,
and/or expressions with nonjudgmental ones. This worksheet can also be
very useful for DBT treatment teams in working with typical judgmental
thoughts and assumptions about individual therapists, skills training
leaders, and/or individual therapy/skills training participants.

99A. Two Types of Judgments There are two types of judgments: judgments
that discriminate and judgments that evaluate.

99

1.  Judgments That Discriminate To "discriminate" is to discern or
    analyze whether two things are the same or different, whether
    something meets some type of standard, or whether something fits the
    facts. Some people are paid to compare things to standards or to
    predict consequences---that is, to judge. Teachers give grades;
    grocers put out "good" food or produce and discard "bad" food. The
    word "good" is also used to give children and adults feedback about
    their behavior, so they will know what to keep doing and what to
    stop. Example: An expert jeweler discriminates whether a stone
    purported to be a diamond is really a diamond or not.

99

Example: A U.S. Supreme Court judge discriminates whether an action or
law violates the Constitution. Example: A criminal court judge
discriminates whether an action is against the law or not.

99

Example: Judges in a spelling contest discriminate whether contestants'
spelling is the same as or different from that in the dictionary.
Discriminations are necessary. Discriminating between a swimming pool
with water in it and one without water is essential before a swimmer
dives into it. A person who can discriminate is often called a person
with a "good eye" (e.g., a butcher who can select the piece of meat that
will be most tender when cooked). Discriminating the effects of angry
versus conciliatory behavior toward other people is essential to
building lasting relationships.

99

2.  Judgments That Evaluate To "evaluate" is to judge someone or
    something as good or bad, worthwhile or not, valuable or not.
    Evaluations are something we add to the facts. They are based on
    opinions, personal values, and ideas in our minds. They are not part
    of factual reality.

99

3.  Letting Go of Evaluations, Keeping Discriminations Our aim in
    nonjudgmentalness is to let go of judgments that evaluate as good
    and bad, and to keep judgments that discriminate and see
    consequences. "Good" and "bad," however, are sometimes used as
    shorthand for describing consequences.

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 5 • 201

99

Example: When fish is slimy and old, and won't taste good if it's eaten,
we say it is "bad." If it is rotten and will make us sick, we say it is
"bad." If it is fresh and not contaminated, we say it is "good."
Example: When people hurt others or are destructive, we call them "bad."
When they help others, we call them "good." Example: If it rains on a
parade and people are distressed, we call it "bad." If it is sunny and
people are happy, we call it "good." Example: We say that people have
"good judgment" when they are skilled at seeing the consequences of
their own behaviors or decisions.

99

But it is easy to leave out stating consequences and simply call other
people or events "good" and "bad." When we use "good" and "bad," we
often forget that we are adding something to reality. We forget that we
are predicting consequences. We treat our judgments as facts. People
also treat their judgments of us as facts. Discriminations can easily
become judgmental as well. Discriminations can turn into judgments when
we exaggerate differences between two things. That is, we describe what
we believe to be factual rather than what we observe to be factual.
Discrimination against various people or ideas is based on judging
certain characteristics of the people or certain ideas as "good" or
"bad." When we feel threatened by differences, it is easier to become
judgmental. Example: Black people are inferior to whites. Example: Women
are less worthwhile than men. Example: Homosexuals are evil people. 4.
The Nature of Evaluations

99

Judgments that evaluate as good or bad are in the mind of the observer.
They are not qualities of what the observer is judging. We are
judgmental when we add an evaluation of worth or value to what we have
observed. "Good" and "bad" are never observed. They are qualities put on
things by the person observing. If something can be worthwhile,
valuable, or good in the eyes of one person or group, it can always be
viewed as worthless, of no value, or bad by another person or group. An
important mindfulness skill is not judging things in this manner.

99

Example: Different cultures see different things as good and different
things as bad. Different families have different values. Different
schools have different rules for what is good behavior and what is bad
behavior. The same is true in different companies.

99 \$ Story Point: Imagine that a tiger chases a man for dinner. What
does the man think? "No, no! This

is bad!" If the tiger catches the man and eats him, his family members
might say, "This is terrible! This is bad!!" Or they might say, "He
should not have been out there alone," "They \[the guides on his
safari\] should have protected him and not let him out there by
himself," or the like. What does the tiger say, however? The tiger says,
"Yum, yum."

5.  The Nature of Nonjudgmentalness

99

Nonjudgmentalness is describing reality as "what is," without adding
evaluations of "good" and "bad" or the like to it. Discussion Point:
Discuss the difference between discriminating and being judgmental.
Elicit examples of when people have been judged as good or bad, and when
something they have done has been judged as meeting a standard or not.
For example, a person may get a B on a math test, but may not feel that
the teacher is judging the person or the performance as "bad."

202 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 5

Discussion Point: Discuss when discrimination between characteristics of
people leads to unjust behaviors---as, for example, in discrimination
based on race, gender, sexual orientation, age, or disability. Knowing
that two things are different may be an important discrimination, but it
may be far more important to be an accurate judge of whether the
observed difference makes a difference. Refusing to hire a man without
hands as a pianist does not mean he cannot be hired as a tap dancer, for
instance.

B. Why Be Nonjudgmental? 1. Judgments Can Have Damaging Effects on
Relationships Negative judgmentalness creates conflict and can damage
relationships with people we care for. Very few of us like people who
are judgmental of us. Judging others might get people to change
temporarily, but more often it leads people to avoid or retaliate
against those who judge them badly. 2. Judgments Can Have Negative
Effects on Emotions Adding judgments can have a huge impact on our
emotions. When we add evaluations of "good" and "bad" to people or
things around us, it can have a strong effect on our emotional responses
to the persons or things we are judging. It is then often difficult to
recognize that we have created the judgments, and thus have created the
very events that can dysregulate our emotions.

99 99

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants whether they have more
difficulty judging themselves or judging others. Do they often feel
judged by others? What about judgments they hear around them, or on
radio, TV, or the Internet? (Notice if they are judging those who
judge.)

3.  Changing the Causes of Things Works Better Than Judging Everything
    that has happened in the universe has been caused. Changing the
    causes of things works better than judging things we don't like. In
    other words, saying that things "should" not have happened, or
    saying that they are "bad" and "should" be different, is ineffective
    and does not change things. If we want drunk drivers off the road,
    we need to develop circumstances that cause them to stop drinking
    and driving. We may need stronger laws against drunk driving or more
    police patrols to enforce the law. We may also need to provide
    effective treatment for people with alcohol problems, and to
    persuade other people not to drive with people who are drinking.
    Similarly, if we want people to vote for something we believe in, we
    have to give them a cause to vote our way. We will need to provide
    persuasive arguments that they will believe, or arguments against
    voting against our position. Or if we want a new dog to urinate
    outside instead of on our new carpets, we have to cause a new
    behavior to develop by training the dog.

99

Example: Standing near a table, ask participants to imagine that on the
table is a priceless heirloom---a white lace tablecloth that is 300
years old and has been in your family all that time. Then, holding a
small object in your hand, ask them to imagine that what you are holding
is a glass of fine red wine. As you continue dropping the object on the
table, picking it up, and dropping it again, keep asking, "Should this
glass of red wine spill on the table?" If they or you say yes, then put
your other hand out and catch the object before it hits the table.
Comment that if you don't want the glass of wine to spill on the table,
you have to do something to cause it not to hit the table when it is
dropped. If you or they then comment that the glass of wine would not
drop on the table if you did not open your hands, comment that you would
have to change the neural firing of your brain for that not to happen.
Discussion Point: If making demands does not change reality, why do we
keep making them? The answer: Sometimes expressing our demands really
does change reality. Getting angry, pouting, or crying out about the
unfairness of what someone has done does sometimes make people change,

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 5 • 203

just to get us to stop acting so angry, stop pouting, or stop crying.
Elicit from participants times this has been true for them. What are the
positive consequences of this? What are the negative consequences?
Discuss.

4.  Nonjudgmentalness Is Fundamental to Mindfulness Nonjudgmentalness is
    stressed in all mindfulness-based treatments (including
    MindfulnessBased Cognitive Therapy, Mindfulness-Based Stress
    Reduction, and Mindfulness-Based Relapse Prevention), as well as in
    all treatments that emphasize acceptance of others and of oneself
    and one's own behavior. It is central to all spiritual traditions of
    mindfulness.

99C. Nonjudgmentally: How to Do It 1. Let Go of Good and Bad View and
describe reality as "what is." Let go of evaluating people, their
behavior, and events as good or bad. Example: Let go of saying that a
person or the person's behavior is either "bad" or "good." Example: Let
go of saying that a person or characteristic is "worthless" or
"worthwhile." Example: Let go of calling oneself a "bad person" or a
"good person." The goal here is to take a nonjudgmental stance when
observing, describing, and participating. Judging is any labeling or
evaluating of something as good or bad, as valuable or not, as
worthwhile or worthless. Letting go of such labeling is being
nonjudgmental.

99

2.  Replace Evaluations with Simple Statements of "It Is," or with
    Descriptions of What Is The goal is not to replace "bad" with
    "good," to switch "worthless" for "worthwhile," or to make other
    similar replacements. If you are good, you can always be bad; if you
    are worthwhile, you can always be worthless. Second, changing a
    negative judgment into a positive judgment can obscure the negative
    consequences of an event. For example, saying that a rotten piece of
    meat is good instead of bad could cause someone to eat it and then
    get sick. The idea is to eliminate evaluations entirely. Example:
    When buying a new house, rather than asking, "Is it a good house?",
    we might ask, "Is it a house I will like?" or "Is it a house that
    will last a long time without a lot of repairs?" or "Will I be able
    to sell it for more than I bought it for?" Example: If we call a
    pillow a "good pillow," we are using judgmental language instead of
    saying, "I like this pillow." But does this mean that we cannot say
    "Good job" to someone or use positive words to praise others? No, it
    does not! Positive judgments have far fewer negative consequences
    than do negative judgments. In general, once we reduce our internal
    judgmentalness, we can go back to using the phrase "Good job" and
    the like to mean specific things. For example, if I say, "Good job!"
    to one of my students after hearing her present her handling of a
    very difficult problem in therapy, I would usually mean "You
    responded to that very effectively." Saying, "Good job!" to a
    3-yearold boy who has mastered a new task may mean "I am proud of
    you."

99

3.  Let Go of "Should" Nonjudgmentalness involves letting go of the word
    "should." That is, it means letting go of being persons who define
    how the world should be, and letting go of demands on reality to be
    what we want it to be simply because we want it to be that way. When
    being nonjudgmental, we let go of saying and thinking that things
    should be different than they are. We also let go of saying that we
    ourselves should be different than we are.

204 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 5

99

4.  Replace "Should" with Descriptions of Feelings or Desires
    Nonjudgmentalness involves replacing "should" with describing how we
    feel or what we desire: "I want things to be different," "I want to
    be different than I am," or "I hope you will do this for me." An
    alternative is to replace "should" with "This is caused":
    "Everything is as it should be, given the causes of the universe."

99D. Getting the Concept of Nonjudgmentalness Across 99 1.
Nonjudgmentalness Does Not Mean Approval Being nonjudgmental means that
everything is what it is, and that everything is caused. Rather than
judging something as good or bad, it is more useful to describe the
facts and then try to understand the causes. When things happen that are
destructive, that we do not like, or that do not fit our values, we have
a better chance of stopping or changing them if we try to understand and
then change the causes. Yelling "Bad!" doesn't stop that many things.
Even if we believe that there is an "evil force" or a "devil" in the
world, understanding how it works and why it does what it does when it
acts is a more effective strategy for getting change. Discussion Point:
Participants may believe that by saying something is not "bad," then
they must be saying it is "good," and vice versa. This is true only if
people have the dichotomy "good--bad" in their minds in the first place
and use that to describe things. Elicit from participants all the times
others have applied judgments to them when they felt their doing,
thinking, or feeling was neither good nor bad. Discussion Point: Elicit
from participants times when others have called them "bad" and expected
immediate change, versus times when others have tried to help them
understand the causes of their own behaviors and help them change. What
are the differences?

99

2.  Nonjudgmentalness Does Not Mean Denying Consequences A person who
    stops judging can still observe or predict consequences. It is often
    very important to observe and remember consequences of behaviors and
    events, particularly when consequences are either destructive to
    things we value or highly rewarding to us. And it can be very
    important to communicate these consequences to other people. Saying,
    "This piece of meat is bad," is a shorthand way of saying, "It is
    filled with bacteria and may make you sick if you eat it." Saying,
    "This paint will look really good in my house," means "I will really
    like this color if we use it in my house." Behavior that is
    destructive to others or to ourselves can still be labeled "bad."
    Behavior that is constructive or helpful to others or ourselves can
    still be labeled "good." Judgments are often easier than describing
    consequences of things. People often use judgmental statements as a
    shorthand for consequences all the time, and eventually forget what
    consequences they are referring to. When there are a lot of negative
    consequences to a behavior, it can be easier to use "good" and "bad"
    as shorthand all the time.

99

Example: Saying a person has "good judgment" means that when the person
makes decisions, the outcomes are ordinarily beneficial to the person
and/or to others.

99

Example: All societies judge murder as "bad," because the consequences
of allowing people to kill others whenever they want to harms the
community as a whole. Example: In politics, one side says, "This is
good, good, good," while the other side says, "This is bad, bad, bad."
However, these are only personal evaluations. It is easy to simplify
"good" and "bad" events or behaviors to "good" and "bad" people.
Discussion Point: Discuss the difference between describing and judging.
Judging is labeling something in an evaluative way as "good" or "bad."
Describing is "just the facts." The facts may be that something is
destructive or harmful, constructive or helpful.

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 5 • 205

Discussion Point: Get examples of the difference between judging and
noticing consequences: "Your behavior is terrible," versus "Your
behavior is hurting me" or "What you are doing is going to result in my
getting hurt"; "I am stupid and bad," versus "I missed my appointment
for the third time, and this is going to get me in trouble with my
friends if I don't change."

3.  Nonjudgmentalness Does Not Mean Keeping Quiet about Preferences or
    Desires

99

Asking for change is not judgmental. But preferences and desires often
become judgments on reality as it is.  Saying that things "should"
change (simply on our say-so) is judgmental.  Saying that things
"should" be different puts a demand on reality.  Saying that things
"should" be different implies that there is something wrong or bad about

reality as it is.  Saying that things "should" be different implies that
a consequence that is caused should

somehow not occur. This would, of course, require changing the rules of
the universe.

99

The important point here is this: Who says so? If each person gets to
determine what "should" be at any given moment, we could say that each
person has the power to be "God" of the universe. This would, of course,
be a mighty responsibility, as changing one thing to fit our preferences
on a particular day might have unintended consequences for the entire
universe.

99

Practice Exercise: The following exercise is a good way to make the
point that "shoulds" are indeed based on preferences. Ask a participant
to tell you something that he or she thinks "should" be different than
it is. Then ask, "Why?" Once the person answers, ask why that should be
so. For example, if a person says, "People should love others more," you
would ask, "Why should people love others more?" Then when the person
gives an answer, you ask again, "Why?" For example, if the person then
responds, "Because when people are more loving, there is less war," you
would ask, "And why should there be less war?" For each answer the
person gives, you continue to ask, "And why should that be so?" You do
this even if the person says, "Because it is God's will." In that case,
you ask, "And why should God's will be carried out?" Ultimately, you
will get to a final answer: "Because I want it to be that way." At that
point, you can point out that the person is turning his or her own
wishes into a demand on reality. Even if the person's wish is shared by
most people on earth, even if it would be valued by most people, even if
it is praiseworthy and wonderful, it is still a preference turned into a
command. Alas, reality as a whole does not work by our commands.
Changing reality requires changing causes.

99

Saying that one thing should (or must) occur in order for a second thing
to occur is not judgmental.

99

Example: Saying, "I should turn the car key if I want the car to start,"
"I should study if I want to make good grades," or "I should look for a
job if I want to find a job" is not judgmental. The trick here is to
avoid the implication that "to be a good person, I should turn the car
key, study, or look for a job." It is also important to avoid the
implication that "to be a good person, I should want to start the car,
make good grades, or find a job."

99

4.  Values and Emotional Responses to Events Are Not Themselves
    Judgmental A person can like something without also saying that it
    is good or bad. For example, many people dislike certain foods
    without judging those foods "bad." Values are principles, standards,
    or qualities that are considered desirable and admirable. Things
    that we value are things we believe are important for our welfare or
    the welfare of society at large. Generally, we have an attachment to
    our values (i.e., positive emotional feelings about our values).
    This is why it can be so difficult when someone disagrees with our
    values. We feel threatened. It is easy to view such people as "bad."
    Wanting, desiring, or admiring something, however, is not itself
    judging. Hating or feeling disgusted by something is not necessarily
    judgmental.

206 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handouts
5--5a

Judgments are often shorthand for describing preferences. Example:
Saying that a room looks "bad" or a book was "terrible" is based on a
personal preference in decorating or in reading material (or sometimes
on a personal or community standard for how rooms should look or how
books should be written). Example: Saying, "I should get the job because
I am more experienced," is really just my preference that they give me
the job, or my value that more experienced people should get jobs over
less experienced people. We often forget that such judgments are
shorthand and take them as statements of fact. When values and
preferences are very important, we feel threatened by people who
disagree with us. Being threatened can easily lead to our calling others
"bad." Discussion Point: Judging is often a way of getting out of
responsibility. Explain: "If I don't like what other people are doing
and want them to stop it, I can say, 'That is bad,' and I don't have to
own up to the fact that the real reason they should stop is that I (and
maybe others) don't like it, don't believe in it, or don't want the
consequences." Elicit from participants times when others have tried to
control their behavior by stating judgments as facts. Get examples of
when they have tried that with someone else. Give your own examples
here.

99

5.  Statements of Fact Are Not Judgmental, but Judgments Often Go Along
    with the Statements of Fact Many words have literal meanings that
    are not judgmental, but are almost always used as judgmental
    statements. A statement of fact may be a judgment because the fact
    is simultaneously being judged. For instance, "I am fat" may simply
    be a statement of fact. But if one adds (in thoughts, implication,
    or tone of voice) that being fat is bad or unattractive, then a
    judgment is added. A favorite judgmental word of participants I work
    with is "stupid," as in "I did a stupid thing," "I am stupid," or
    "What a stupid thing to say." Judgments often masquerade as
    statements of fact, so they can be hard to catch. Mental health
    professionals are very good at this sometimes. I once had a
    therapist try to convince me that calling a client "narcissistic"
    (for saying she felt more "real" when she was around me) was not a
    judgmental statement. Discussion Point: Discuss the difference
    between a judgment and a statement of facts. Get examples of
    judgmental statements masquerading as descriptions of facts. Note to
    Leaders: Some participants will believe that there really is an
    absolute "good" and an absolute "bad." You need to be dialectical
    here and search for a synthesis of different points of view. Do not
    expect participants to throw out judgments without a fight! Expect
    participants to bring up Hitler (or, more rarely, sexual abuse) as
    an example of "bad" with a capital B. Thus the next teaching point
    is important: Judgments have their place. Letting go of judging is
    an idea that will grow over time. Don't force it at the beginning.
    You can usually get more mileage out of focusing first on reducing
    self-­judgments. (See Chapter 7 of the main DBT text for a more
    extensive discussion of these points.)

99

6.  Don't Judge Judging Emphasize to participants: "It is important to
    remember that you cannot change judging by judging judging."

E. Nonjudgmentalness Practice Exercises As it is for developing the
"what" skills (observing, describing, participating), practice is
important for developing the "how" skills. You can do one exercise and
then ask participants to share their experiences of it, or you can do
several of these sequentially and then ask them to share.

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handouts 5--5a • 207

1.  Any Participating Exercise When asked to participate in a task such
    as those described for participating (see Section VI, E), most
    people have judgmental thoughts either about themselves or others.
    Using participating exercises to practice nonjudgmentalness works
    best if you first start the exercise and then, after a few minutes,
    stop and ask people whether they are judging themselves. For
    example, are they thinking, "I look silly," or "I'm really stupid, I
    can't do this"? Almost always, when the exercise restarts, people
    find it easier to let go of judgments.
2.  Walking Slowly in a Line Ask participants to walk slowly in a line,
    either around in a circle indoors or single file outdoors. What
    almost always happens in this exercise is that people start judging
    the person in front of them or behind them, or they judge the person
    giving the instructions. As above, it is useful to stop in the
    middle and review who is already judging. Then start again.
3.  Describing Something That Is Disliked Ask each person to describe a
    disliked interaction with someone or a disliked characteristic of
    another person or of herself. Have participants practice describing
    these things without using judgmental words or tone of voice.
4.  Starting Over without Judgments During the session, stop anyone who
    uses a judgmental voice tone or judgmental words. Ask the person to
    start the sentence over and to drop judgmental words and voice tone.
    Do this every session, even when other skills are being taught, and
    individuals will ultimately get in the habit of being nonjudgmental.

F. Nonjudgmentalness Practice Exercises for Between Sessions The
following are individual practice ideas for participants who are having
lots of trouble with judgmental thoughts. The practice exercises are
listed in order from easiest to hardest. Check up on each assignment
each week, and give the next assignment once the current exercise is
mastered. Each suggestion is a daily practice that starts over on the
next day. These exercises are also included in Mindfulness Handout 5a,
along with other ways to practice nonjudgmentalness; it is important to
go over this handout with participants. Ask participants to do the
following:  "Practice observing judgmental thoughts going through the
mind. Remember, do not judge

judging."  "Count up judgmental thoughts each day. You can do this in
one of several ways. You can tear

up pieces of paper, put them in a pocket on one side, and move them to a
pocket on the other side each time you notice a judgment. Or buy a golf
or sports counter, and each time a judgment goes through, push the
counter. Or record judgments on a cell smartphone each time one comes
by. At the end of each day, write down the count, and start over the
next day. Remember that observing and recording behavior can be an
effective way of changing behavior."  "Replace judgmental thoughts,
statements, or assumptions with nonjudgmental ones." (See below for tips
on how to do this.)  "Observe your judgmental facial expressions,
posture, and voice tones (both internal and external). It can sometimes
be helpful to ask caring others to point these out."  "Change judgmental
voice tones and expressions to nonjudgmental expressions (and, if
necessary, apologies)."

G. Tips for Replacing Judgmental Thoughts See also the list under item 3
on Mindfulness Handout 5a.

208 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handouts
5--5b

"Describe the facts of the event or situation---only what is observed
with your senses." (For

example, "The white fish is not fresh and has a fishy smell.") 
"Describe the consequences; keep to the facts." (For example, "This fish
may taste rancid

when cooked.")  "Describe your own feelings in response to the facts.
Emotions are not judgments." (For ex-

ample, "I don't want to serve this fish for dinner.")

VIII. Mindfulness "How" Skills: One-­Mindfully (Mindfulness Handouts
      5--5b) Main Point: Acting one-­mindfully, the second of the three
      mindfulness "how" skills, consists of focusing attention on the
      present moment and bringing the whole person to bear on one task
      or activity. Mindfulness Handout 5: Taking Hold of Your Mind:
      "How" Skills. This is the same handout used in teaching the skill
      of nonjudgmentalness. Review the "One-­Mindfully" section of the
      handout with participants. It is important to note that this skill
      encompasses two ideas: being completely present to the moment, and
      doing one thing at a time. Both have to do with focusing the mind.
      Mindfulness Handout 5b: Ideas for Practicing One-­Mindfulness
      (Optional). It is useful to have this handout available, as it
      gives a number of practice exercises for one-­mindfulness.
      Mindfulness Worksheets 2, 2a, 2b: Mindfulness Core Skills
      Practice; Mindfulness Worksheet 2c: Mindfulness Core Skills
      Calendar; Mindfulness Worksheet 5: Mindfulness "How" Skills:
      Nonjudgmentalness, One-­Mindfulness, Effectiveness; Mindfulness
      Worksheet 5a: Nonjudgmentalness, One-­Mindfulness, Effectiveness
      Checklist; Mindfulness Worksheet 5b: Nonjudgmentalness,
      One-­Mindfulness, Effectiveness Calendar. These worksheets are the
      same as those used in teaching the skills of observing,
      describing, and participating, as well as nonjudgmentalness. Each
      asks participants to describe their mindfulness practice. For this
      skill, ask participants to practice one-­ mindfulness and then
      record their experience.

99A. One-­Mindfully: What Is It? 99 1. One-­Mindfully Means Being
Completely Present in This One Moment One-­mindfulness means, for "just
this moment," being present to our lives and what we are doing. Like
nonjudgmentalness, living one-­mindfully is central to all mindfulness
teaching and contemplative practices. It is central to both
psychological and spiritual traditions of mindfulness. a. The Past Is
Over

The past is over; it does not exist in the present. We may have thoughts
and images of the past. Intense emotions may arise within us when we
think about the past, or when images of the past go through our minds.
We may worry about things we did in the past or things others did. We
may wish that our pasts were different, or wish that we were still in
the past. But it is crucial to recognize that these thoughts, images,
feelings, and wishes are occurring in the present. Trouble starts when,
instead of being aware of thinking about the past, we become lost in the
past or in past thinking and imagining. We stop paying attention to what
is happening right here and now, and instead focus our minds
inadvertently on thoughts and images about the past. Our emotions now
may be identical to the emotions we felt in the past, making us think
that we are actually living in the past or that the past is living in
us.

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 5 • 209

b.  The Future Has Not Come into Existence

The same points can be made with respect to the future. It does not
exist. We may have many thoughts about and plans for the future. Intense
emotions may arise within us when we think about the future. We may have
many worries about the future. Indeed, we may spend many hours and
endless nights worrying about the future. But, as with worries about the
past, it is very important to remember that our worries about the future
are occurring in the present. Just as we can get lost in our thoughts
and images of the past, we can get lost in ruminating about the future.
Living in the present can include planning for the future. It simply
means that when we plan, we plan with awareness that we are doing it
(i.e., we plan as a present-­moment activity).

99

2.  One-­Mindfully Means Doing One Thing at a Time One-­mindfulness also
    means doing one thing at a time, with awareness. It is focusing
    attention on only one activity or thing at a time, bringing the
    whole person to bear on this thing or activity. Research Point: This
    notion is very similar to an effective therapy for chronic worriers
    developed by Thomas Borkovec.52 The essence of the therapy is "Worry
    when you are worrying." It involves setting aside 30 minutes each
    day to worry. Explain: "You go to the same place each day, and try
    to spend the whole time worrying. During the rest of the day, you
    banish worries from your mind, reminding yourself that you will
    attend to that particular worry during your worry time. There is a
    similar technique for fighting insomnia: writing down all the things
    you need to remember for the next day before you go to sleep, so you
    won't have to wake up to think about them."

B. One-­Mindfully: Why Do It?

99

1.  The Pain of the Present Moment Is Enough Pain for Anyone Adding to a
    painful present moment all the pain from the past and all the pain
    from the future is too much. It is too much suffering. Research
    Point: One of the reasons mindfulness is an effective treatment for
    physical pain is that it keeps us in the present. Ruminating about
    suffering in the past, and dreading suffering in the future, both
    increase the pain in the moment. The road to less pain is letting go
    of past and future pain, and suffering only the pain of the present
    moment.

99

2.  Multitasking Is Inefficient There is now quite a bit of research on
    multitasking (doing more than one thing at a time). Contrary to what
    most people believe, trying to juggle two things at once does not
    save time. In fact, it cuts down on the ability to do things
    quickly. 53--59
3.  Life, Relationships, and Beauty Pass You By When life is led in
    mindlessness of the present, the present whizzes by. We do not
    experience many of the things we care about. We do not smell the
    roses.

C. One-­Mindfully: How to Do It

99

1.  Be Present to Your Own Experiences Being present to our own
    experiences is the opposite of avoiding or trying to suppress our
    present experiences. It is allowing ourselves to be aware of our
    current experiences---our feelings, our sensations, our thoughts,
    our movements and actions.

210 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handouts
5--5b

2.  Rivet Yourself to Now The next step is to actively focus and
    maintain awareness of what we are experiencing now, what is
    happening now, and what we are doing now. This involves letting go
    of thoughts of both the past and the future. We spend much of our
    time living in the past (which is over), living in the future (which
    is not here yet), or responding to our concepts and ideas of what
    reality is rather than what it actually is. Thus a primary aim of
    one-­mindfulness is to maintain awareness of the moment we are in.

99

Example: "You are in a meeting and very bored. Rather than sitting and
thinking about all the things you would rather be doing, throw yourself
into listening. Focus on the present. This can stop you from being
miserable." Example: "When you are driving, drive. When you're walking,
walk. When you are eating, eat."

99

3.  Do Only One Thing at a Time Doing only one thing at a time is the
    opposite of how people usually like to operate. Most of us think
    that if we do several things at once, we will accomplish more; this
    is not true. The trick is to have our minds completely on what we
    are doing at the moment. This refers to both mental and physical
    activities.

99

Example: "You have five dishes to wash, but you can only wash one at a
time." However, this does not mean that we cannot switch from one thing
to another and back. Focusing on one thing in the moment does not mean
that we cannot do complex tasks requiring many sequential activities.
But it does mean that whatever we do, we should attend fully to it. Thus
the essence of the idea is acting with undivided attention. The
opposites are mindlessness (i.e., automatic behaviors without awareness)
and distracted behavior (i.e., doing one thing while thinking about or
attending to another). Discussion Point: Discuss an example of doing two
things at once, such as sitting in skills training and thinking about
the past or worrying about the future. Explain: "A mindfulness
perspective would suggest that if you are going to think about the past,
you should devote your full attention to it. If you are going to worry
about the future, devote your full attention to it. If you are going to
attend class, devote your full attention to it." Get participants to
come up with other examples (e.g., watching TV or reading while eating
dinner).

D. One-­Mindfulness Practice Exercises Mindfulness Handout 5b lists a
number of ideas for practicing being one-­mindful. It is important to go
over some of these with participants.

IX. Mindfulness "How" Skills: Effectively (Mindfulness Handouts 5--5c)
    Main Point: Acting effectively, the third of the three mindfulness
    "how" skills, is doing what works and using skillful means.
    Mindfulness Handout 5: Taking Hold of Your Mind: "How" Skills. This
    is the same handout used in teaching the skills of acting
    nonjudgmentally and one-­mindfully. Review the "Effectively" section
    of the handout with participants. The key point here is that to
    reach one's goals, to reduce suffering, and to increase happiness,
    using effective means is critical. Willfulness (the opposite of the
    skill of willingness; see Distress Tolerance Handout 13:
    Willingness) and pride, however, often get in the way. The best way
    to teach this skill is to find a way to appeal to each participant's
    ultimate self-­interest.

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handouts 5--5b • 211 Mindfulness
Handout 5c: Ideas for Practicing Effectiveness. Practicing effectiveness
can be difficult if you do not have a situation where effectiveness is
needed. This handout gives some ideas on how to practice. Mindfulness
Worksheets 2, 2a, 2b: Mindfulness Core Skills Practice; Mindfulness
Worksheet 2c: Mindfulness Core Skills Calendar; Mindfulness Worksheet 5:
Mindfulness "How" Skills: Nonjudgmentalness, One-­Mindfulness,
Effectiveness; Mindfulness Worksheet 5a: Nonjudgmentalness,
One-­Mindfulness, Effectiveness Checklist; Mindfulness Worksheet 5b:
Nonjudgmentalness, One-­Mindfulness, Effectiveness Calendar. These
worksheets are the same as those used in teaching the "what" skills, as
well as nonjudgmentalness and one-­mindfulness. Each asks participants to
describe their mindfulness practice. For this skill, ask participants to
practice the skills of effectiveness. To do this, participants need to
be vigilant for situations where they are tempted to do something
dysfunctional or ineffective. These are the situations where
effectiveness is needed. Also encourage participants to write down times
when they easily or even automatically act in an effective manner.

99A. Effectively: What Is It? Acting effectively is doing what works to
achieve our goals. The goal here is to focus on doing what works, rather
than what is "right" versus "wrong" or "fair" versus "unfair."
Generally, it is the opposite of "cutting off your nose to spite your
face." Acting effectively means using skillful means to achieve our
goals.

99B. Why Act Effectively? Without the skill to use effective means, it
is difficult to reach our goals, reduce suffering, or increase
happiness. Being right or proving a point may feel good for the moment,
but in the long term, getting what we want in life is more satisfying.
Example: "Yelling at the reservation clerk who says you do not have a
reservation for a hotel room (when you know you called and made one) may
make you feel good in the moment, but actually getting a hotel room
(which may require skillful means) would be likely to make you feel even
better."

C. Effectively: How to Do It 1. Know the Goal or Objective Doing what
works (what is effective) requires, first, knowing what our goal or
objective in a particular situation is.

99

Discussion Point: Not knowing what we want makes effectiveness hard. It
can be very hard to know what we want when emotions get in the way. We
can mistake being afraid of something with not wanting something, being
angry at someone with not wanting to be close to the person, being
ashamed of our own actions with not wanting to be around certain people.
Discuss with participants when confusion over goals and objectives
interferes with effectiveness. Elicit examples of when emotions have
interfered.

2.  Know and React to the Actual Situation Being effective requires
    knowing and reacting to the actual situation, not to what we think
    the situation should be. Example: Signs on the freeway tell people
    to drive in the right lane except to pass. People who tailgate
    slower drivers in the left lane, switch their lights off and on, or
    keep honking (instead of just passing from the right lane) are
    acting as if all people are willing to follow highway directions.
    All are not!

212 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 5

Example: A person wants to get a raise at work, but thinks the
supervisor should know without being told that a raise is deserved, and
so the person refuses to ask for it. In this case, the person is putting
being right over achieving the goal of getting a raise. Discussion
Point: Get examples of participants' "cutting off their noses" to make a
point. Share examples of your own here as well---the more outrageous or
humorous, the better.

3.  Know What Will and Won't Work to Achieve Goals Effectiveness
    requires knowing what will and what won't work to achieve our goals.
    Much of the time, we know what is and is not effective if we are
    calm and can think about our options. At other times, however, being
    effective means asking for help or asking for instructions in what
    to do. To be more effective, some participants may need to improve
    their problem-­solving skills (see Emotion Regulation Handout 12). An
    openness to experimenting, to staying aware of the consequences of
    what we do, and sufficient humility to learn from our mistakes are
    essential to effectiveness. Example: "If you want people to remember
    your birthday, you can call to remind them beforehand, rather than
    letting them forget." Example: "When the goal is to make someone
    happy, it is more effective to do what you know will make them happy
    than to take a stand and be 'right.' "

99 99

Example: "When things are going wrong at the airport, it is more
effective to talk calmly to the people who can help you than to yell at
them. Yelling and making a scene can cause the reservations person to
put you on a flight far in the future!" 4. "Play by the Rules" When
Necessary Effectiveness also involves "playing by the rules" when this
is needed to achieve a goal. Playing by the rules is most important in
situations where we are in a low-power position and what we want is
important. Example: Being an involuntary patient in a state hospital is
a situation in which playing by the rules is vitally necessary. Staff
members make the rules about when a patient gets privileges. Right or
wrong, they have the power, not the patients. Example: Other examples of
situations that call for playing by the rules include being a prisoner
in jail, an applicant for a bank loan, or a person going through
security at an airport. In each situation, other people make the rules
and can enforce them. 5. Be Savvy about People Effectiveness often means
being "political" or savvy about people. It is taking people where they
are (rather than where they "should" be) and going from there. Different
people are like different cultures. What works in one culture may not
work in another. Focusing on what's "right" instead of what works is
like trying to impose our own culture on another country when visiting.
Discussion Point: Get examples of when participants have imposed their
own cultures or views on others. Also, when have others imposed in this
way on participants?

6.  Sacrifice a Principle to Achieve a Goal When Necessary Effectiveness
    sometimes requires sacrificing principles to achieve a goal. In
    extreme situations (e.g., a concentration camp, where not playing by
    the rules would mean death), most people are willing to sacrifice
    their principles even if the rules are not fair. In real life, this
    is sometimes very hard. It can be especially hard just when it is
    needed most, with people in authority positions.

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handouts 5--5c, 6 • 213

Discussion Point: Discuss with participants which "how" skill (taking a
nonjudgmental stance, focusing on one thing in the moment, being
effective) is their strength and which is their weakness. The one they
have most difficulty with is the one to practice the most.

99D. Effectiveness Practice Exercises Mindfulness Handout 5c lists a
number of ideas for practicing effectiveness. It is important to go over
some of these with participants.

X.  

Summary of the Module At the end of the Mindfulness module, summarize
states of mind, the mindfulness "what" skills (observing, describing,
participating), and the mindfulness "how" skills (taking a nonjudgmental
stance, focusing on one thing in the moment, being effective). If you
have used supplemental skills (see Sections XI--XVI, below), they should
also be summarized. Remind participants that they need to continue
practicing mindfulness skills throughout all of the skills training
modules (and beyond).

XI. Overview: Other Perspectives on Mindfulness (Mindfulness Handout 6)
    Main Point: There are many possible approaches to mindfulness, and
    many possible outcomes that can be obtained from the practice of
    mindfulness. This set of handouts can be taught in their entirety,
    or you can select specific skills to fit the individuals you are
    working with. Mindfulness Handout 7a highlights the role of
    spirituality in mindfulness practices for both leaders and
    participants. The handout is meant to promote discussion; there is
    no worksheet for it. Mindfulness Handout 6: Overview: Other
    Perspectives on Mindfulness Skills. Review this handout quickly
    unless you plan on skipping the handouts associated with each topic
    (Mindfulness Handouts 7--10). Worksheet: There is no worksheet
    associated with this handout.

99A. Mindfulness: A Spiritual Perspective Mindfulness as a psychological
practice is a derivative of mindfulness as a spiritual practice.

B. Skillful Means: Balancing Doing Mind and Being Mind "Skillful means"
is a set of skills for balancing being present to the moment with doing
what is needed in the moment, and for working toward goals while at the
same time letting go of attachment to achieving goals.

C. Wise Mind: Walking the Middle Path "Walking the middle path" is a set
of skills highlighting the importance of finding the synthesis between
opposites, rather than condemning one side or the other. Note to
Leaders: The content of these mindfulness skills from another
perspective and of Mindfulness Handouts 6--10 can be woven into your
teaching of the core mindfulness skills (Mindfulness Handouts 1--5) or
can be covered separately. These skills can be taught in any order. The
content easiest to integrate into core mindfulness skills is that of
Mindfulness Handout 7. It does not necessarily add new content to
Mindfulness Handout 1; it simply extends the list of goals. These goals,
taken together, can be presented as psychological goals and spiritual
goals. The concepts of being mind and doing mind are prominent in

214 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 7

Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction therapy and similar treatments. If
you are treating individuals who have family members in adolescent DBT,
then teaching Mindfulness Handout 10 makes sense, since walking the
middle path (finding the synthesis between opposites) is an important
skill in adolescent DBT.

XII. Mindfulness Practice: A Spiritual Perspective (Mindfulness
     Handout 7) Main Point: Mindfulness can be practiced for spiritual,
     psychological, medical, and/or humanistic reasons. The practice of
     mindfulness is very old, arising initially from spiritual practices
     across many cultures and spiritual practices. Its modern-day
     presence is found in the contemplative prayer and meditation
     practices common across the wide array of spiritualities in our
     times. Mindfulness Handout 7: Goals of Mindfulness Practice: A
     Spiritual Perspective (Optional). This is an optional handout.
     Depending on the group you are teaching, it can be added after
     Handout 1: Goals of Mindfulness Practice (and reviewed very
     quickly), or it can be taught after participants have been through
     mindfulness teaching one or more times. If added to Handout 1,
     mention the list of outcomes here as outcomes many mindfulness
     practitioners speak about. Pay just enough attention so that
     participants have a good idea of what many believe the benefits of
     mindfulness practice may be, particularly for spiritual
     individuals. Do not let this handout interfere with teaching the
     "what" and "how" mindfulness skills. Worksheet: There is not a new
     worksheet for this handout. Assign Mindfulness Worksheet 1 if
     needed. Note to Leaders: Be sure to read my rationale for inclusion
     of a spiritual perspective at the beginning of this chapter. You do
     not need to be spiritual yourself to teach this skill. However, I
     suggest not teaching it if none of your skills training
     participants are spiritual or have an interest in spirituality.
     Find out by asking. Your task in teaching this skill is to assist
     participants in grounding their mindfulness practice firmly within
     their own spiritual practices. Remember not to confuse spirituality
     with religion. See discussion at the beginning of the chapter on
     this topic.

99A. The Goals of Mindfulness Practice from a Spiritual Perspective  To
experience ultimate reality---the transcendence of boundaries and the
ground of our being,

which leads to an awareness of our intimate wholeness with the entire
universe.  To grow in wisdom of the heart and of action.  To experience
freedom by letting go of attachments.  To increase love and compassion
toward ourselves and others.

Each of these goals is discussed in detail below.

99

Discussion Point: Ask participants to read Mindfulness Handout 7 and
check off on the handout each goal that is important to themselves.
Discuss participants' goals. Use the teaching notes below to address
questions that arise about goals or to make teaching points.

B. Experience Ultimate Reality 1. Our Minds Are Spacious Our minds are
spacious; that is, there is no boundary enclosing our minds.  Spacious
mind is the opposite of rigidity and inflexibility. Flexibility60 is one
of the hall-

marks of emotional well-being.61--66 Emotion regulation, problem
solving, and coping with stressful life events require a flexible
repertoire of responses that a person can use as the situation requires.

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 7 • 215  Spacious mind is
empty mind. This type of emptiness is experienced as liberating and

joyful rather than painful and constricted. "Empty" in this sense does
not mean being empty-­headed. It is an acceptance of the fact that
everything in the universe is in a state of continual change. Thus
nothing is permanent (although we experience much in the universe as
permanent). Even the self is continuously changing. "Emptiness" also
means being empty of "self" or "ego." It is the process of emptying
ourselves of attachments and of letting go of clinging. Note to Leaders:
"Emptiness" is a concept that can be difficult to understand. It is best
left to more advanced teaching, after you have worked with wise mind for
some time. Although the term "emptiness" is used extensively by Buddhist
writers, particularly in Zen, it is also an important concept in
Christian and other religious writings.

Practice Exercise: Instruct participants to close their eyes, and then
to examine what is going on in their minds and ask themselves, "Where
are the boundaries of my mind?" or "Can I see the walls around my mind?"
Afterward, ask them to share and discuss observations. Practice
Exercise: Following the exercise above, ask participants to walk around
the room for a few steps and then stop. Ask, "Where did walking go?"
Discuss how thinking, desiring, wanting, and so forth are behaviors of
the mind (and of the body also). "Where does walking go? Where do my
thoughts, desires, urges, and so on go?" These questions have the same
answer.  In spacious mind, everything comes and goes. If we watch our
minds for a while, we can

see this. What was in our minds 5 seconds, 5 minutes, or a year ago is
not in our minds now. Thoughts, feelings, and desires may come into our
minds over and over and over. But they also go out of our minds over and
over and over. Practice Exercise: Instruct participants to close their
eyes and then to observe their minds for a few minutes. Ask them to
observe thoughts coming and going, feelings and sensations coming and
going. Then ask: "Where do thoughts go? Where are thoughts coming from?"
Spacious mind is still. If we practice mindfulness long enough,
uncluttered by our con-

stant inner chatter, ruminations, thoughts, and images, we will
gradually develop a clarity within which our thoughts and emotions come
and go. We will experience the stillness of our minds.  Under high
emotional arousal, our minds become constricted and inflexible. Feeling
constricted and mentally inflexible can be extremely painful and scary.
We cannot change this experience through willpower or by mental command.
Trying to suppress, deny, or avoid this experience makes it worse. In
wise mind, all of us are sometimes constricted and inflexible. Because
everything in our mind comes and goes, this sense of being constricted
and inflexible also comes and goes.

99C. We Are Each Intimately Connected with the Entire Universe We cannot
be separate from the universe even if we try to be. We are connected to
even the farthest star in the universe. Mindfulness is a path to
experiencing this connection. Everything in the universe is
interconnected. This is a major finding of modern physics. It is also a
tenet of all major religions and spiritual paths. Given this reality,
each of us is also interconnected with the entire universe.

99 99

 There are no outsiders in the universe. If everything is
interconnected, then it logically fol-

lows that the universe is one with many parts. Therefore, although we
can feel like outsiders and we can be treated as outsiders, in reality
there are no outsiders and no insiders.  We are connected even if we
don't experience the connection. The floor touches the door to outside;
the door touches the porch or sidewalk; the sidewalk touches the street;
the street

216 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 7

goes so many places; and so on and so on. If we close our eyes and do
not experience something right in front of us, does that mean it has
disappeared from the universe and is no longer connected to us? Opening
our eyes, we see that it is still there.  It is very easy to experience
ourselves as isolated, alone, and unconnected when troubles arise. If we
have not experienced being loved or cherished by others, it can be
extremely difficult to experience our connections to others. This is
particularly true if others have not stayed connected to us. We lose the
reality that we are intimately connected to the entire universe.  The
experience of being unconnected, of being an outsider, or of not fitting
in can be extremely painful. Fear and shame are common emotions here. We
cannot change this experience at will; trying to suppress it is also not
effective. Mindfulness practices of mindfulness of current emotions and
mindfulness of current thoughts can be very helpful here.  The absence
of a sense of connection can also be due to beliefs that life must go
the way we want it to if we are to be content. Practicing radical
acceptance and willingness (distress tolerance skills) can be very
helpful here.  All of us sometimes feel alone and unconnected. Some
people, however, feel unconnected, like outsiders, and alone almost all
the time. They may be physically alone and treated as outsiders much of
the time. In contrast to others who have been chosen as life partners or
best friends, they may be unchosen. They may have no family or friends
to love and cherish them. Thus their experience may fit the facts of
their everyday experience, and these facts should not be denied or
downplayed. However, it is still true that in reality no one is
unconnected, outside, or alone in the universe.  Some people are quite
content being alone and feeling like outsiders, and don't care if they
fit in or not. (Of course, these people as well are really not alone and
are not outsiders.) More than likely, this feeling of contentment is due
to these people's having not been judged and not judging themselves as
inadequate or unacceptable for being the way they are.  The absence of a
sense of connection may be due to inadequate awareness of the present
moment. Sometimes people are very connected but just don't experience or
see it. This may be due to being too busy to notice (i.e., "not taking
time to smell the flowers") or to having a habit of inattentiveness to
everyday life.  Finding connection and building a sense of inclusion
take much more work for some people than for others. Say to
participants: "The fact that you are not an outsider in the universe
does not mean that you are not an outsider in the community that you are
in or that you want to be in. You may not be alone in the universe, but
you may be alone in your home. The universe as a whole may love and
cherish you, but there may be no person who loves and cherishes you
enough to call you on the phone or want to live with you."  The absence
of a sense of connection may be due to having a very rigid idea of what
it means to be connected, loved, or included. This tendency is quite
common in situations where one person makes up the rules, so to speak,
for what counts as being connected, loved, or included. Example: A
person may be loved by a very forgetful person, but feel unloved if the
person forgets his or her birthday. Example: A person may be loved by a
significant other with very different taste. This person may feel
misunderstood or unloved upon receiving a gift from the significant
other that he or she does not like. Example: A person may have
expectations about how a friend should express affection. This person
may expect to be always picked up from the airport, or to be able to
borrow money indefinitely, and may feel rejected when these events don't
happen.

99

Discussion Point: Ask participants about their own feelings of being
unconnected, being outsiders, being alone, or not fitting in. Ask each
person whether such experiences set off emotions of shame or of fear or
other emotions. Ask what is most likely: that these feelings of being
unconnected are due primarily to (1) life experiences of being judged;
(2) life experiences of being physi-

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 7 • 217

cally alone, not included, or ignored much of the time; (3) being
unaware of present-­moment connections; and/or (4) something else
entirely. Note to Leaders: It may be critical to help participants
develop a sense of lovability, inherent acceptability, and connection.
The goal here is to transform their experience of being outsiders to an
experience of insider status. Although many are treated as outsiders by
their families or communities, no one really is an outsider---since if
we are actually "one," there are no outsiders and no insiders. It can
also be very important to connect participants' own spiritual or
religious beliefs to this view of our connection to the universe.
Quotations that might help follow.

Many authors have written about our intimate connection to the entire
universe. Here are just a few examples: Lord Byron, the poet, wrote:
"Are not the mountains, waves and skies a part of me and of my soul, as
I of them?" (p. 530).67 Henry Miller, the novelist, wrote: "We invent
nothing, truly. We borrow and re-­create. We uncover and discover. All
has been given, as the mystics say. We have only to open our eyes and
hearts, to become one with that which is" (p. 57).68 Charlene Spretnak,
a writer on women and spirituality, has noted: "There are sacred moments
in life when we experience in rational and very direct ways that
separation, the boundary between ourselves and other people and between
ourselves and Nature, is illusion. Oneness is reality. We can experience
that stasis is illusory and that reality is continual flux and change on
very subtle and also on gross levels of perception."69

99D. Grow in Wisdom When we are in wise mind, we gain access to our
inner wisdom. The practice of mindfulness over time leads to increases
in wisdom and wise action. 1. Wisdom Is Practical Wisdom is practical;
that is, it is concretely beneficial to life and well-being. Wise mind
is a way to access good judgment and skillful means. Good judgment is
figuring out what is needed in any given moment, and skillful means is
doing what is needed. 2. A Wise Person Is Balanced A mark of wise mind
practice is a growing sense of greater integration. In the stillness of
wise mind, we can find harmony, balance, and quieting of extreme
emotions. 3. Wisdom Involves Both the Heart and the Brain In wise mind,
there is wisdom of the heart as well as of the brain. Thus, in wise
mind, we access our capacity for intuitive knowing, and develop
sensitivity and a capacity to "read hearts." In wise mind, we have depth
of understanding, in addition to good judgment and application of
existing knowledge (as noted above).

99E. Experience Freedom Mindfulness practice enables us to free
ourselves from the demands of our own desires, cravings, and intense
emotions. 1. Freedom Is the Ability to Want Something We Lack and to
Find a Life Worth Living without It We need the ability to have a tragic
and sad past, or a present that is not what we would want, and still
have a sense of liberation and freedom. The idea is not to suppress
feeling, wishes, and desires, but to live with them as friends.

218 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handouts
7--7a

2.  The Drive to Stop Pain No Matter What Is the Opposite of Freedom
    Much of life involves managing situations that are painful but
    cannot be solved immediately. Although it is easy to think that we
    can just get rid of pain through positive thinking, ignoring pain,
    or suppressing pain, the fact is that these strategies often do not
    work. Our use of these strategies is usually based on the delusion
    that we cannot stand the pain. We feel compelled to do something to
    stop the pain. We are slaves to our incessant urges to escape from
    the present moment.
3.  When We Are Free, We Have a Sense of Liberation and Absence of
    Constraints We are free to be who and what we are. We are free to
    change. Freedom is the falling away of desperation and limits.

99F. Increase Love and Compassion Finally, mindfulness practice enables
us to increase love and compassion toward ourselves and others.
Compassion is one of the hallmarks of being in wise mind. It is
difficult to find any discussion of wise mind or of experiencing reality
as it is, of religious or spiritual awakening, or of wisdom or
enlightenment without a corresponding discussion of love and
compassion. 1. Wise Mind Lets Go of Judgmental Thinking Tell
participants: "As you settle more often in wise mind, you will find that
you become more tolerant and more likely to radically accept yourself
and others, as well as less likely to judge, criticize, and reject
yourself and others." 2. Wise Mind Is Loving The outcome of wise mind is
a greater capacity for love---love of others and love of oneself. 3.
Wise Mind Is Compassionate Say to participants: "Compassion makes much
more sense once you realize that you and the universe are one. Cutting
off your arm is cutting off your friend's or your neighbor's arm.
Hurting others is hurting yourself." Discussion Point: Elicit
participants' reactions to these points and discuss. The last point in
particular can be difficult for participants to understand; the
interconnectedness of the entire universe is a conceptual idea but not
an experienced reality for many.

XIII. Wise Mind: A Spiritual Perspective (Mindfulness Handout 7a) Main
      Point: Spiritual words and concepts are often universal beliefs
      that, depending on one's own religion, are stated in vastly
      different words. It is important to see the commonalities across
      various practices and cultures. It is also important to be able to
      select the part of a practice that conforms to one's own beliefs
      and practices. Mindfulness Handout 7a: Wise Mind from a Spiritual
      Perspective (Optional). Depending on the group you are teaching,
      this optional handout can be added after Mindfulness Handout 8:
      Practicing Loving Kindness to Increase Love and Compassion (and
      reviewed very quickly), or it can be brought out if the topics
      covered come up in a discussion of mindfulness at some other
      point. Similar to Mindfulness Handout 7, this handout can be
      useful for spiritual and/or religious participants and their
      families, particularly those who are uncomfortable with
      mindfulness or the term "mindfulness" due to its association with
      Buddhism. Worksheet: There is no worksheet for this handout.

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 7a • 219

A. Wise Mind as Contemplative Practice In the widest meaning, the
experience of wise mind can be viewed as a contemplative experience.
Contemplative practices are associated with all of the major religions,
as well as with naturalist/ humanistic contemplative practices.

99

1.  Wise Mind as Unity with the Sacred The experience of wise mind, from
    these perspectives, is the experience of unity with the sacred when
    entered into wholly and completely. "The sacred" here is referred to
    in various traditions as "the divine within," God, the Great Spirit,
    Yahweh, Brahma, Allah, Parvardigar, "ultimate reality," "the
    totality," "the source," "our essential nature," "no self,"
    "emptiness," "the core of our being," "the ground of being," "our
    true self," and countless other names.
2.  Wise Mind Experiences as Spiritual Experiences Such experiences are
    often termed "spiritual" or "enlightenment" experiences. "The well
    within" as a metaphor for wise mind (see Figure 7.1) intentionally
    opens into an underground ocean so as to accommodate these beliefs.

99B. Wise Mind as "Going Home" Wise mind can be considered "going home"
or "going to our true home." When we are out of wise mind, we can feel
lost. The loneliness we feel is homesickness. 1. Wise Mind as True Self
Wise mind is sometimes considered to be our true self. From this
perspective, we are each one with ultimate reality. Just as wise mind is
our true home, it is our true self as well. 2. Seven Characteristics of
Spiritual Experiences Seven characteristics of deep spiritual or
mystical experiences are as follows:  Experiential. The experience
involves direct, unmediated experience of reality.  Unitary or nondual.
The experience is characterized by awareness of nonduality and non-

separation---of no distance between oneself, the ultimate reality, and
all other beings.  Ineffable or nonconceptual. What is experienced is
ungraspable and incomprehensible. It

can only be communicated with metaphors. It is compared with going into
the "cloud of unknowing."10, 29, 70  Giving certitude. In the midst of
the experience, certainty is total, undeniable, and clear.  Practical.
The experience is concretely beneficial to one's life and well-being. 
Integrative. The experience is psychologically integrative, establishing
harmony of love, compassion, mercy, kindness, and quieting of extreme
emotions.  Sapiential. The experience leads to wisdom, enhanced capacity
for intuitive knowledge, the capacity to "read hearts," and the ability
to discern the motives of others.71

99

3.  "The Dark Night of the Soul" The inability to access wise mind can
    be experienced as "the dark night of the soul," described by
    St. John of the Cross in his book of the same name.72 The dark night
    of the soul is a metaphor for a depth of loneliness and desolation.

<!-- -->

XIV. Practicing Loving Kindness (Mindfulness Handout 8) Main Point:
     Anger, hate, hostility, and ill will toward ourselves and others
     can be very painful. The practice of loving kindness is a form of
     meditation that involves reciting specific positive words and
     phrases repeatedly, to cultivate compassion and loving feelings as
     an antidote to negativity.

220 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 8

Mindfulness Handout 8: Practicing Loving Kindness to Increase Love and
Compassion (Optional). Although this is an optional handout, it can be
very useful in a number of ways. As presented here, loving kindness is a
meditation aimed at increasing love and compassion for others. As such,
it would also fit well with a number of skills in the Interpersonal
Effectiveness module (e.g., see Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 6).
It can also be used as an an opposite action for anger and hate as well
as disgust aimed at self and others (see Emotion Regulation Handout 10).
Because loving kindness involves some imagery, it can also be used as a
skill to improve the moment (see Distress Tolerance Handout 9).
Mindfulness Worksheet 6: Loving Kindness. Review this worksheet with
participants. The worksheet gives participants an option to describe two
incidents of practicing loving kindness. Remind them that they can
describe other times on the back of the page. Instruct participants to
check off which individual(s) they send loving kindness to. If they send
loving kindness to more than one person while practicing, then they
should check more than one person for the practice episode. Remind them
to practice on people, including themselves, toward whom they want to
increase or continue a sense of loving kindness. The series of warm
wishes the participant used should be listed next. Remind participants
that they can use the script in Mindfulness Handout 8, or they can make
up their own. Review also how to rate loving kindness practice. Note
that the ratings are for how effective the participants' practice was in
increasing love, compassion, and connection, as well as increasing
wisdom and a sense of happiness and personal validity.

A. Loving Kindness: What Is It?

99

1.  A Practice of Mentally Sending Warm Wishes Say to participants:
    "Loving kindness is the practice of mentally sending warm wishes to
    yourself and to others. Loving kindness is very similar to praying
    for people, except that rather than praying for their welfare, you
    are wishing for their welfare. Warm wishes can be sent to yourself,
    to others you know, to people you don't know, and to all beings
    everywhere. The wishes can be for any positive outcome, such as for
    happiness, safety, health, contentment, love, and so on."
2.  An Ancient Spiritual Meditation Practice Loving kindness is an
    ancient spiritual meditation practice developed originally as a
    Buddhist practice (metta meditation), but it is compatible with all
    spiritual traditions. The aim of the practice is to increase love
    and compassion for self and others.
3.  A Form of Visualization Tell participants: "Loving kindness can also
    include visualizing the persons you are sending wishes to---that is,
    calling up images of them in your mind."

B. Loving Kindness: Why Do It? 1. Ill Will, Hate, and Anger toward Self
and Others Can Be Wearing Strong negative emotions can be corrosive
psychologically; they can also have negative physical effects, such as
raising blood pressure and increasing risk of heart attacks.73--75 2.
Loving Kindness Reduces Self-Hate Hating oneself is extremely painful.
Loving kindness focuses on reducing self-hate. Tell participants:
"Besides being painful all by themselves, hate, anger, and disgust
directed at yourself make it much more difficult to take good care of
yourself. Self-hate can lead to an attitude that you don't deserve
positive events, soothing, or even your rights to be upheld. In turn,
this attitude can complicate depression, increase feelings of
inadequacy, and decrease feelings of worth and efficacy."

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 8 • 221

3.  Ill Will, Hate, and Anger Interfere with Interpersonal Effectiveness
    Say to participants: "It is much more difficult to live, work, and
    negotiate with persons you have difficult relationships with. Loving
    kindness can help you improve these relationships."

99

4.  Daily Loving Kindness Practice Increases Positive Emotions Research
    Point: Data suggest that a daily practice of loving kindness works
    to increase daily experiences of positive emotions (including love,
    joy, gratitude, contentment, hope, pride, interest, amusement, and
    awe), and to decrease negative emotions.76 The practice of loving
    kindness increases social connectedness,77 and mounting research
    suggests that it has potential as an effective psychological
    intervention. Neuroimaging studies suggest also that loving kindness
    practice is associated with increased activation of brain areas
    involved with emotional processing and empathy. Over time, these
    positive emotions predict both increased satisfaction with life and
    reduced depressive symptoms.78 In addition, daily practice of loving
    kindness can also increase self-­acceptance and improve relationships
    over time.79

Note to Leaders: There is preliminary but potentially significant
research indicating that loving kindness meditation may not be as useful
for individuals with a high tendency to brooding rumination.80 These
individuals may do better with a mindful focus on breathing.81 I would
suggest encouraging participants to try both and letting them decide
which practice is best for them.

99C. Loving Kindness: How to Do It 1. The Core Component: Sending Loving
Kindness toward Ourselves and Others

99

99

The content of loving wishes can vary. The script provided in
Mindfulness Handout 8 is a common one, but there are also many other
versions---for example, "May I live with ease" ("May John live with
ease"), "May I be safe and protected" ("May John be safe and
protected"), "May I be healthy and whole" ("May all beings be healthy
and whole"), "May I be filled with joy" ("May all beings be filled with
joy"), and so on. Generally, however, only four or five wishes for each
person should be made, as it is hard to remember many others. 2. Select
Wishes That Are Sincere Sincerity is a key point. Tell participants: "If
your wish is not sincere, from your heart, then it can become like
saying a mantra where the words themselves mean very little. Once the
words lose meaning, your mind can repeat the words even while you think
of other things. So it is important that the wishes have real meaning
for you. Don't repeat only one wish over and over. Instead, go through a
brief list of meaningful wishes, and then start over." Discussion Point:
Ask participants what positive wishes they would like to make to
themselves and others.

99

3.  Start with Wishes for Self or a Loved One Suggest to participants:
    "Start by practicing only on yourself or only on someone you already
    love until you understand how to do the practice. The standard way
    is to start with wishes for yourself, because it is hard to love
    others when you don't love yourself. Generally, it is easier to go
    next to a person you love or a friend. Practice repeatedly with one
    person until you feel a sense of loving kindness and/or compassion,
    and then move to the next person. Then it can be useful to send
    wishes to a person you are having difficulties with or are angry at.
    End with all living beings." Positive results have been found with
    very brief loving mindfulness practices; lasting changes, however,
    are more than likely to require a consistent regimen of practice.

222 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handouts 8,
9--9a

Note to Leaders: It is important to remind participants to practice only
on people they want to increase love and compassion for.

4.  Try to Let Go of Tension or Tightness Say to participants: "Try to
    let go of any tension or tightness after each round of wishes, but
    do not worry if you find it hard to relax. Simply let go as much as
    possible."

99

5.  If Thoughts or Distractions Intrude, Just Notice Them and Gently
    Return to the Practice Tell participants: "When thoughts take you
    away from loving kindness, notice it and make a wish for your own
    happiness, and then continue. Remember that mindfulness practice is
    not about forcing your mind to stay focused, but rather about
    noticing when your mind is distracted by thoughts, emotions, sounds,
    or other sensations, and then gently bringing your mind back. You
    can say, 'My mind has taken a walk. I think I will come back home to
    loving kindness.' Let go of judgmental and critical thoughts. Let go
    of perfectionism." Note to Leaders: Note that the instructions here
    are almost identical to previous instructions for observing
    mindfulness practice.

<!-- -->

XV. Skillful Means: Balancing Doing Mind and Being Mind (Mindfulness
    Handouts 9--9a) Main Point: In everyday life, wise living requires
    us to balance working to achieve goals (on the one hand) with, at
    the very same time, letting go of attachment to achieving goals (on
    the other hand). Mindfulness Handout 9: Skillful Means: Balancing
    Doing Mind and Being Mind (Optional); Mindfulness Handout 9a: Ideas
    for Practicing Balancing Doing Mind and Being Mind (Optional). Both
    of these optional handouts can be particularly useful for
    participants who have read about or participated in one of the
    mindfulness-based forms of CBT.4, 82 The concepts of doing mind and
    being mind were taken from these approaches. Handout 9 integrates
    these concepts with that of wise mind. Handout 9a lists practice
    exercises. The handouts may be particularly useful for individuals
    who tend toward overdoing. Generally, these handouts are useful with
    individuals who have already gone through mindfulness training
    several times. Mindfulness Worksheet 7: Balancing Being Mind with
    Doing Mind. Review this worksheet with participants. It is almost
    identical to Mindfulness Worksheet 3: Wise Mind Practice, but it
    also lists the practice exercises given in Handout 9a. If you have
    taught a different practice exercise, ask participants to write that
    exercise on their worksheet so that they will remember what it is.
    Review where participants have questions. As on Worksheet 3, for
    each exercise there are four boxes. Instruct participants to check
    off one box for every day they practice the indicated exercise. If
    they practice more than four times in a week, tell them to put extra
    checkmarks outside the boxes. Review also how to rate wise mind
    practice, if you have not done so already. Note that the ratings are
    for how effective their practice was in getting into their own wise
    mind. These are not ratings of whether or not the practice calmed
    them down or made them feel better. Also note that at the bottom,
    the worksheet asks participants to list any and all wise things they
    did during the week. Mindfulness Worksheet 7a: Mindfulness of Being
    and Doing Calendar; Mindfulness Worksheet 8: Mindfulness of Pleasant
    Events Calendar; Mindfulness Worksheet 9: Mindfulness of Unpleasant
    Events Calendar. Each of these worksheets is a calendar that asks
    participants to record their mindfulness practice each day. Review
    the worksheets you plan to assign to participants. Each worksheet
    asks participants to attend to the present moment, noticing their
    sensations, moods, feelings, and

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 9 • 223 thoughts during their
mindfulness practice and also as they are writing their practice down.
The calendars focus on mindfulness during frazzled moments (7a),
pleasant events (8), and unpleasant events (9).

99A. Skillful Means Each person has the capacity for skillful means.
"Skillful means" is a term in Zen; it refers to any effective method
that aids a person to experience reality as it is, or, in DBT terms, to
enter fully into wise mind.

99B. Doing Mind and Being Mind "Doing mind" and "being mind" are states
of mind that in their extremes can get in the way of skillful means and
of wise mind. Doing mind focuses on achieving goals; being mind focuses
on experiencing. The polarity between them is similar to that between
reasonable mind and emotion mind.

99C. The Need for Both Doing Mind and Being Mind Without aspects of both
being mind and doing mind, it is difficult if not impossible to lead a
balanced life. Once we let go of balance and, instead, live at one
extreme or the other, we start seeing reality from that extreme
perspective. We become biased, and experiencing reality as it is becomes
elusive. Note to Leaders: The concepts of doing mind and being mind are
drawn from the mindfulness-based treatment manuals. For those in skills
training who have experienced multiple episodes of major depression, it
may be useful to give them information on Mindfulness-Based Cognitive
Therapy as an evidence-based treatment for depression and the self-help
book based on it.82 For those with addictions, Mindfulness-Based Relapse
Prevention may be useful, and for those with chronic physical pain,
Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction may be of value.3, 4

99D. Doing Mind 99 1. Doing Mind Focuses on Achieving Goals and Doing
What Is Needed Say to clients: "When you are in doing mind, similar to
reasonable mind, you view thoughts as facts about the world. You are
comparing where you are now to where you want to be in the future. You
compare your own behavior and that of others now and in the past to what
you want it to be. In its extreme form, doing mind is relentlessly task
focused, climbing to the top with ambition. At this extreme, doing mind
is driven mind." Doing mind is necessary for getting work done, for
meeting goals, for planning, and for evaluating whether we are living
our lives according to our values. Processing incoming information and
using the information to help us achieve both immediate and long-range
goals is clearly important.

99

2.  Too Little Doing Mind Can Interfere with Achieving Important Goals
    Deficits in doing activities can be destructive. This is
    particularly true for those individuals who spend many of their
    waking moments "zoning out," sleeping, or living lives of leisure or
    lethargy that ignore their very real needs. Many individuals resort
    to drugs in order to mobilize themselves to work toward goals.
    Cocaine, amphetamines, and high levels of caffeine, for example, are
    used by many to produce an artificial state of doing mind.

99

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants their own experiences of
doing mind. Ask how many always feel the need to be doing something;
feel guilty if they are not productive; and/or fill their time with
activities, activities, activities to keep from having nothing to do.

224 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 9

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants addictive behaviors that they
cannot stop---that they spend far too much time planning for or doing.
Discussion Point: Ask what artificial means participants have used to
produce doing mind. What helps them to produce short-term doing mind
naturally when they need it?

3.  Too Much Doing Mind Can Become an Automatic Mode of Being When we
    spend too much time in doing mind, we start living our lives on
    automatic pilot. We act out of habit and do not notice when the
    situation or context has changed and something else is needed. It
    can be very easy to make both little and big mistakes.  Problems
    with doing occur when we become addicted to "doing." Workaholics are
    caught

99

in doing mind. They work excessively, caught in always doing something.
They feel an intense drive to always be doing something productive and,
alas, they do not enjoy work. We could call them "doing-­aholics."
Perfectionists are also caught in doing mind.  People with any types of
addiction are caught in doing mind. The addictive activity is so
compelling that although the persons may be in the present (forgetting
about the long-term harm their addiction is causing), their awareness of
the present is rigidly focused on just the one addictive activity. Out
of awareness are the wider universe; the people whom they love and who
love them; and the responsibilities and promises they are forgetting. 
In doing mind, we lose sight of the value of the present moment, because
we look at the present and the past in terms of how close or far we are
from some future goal. We are immersed in activity, losing sight of all
else happening around us, like a workaholic who never stops to smell the
roses.

99E. Being Mind 1. Being Mind Is "Beginners' Mind"

99

Say to participants: "In being mind, you are open and curious about the
moment you are in. Thoughts are viewed as sensations of the mind,
arising and falling, coming and going. You are focused on immediate,
moment-to-­moment experiencing with an open mind; you accept that each
moment is as it is. You let go of evaluating the past and the present.
There is only 'just this moment.' In its extreme form, being mind
focuses on immediate, moment-to-­moment experiencing, with no thought of
goals or of consequences of current action or absence of action." 2. Too
Little Being Mind Can Interfere with Living Life to Its Fullest

99

99

 Being mind is "nothing-to-do, nowhere-to-go" mind. Tell participants:
"When there is

nothing to do and nowhere to go, being mind is the place to be. Being
mind is the path to spacious mind, to awareness or our connection to the
entire universe---the floor that touches our feet and the furthest star
in the universe. Being mind is like lying in the grass on a warm sunny
day, head in your arms, lotion on your body, just feeling the warm sun
beating down. Or it is like lying on your back on a cool summer evening,
gazing at the sky and watching the stars. It is watching the clouds
going by. Or it is simply attending to a touch on the arm or a smile
from someone you know."  Being mind is being present to one's life.
Many people find at some point that they have missed a lot of their own
lives. Almost always, this is a very sad realization. It is like having
a garden full of beautiful roses but never stopping to smell them.
Appreciating life requires experiencing life.  Deficits in being mind
can be as destructive as deficits in doing mind. Generally, a deficit in
being shows up as an excess of doing: Individuals spend many of their
waking moments comparing themselves to others, or comparing their
progress in life now to what they expected it to be or wanted it to be.
Many individuals find these incessant compari-

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handouts 9a--10 • 225

sons so difficult that they try to escape with drugs. Opiates in
particular bring about a state of artificial being mind that provides an
escape from the anxiety and shame that doing mind run amuck can
sometimes create. Discussion Point: Elicit from participants their own
experiences of being mind. What artificial means have they used to
produce being mind? What helps them to produce being mind naturally when
they need it? Discussion Point: Discuss the pros and cons of both types
of mind. Draw from participants their experiences of doing mind and of
being mind.

99

3.  Too Much Being Mind Can Be Indulgent and Self-­Centered An excess of
    being mind can be focused on personal experience at the expense of
    others and their needs, and of what needs to be done in the moment.
    Say to participants: "When this happens, being mind can be
    destructive if there is something that needs to be done or somewhere
    you need to go. Sitting in meditation, lying around on the beach, or
    watching the clouds go by is all well and good. But it won't do when
    you are driving somewhere and need to follow a map; when you have a
    weekly budget and need to plan, buy, and cook meals for the week;
    when homework needs to be done; or when e-mail needs to be
    answered." Example: "Someone who just sits on the couch meditating
    all day never gets any work done and is stuck in being mind. 'Now,
    now, now' can interfere with planning for the future for yourself
    and for those you love and/or are responsible for."

F. Review of Practice Exercises for Balancing Doing Mind and Being Mind
Mindfulness Handout 9a lists a number of ideas for bringing being mind
into everyday doing mind life. There are also exercises for increasing
doing mind when needed. It is important to go over some of these with
participants.

XVI. Wise Mind: Walking the Middle Path (Mindfulness Handout 10) Main
     Point: The "middle path" is a synthesis of extremes. Ordinarily,
     when we are at an extreme on any continuum, we are in danger of
     distorting reality. Mindfulness Handout 10: Walking the Middle
     Path: Finding the Synthesis between Opposites. This handout can be
     useful for participants who need to work on balancing the
     priorities in their lives. It is also compatible with an adolescent
     skills training module, Walking the Middle Path. Generally, like
     the previous handout, this handout is useful with individuals who
     have already gone through mindfulness training one or more times.
     With individuals for whom the main focus of treatment is on
     interpersonal relationships, however, Handout 10 can be important
     in its own right, independent of other mindfulness handouts.
     Mindfulness Worksheet 10: Walking the Middle Path to Wise Mind.
     Note that the worksheet lists several polarities that could be out
     of balance. The first polarity is emotion mind versus reasonable
     mind. If you have not reviewed Handout 10, you can still use this
     worksheet if you wish; you can simply tell participants to work on
     the first polarity only, or you can very briefly describe what is
     meant by each polarity without going into too much detail.
     Mindfulness Worksheet 10a: Analyzing Yourself on the Middle Path.
     Review the instructions for each step. At Step 1, instruct
     participants to think through whether they are out of balance on
     each of the three polarities. They should put an X in the middle if
     they are not out of balance, or put an X toward the end where they
     are most of the time. At Step 2, remind participants that they need
     to be very specific

226 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Mindfulness Handout 10

in describing what they do that is too much (i.e., too extreme) or too
little. This may take a fair amount of coaching and review if you have
not already taught the mindfulness skill of describing. Step 3 is very
important: What is out of balance for one person may not be out of
balance for another. Remind participants that being out of balance means
living in a way that knocks them off their center, out of wise mind. At
Step 4, be sure participants know how to be very specific when they
commit to making changes in the next week. Remind them to be realistic
in what they write down. Review also how to rate their practice.
Mindfulness Worksheet 10b: Walking the Middle Path Calendar. This
worksheet offers opportunities for recording daily practice in a
different format from that of Worksheet 10. It can also be used in
conjunction with Worksheet 10a.

99A. Wise Mind: The Middle Path between Extremes In wise mind, we
replace "either--or" with "both--and" thinking, in an effort to find a
synthesis between positions. Wise mind is all of the following things.

99

1.  A Synthesis of Reasonable Mind and Emotion Mind A person who uses
    facts and reason alone ignores values and the feelings of others; in
    essence, this person lets go of empathy in making a decision. This
    is the person who insists on taking the shortest route on the
    highway because it is more efficient, ignoring everyone else's
    desire to enjoy the scenery even if it is not as efficient. A person
    who is ruled by emotions is mood-­dependent, ruled by the current
    mood. This is the person who refuses to take the scenic route
    because he or she is angry at everyone else and is not in the mood
    for being civil.

99

2.  A Synthesis of Doing Mind and Being Mind The middle path combines
    doing with being. The key here is to do what is needed with
    awareness. Skillful means is doing what is needed to be effective,
    while at the same time experiencing fully the uniqueness of each
    moment in the moment. The middle path between doing and being has
    been written about for thousands of years and across many cultures.
    In 2400 b.c., the Egyptian sage Ptahhotep wrote: "One that reckons
    accounts all the day passes not a happy moment. One that gladdens
    his heart all the day provides not for his house. The bowman hits
    the mark, as the steersman reaches land, by diversity of aim. He
    that obeys his heart shall command."83 This is similar to the
    proverb "All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy." Some writers
    have added a second part to this proverb: "All work and no play
    makes Jack a dull boy; all play and no work makes Jack a mere toy."

99

3.  A Synthesis of Intense Desire for Change and Radical Acceptance The
    middle path also involves radically accepting the present without
    suppressing an intense desire for something else. The middle path
    from this perspective includes simultaneously passionately throwing
    your entire self into working toward goals, while at the same time
    letting go of having to achieve your goals.

99

4.  A Synthesis of Self-­Denial and Self-­Indulgence All of us at times
    need to deny ourselves something we want. At times, however,
    indulging ourselves can be good for the soul. The middle path here
    combines moderation with satisfying the senses, self-care, and
    pleasant events. The point is that either extreme---self-­denial or
    self-­ indulgence---can interfere with finding wise mind.

7. Mindfulness Skills: Mindfulness Handout 10 • 227 Note to Leaders:
When you are making the points above, it can be very useful to draw a
balance beam on a whiteboard with each of the polarities written at
either end. See Mindfulness Handout 10 for examples. If a whiteboard is
not available, give out Handout 10.

99

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants areas where they believe that
they are out of balance in their own lives. Discuss these points.
Discussion Point: Balance is not always a 50--50 split. What is out of
balance for one person may not be out of balance for another. As noted
earlier, being out of balance means a living style that knocks each
person off his or her own center, out of his or her own wise mind.
Elicit from participants times when something was out of balance for
them but not for others. How did that feel?

B. Dialectical Abstinence In working with people with addictions (to use
of alcohol/drugs or to other behavioral patterns), the synthesis of
opposites is referred to as "dialectical abstinence." In dialectical
abstinence, the person strategically shifts between 100% absolute
abstinence "in the moment" (so long as the person refrains from
addictive behaviors) and relapse management (should the individual lapse
or relapse).  In every moment that the individual is abstinent (from
drugs or dysfunctional behaviors),

every cell in the individual's body is committed fully to absolute
abstinence from the addictive behavior. Each move is intended to get the
individual further and further down the road away from a life with the
addictive behavior, and closer to a life worth living without the
behavior.  In every moment after a person has relapsed, the individual
radically accepts the relapse and focuses on getting back up, so to
speak; he or she applies all the skills necessary to get back into
abstinence. See Distress Tolerance Handout 17 for more information on
dialectical abstinence.

C. Summary of Other Perspectives on Mindfulness Skills Summarize both
core and supplemental mindfulness skills that have been covered.

References 1. Grepmair, L., Mitterlehner, F., Loew, T., Bachler, E.,
Rother, W., & Nickel, M. (2007). Promoting mindfulness in
psychotherapists in training influences the treatment results of their
patients: A randomized, double-blind, controlled study. Psychotherapy
and Psychosomatics, 76(6), 332--338. 2. Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M.
G., & Teasdale, J. D. (2013). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for
depression (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press. 3. Bowen, S., Chawla,
N., & Marlatt, G. A. (2011). Mindfulness-based relapse prevention for
addictive behaviors: A clinician's guide. New York: Guilford Press. 4.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living: Using the wisdom of your
body and mind to face stress, pain, and illness. New York: Delacorte. 5.
Williams, J. M. G. (2008). Mindfulness, depression and modes of mind.
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 32(6), 721--733. 6. Miller, W. R., &
Martin, J. E. (1988). Spirituality and behavioral psychology: Toward
integration. In

W. R. Miller & J. E. Martin (Eds.), Behavior therapy and religion
(pp. 13--24). Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 7. Kabat-Zinn, J., Lipworth, L., &
Burney, R. (1985). The clinical use of mindfulness meditation for the
self-­regulation of chronic pain. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 8(2),
163--190. 8. Luke 10:38--42. (Any version of the Bible; see, e.g.,
www.devotions.net/bible/00bible.htm) 9. Borchert, B. (1994). Mysticism:
Its history and challenge. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser. 10. Johnston,
W. (2005). The cloud of unknowing and The book of privy counseling. New
York: Doubleday. 11. Jain, S., Shapiro, S. L., Swanick, S., Roesch, S.
C., Mills, P. J., Bell, I., et al. (2007). A randomized controlled trial
of mindfulness meditation versus relaxation training: Effects on
distress, positive states of mind, rumination, and distraction. Annals
of Behavioral Medicine, 33(1), 11--21. 12. Broderick, P. C. (2005).
Mindfulness and coping with dysphoric mood: Contrasts with rumination

228 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES

and distraction. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 29(5), 501--510. 13.
Davidson, R. J. (2003). Alterations in brain and immune function
produced by mindfulness meditation. Psychosomatic Medicine, 65(4),
564--570. 14. Gross, C. R., Kreitzer, M. J., Reilly-Spong, M., Winbush,
N. Y., Schomaker, E. K., & Thomas, W. (2009). Mindfulness meditation
training to reduce symptom distress in transplant patients: Rationale,
design, and experience with a recycled waitlist. Clinical Trials, 6(1),
76--89. 15. Kabat-Zinn, J., Massion, A. O., Kristeller, J., Peterson, L.
G., Fletcher, K. E., Pbert, L., et al. (1992). Effectiveness of a
meditation-based stress reduction program in the treatment of anxiety
disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 149, 936--943. 16. Speca, M.,
Carlson, L. E., Goodey, E., & Angen, M. (2000). A randomized, wait-list
controlled clinical trial: The effect of a mindfulness meditation-based
stress reduction program on mood and symptoms of stress in cancer
outpatients. Psychosomatic Medicine, 62(5), 613--622. 17. Chiesa, A., &
Serretti, A. (2011). Mindfulness-based interventions for chronic pain: A
systematic review of the evidence. Journal of Alternative and
Complementary Medicine, 17(1), 83--93. 18. Pradhan, E. K., Baumgarten,
M., Langenberg, P., Handwerger, B., Gilpin, A. K., Magyari, T., et al.
(2007). Effect of mindfulness-based stress reduction in rheumatoid
arthritis patients. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 57(7), 1134--1142. 19.
Sephton, S. E., Salmon, P., Weissbecker, I., Ulmer, C., Floyd, A.,
Hoover, K., et al. (2007). Mindfulness meditation alleviates depressive
symptoms in women with fibromyalgia: Results of a randomized clinical
trial. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 57(1), 77--85. 20. Kabat-Zinn, J.,
Wheeler, E., Light, T., Skillings, A., Scharf, M. J., Cropley, T. G., et
al. (1998). Influence of a mindfulness meditation-based stress reduction
intervention on rates of skin clearing in patients with moderate to
severe psoriasis undergoing phototherapy (UVB) and photochemotherapy
(PUVA). Psychosomatic Medicine, 60(5), 625--632. 21. Creswell, J. D.,
Myers, H. F., Cole, S. W., & Irwin, M. R. (2009). Mindfulness meditation
training effects on CD4+ T lymphocytes in HIV-1 infected adults: A small
randomized controlled trial. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, 23(2),
184--188. 22. Tang, Y. Y., Ma, Y., Wang, J., Fan, Y., Feng, S., Lu, Q.,
et al. (2007). Short-term meditation training improves attention and
self-­regulation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA,
104, 17152--17156. 23. Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G.
(2012). Acceptance and commitment therapy: The process

and practice of mindful change (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press. 24.
Hayes, S. C., & Melancon, S. M. (1989). Comprehensive distancing,
paradox, and the treatment of emotional avoidance. In L. M. Ascher
(Ed.), Therapeutic paradox (pp. 184--218). New York: Guilford Press. 25.
Fischer, N. (2008). Mindfulness. Lecture presented at the
Benedicktushof, Holzkirchen, Germany. 26. Giuliano, R. J., & Wicha, N.
Y. Y. (2010). Why the white bear is still there: Electrophysiological
evidence for ironic semantic activation during thought suppression.
Brain Research, 1316, 62--74. 27. Wegner, D. M., Schneider, D. J.,
Carter, S. R., & White, T. L. (1987). Paradoxical effects of thought
suppression. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(1), 5--13.
28. Stapp, H. P. (2007). Mindful universe: Quantum mechanics and the
participating observer. New York: Springer. 29. Walsh, J. (Ed.). (1981).
The cloud of unknowing. New York: Paulist Press. 30. Jager, W. (1994).
Contemplation: A Christian path. Ligori, MO: Triumph Books. 31. Keating,
T. (n.d.). The method of centering prayer. Available from
www.cpt.org/files/WS-Centering Prayer.pdf 32. Deikman, A. J. (1982). The
observing self: Mysticism and psychotherapy. Boston: Beacon Press. 33.
Polanyi, M. (1958). Personal knowledge. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press. 34. May, G. G. (1982). Will and spirit: A contemplative
psychology. San Francisco: Harper & Row. 35. Senay, I., Albarracin, D.,
& Noguchi, K. (2010). Motivating goal-­directed behavior through
introspective self-talk: The role of the interrogative form of simple
future tense. Psychological Science, 21(4), 499--504. 36. Butryn, M. L.,
Phelan, S., Hill, J. O., & Wing, R. R. (2007). Consistent
self-­monitoring of weight: A key component of successful weight loss
maintenance. Obesity, 15(12), 3091--3096. 37. Nelson, R. O., & Hayes, S.
C. (1981). Theoretical explanations for reactivity in self-­monitoring.
Behavior Modification, 5(1), 3--14. 38. Krishnamurti, J. (1991). The
collected works of J. Krishnamurti: Vol. 5. 1948--1949, Choiceless
awareness. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt. 39. Hayes, S. C., Wilson, K. G.,
Gifford, E. V., Follette, V. M., & Strosahl, K. (1996). Experiential
avoidance and behavioral disorders: A functional dimensional approach to
diagnosis and treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
64(6), 1152--1168. 40. Wegner, D. M., & Erber, R. (1992). The
hyperaccessibility of suppressed thoughts. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 63(6), 903--912.

7. Mindfulness Skills • 229 41. Levitt, J. T., Brown, T. A., Orsillo, S.
M., & Barlow, D. H. (2004). The effects of acceptance versus suppression
of emotion on subjective and psychophysiological response to carbon
dioxide challenge in patients with panic disorder. Behavior Therapy,
35(4), 747--766. 42. Roemer, L., & Borkovec, T. D. (1994). Effects of
suppressing thoughts about emotional material. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 103(3), 467--474. 43. Teasdale, J. D., Segal, Z., &
Williams, J. M. G. (1995). How does cognitive therapy prevent depressive
relapse and why should attentional control (mindfulness) training help?
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33(1), 25--39. 44. Miller, A. L.,
Rathus, J. H., & Linehan, M. M. (2007). Dialectical behavior therapy
with suicidal adolescents. New York: Guilford Press. 45. Cioffi, D.
(1993). Sensate body, directive mind: Physical sensations and mental
control. In D. Wegner & J. W. Pennebaker (Eds.), Handbook of mental
control (pp. 410--442). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PrenticeHall. 46.
Lieberman, M. D., Eisenberger, N. I., Crockett, M. J., Tom, S. M.,
Pfeifer, J. H., & Way, B. M. (2007). Putting feelings into words: Affect
labeling disrupts amygdala activity in response to affective stimuli.
Psychological Science, 18(5), 421--428. 47. Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997).
Finding flow: The psychology of engagement with everyday life. New York:
Basic Books. 48. Beatrice Grimm taught me these dances at Benedicktushof
in Germany. 49. Besser, B. (n.d.). Shepherd's dance. On More beginner's
dances \[CD\]. (Available from Barbara Besser, Nienberger Kirchplatz 1,
D-4861 Munster, Germany) 50. Based on Bays, J. C. (2011). How to train a
wild elephant and other adventures in mindfulness. Boston: Shambhala.
51. Schneider, P. (2005). The patience of ordinary things. In Another
river: New and selected poems. Amherst, MA: Amherst Writers and Artists
Press. 52. Borkovec, T. D., & Inz, J. (1990). The nature of worry in
generalized anxiety disorder: A predominance of thought activity.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28(2), 153--158. 53. Rubinstein, J. S.,
Meyer, D. E., & Evans, J. E. (2001). Executive control of cognitive
processes in task switching. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 27(4), 763--797. 54. Jackson, M. (2004).
Pressured to multitask, workers juggle a fragmented existence. Health,
10, 26. 55. Healy, M. (2004). We're all multitasking, but what's the
cost? Los Angeles Times. Retrieved from www.

umich.edu/\~bcalab/articles/LATimesMultitasking2004.pdf 56. Henig, R. M.
(2005). Driving? Maybe you shouldn't be reading this. The New York
Times. Retrieved from
www.umich.edu/\~bcalab/articles/NYTimesMultitasking2004.pdf 57.
Rubinstein, J., Meyer, D., & Evans, J. E. (2001). Is multitasking more
efficient?: Shifting mental gears costs time, especially when shifting
to less familiar tasks. Retrieved from
www.apa.org/news/press/releases/2001/08/multitasking.aspx 58. Cable News
Network. (2001, August 5). CNN Tonight: Multitasking has problems, study
finds. Retrieved from www.umich.edu/\~bcalab/articles/
CNNTranscript2001.html 59. Anderson, P. (2001, December 6). Study:
Multitasking is counterproductive. Retrieved from www.
umich.edu/\~bcalab/articles/CNNArticle2001.pdf 60. McClure, E. B.,
Treland, J. E., Snow, J., Schmajuk, M., Dickstein, D. P., Towbin, K. E.,
et al. (2005). Deficits in social cognition and response flexibility in
pediatric bipolar disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(9),
1644--1651. 61. Bonanno, G. A., Papa, A., Lalande, K., Westphal, M., &
Coifman, K. (2004). The importance of being flexible. Psychological
Science, 15(7), 482--487. 62. Gross, J. J. (1998). Antecedent- and
response-­focused emotion regulation: Divergent consequences for
experience, expression, and physiology. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 74(1), 224--237. 63. Gross, J. J. (1998). The
emerging field of emotion regulation: An integrative review. Review of
General Psychology, 2(3), 271--299. 64. Pennebaker, J. W., & Seagal, J.
D. (1999). Forming a story: The health benefits of narrative. Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 55(10), 1243--1254. 65. Lester, N., Smart, L., &
Baum, A. (1994). Measuring coping flexibility. Psychology and Health,
9(6), 409--424. 66. Cheng, C. (2001). Assessing coping flexibility in
real-life and laboratory settings: A multimethod approach. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 80(5), 814--833. 67. Byron, G. G.
(1979). Childe Harold's pilgrimage. In M. H. Abrams (General Ed.), The
Norton anthology of English literature (4th ed., Vol. 2, pp. 518--541).
New York: Norton. (Original work published 1812-- 1818) 68. Miller, H.
(1958). The smile at the foot of the ladder. New York: New Directions.
69. Spretnak, C. (n.d.). Retrieved from
www.famousquotes.com/author/spretnak 70. Butcher, C. A. (Trans.).
(2009). The cloud of unknowing with the book of privy counsel: A new
translation. Boston: Shambhala.

230 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES

71. Teasdale, W. (1999). The mystic heart: Discovering a universal
    spirituality in the world's religions. Novato, CA: New World
    Library.
72. St. John of the Cross. (1990). Dark night of the soul (E. A. Peers,
    Ed. & Trans.). New York: Image Books.
73. Williams, J. E., Paton, C. C., Siegler, I. C., Eigenbrodt, M. L.,
    Nieto, F. J., & Tyroler, H. A. (2000). Anger proneness predicts
    coronary heart disease risk: Prospective analysis from the
    Atherosclerosis Risk In Communities (ARIC) Study. Journal of the
    American Heart Association, 101(17), 2034--2039.
74. Markowitz, J. H., Matthews, K. A., Wing, R. R., Kuller, L. H., &
    Meilahn, E. N. (1991). Psychological, biological and health behavior
    predictors of blood pressure changes in middle-aged women. Journal
    of Hypertension, 9, 399--406.
75. Shapiro, D., Goldstein, I. B., & Jamner, L. D. (1996). Effects of
    cynical hostility, anger out, anxiety, and defensiveness on
    ambulatory blood pressure in black and white college students.
    Psychosomatic Medicine, 58(4), 354--364.
76. Fredrickson, B. L., Cohn, M. A., Coffey, K. A., Pek, J., &
    Finkel, S. M. (2008). Open hearts build lives: Positive emotions,
    induced through loving-­kindness meditation, build consequential
    personal resources. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
    95(5), 1045--1062.
77. Hutcherson, C. A., Seppala, E. M., & Gross, J. J.

(2008). Loving-­kindness meditation increases social connectedness.
Emotion, 8(5), 720--724. 78. Hofmann, S. G., Grossman, P., & Hinton, D.
E. (2011). Loving-­kindness and compassion meditation: Potential for
psychological interventions. Clinical Psychology Review, 31(7),
1126--1132. 79. Carson, J. W., Keefe, F. J., Lynch, T. R., Carson, K.
M., Goli, V., Fras, A. M., et al. (2005). Loving-­ kindness meditation
for chronic low back pain: Results from a pilot trial. Journal of
Holistic Nursing, 23, 287--304. 80. Barnhofer, T., Chittka, T.,
Nightengale, H., Fisser, C., & Crane, C. (2010). State effects of two
forms of meditation on prefrontal EEG asymmetry in previously depressed
individuals. Mindfulness, 1, 21-- 27. 81. Feldman, G., Greeson, J., &
Senville, J. (2010). Differential effects of mindful breathing,
progressive muscle relaxation, and loving kindness meditation on
decentering and negative reactions to repetitive thoughts. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 48(10), 1002--1011. 82. Williams, J. M. G.,
Teasdale, J. D., Kabat-Zinn, J., & Segal, Z. V. (2007). The mindful way
through depression: Freeing yourself from chronic unhappiness. New York:
Guilford Press. 83. Geary, J. (2007). Geary's guide to the world's great
aphorists. New York: Bloomsbury USA.

Chapter 8

Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills

Goals of the Module Interpersonal response patterns taught in DBT skills
training are divided into three sections. The first section focuses on
the core interpersonal skills of obtaining objectives while maintaining
relationships and self-­respect. These skills are very similar to those
taught in many assertiveness and interpersonal problem-­solving classes.
The second section is designed for individuals who want help in
developing and maintaining relationships. It focuses on decreasing
interpersonal isolation by addressing how to find friends, get them to
like you, and then build the sensitivity and communication skills
necessary for maintaining friendships. How to end destructive
relationships is also covered. The third section covers skills for
walking the middle path, which have to do with balancing acceptance and
change in relationships. These skills were developed for working with
adolescents' families,1\* but they can be useful for individuals, as
well as for any group members who wish to develop better communication
and collaboration skills.

Core Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Obtaining Objectives While
Maintaining Relationships and Self-­Respect The core interpersonal
effectiveness skills include effective strategies for asking for what
one needs, \*Sections XIV--XVII of this chapter, as well as other
material marked with note number 1, are adapted from Miller, A. L.,
Rathus, J. H., & Linehan, M. M. (2007). Dialectical behavior therapy
with suicidal adolescents. New York: Guilford Press. Copyright 2007 by
The Guilford Press. Adapted by permission.

for saying no, and for managing interpersonal conflicts skillfully.
"Effectiveness" here has to do with "doing what works" in these areas.
Many individuals possess reasonably effective interpersonal skills in a
general sense. Problems arise in the application of these skills to
specific situations. People may be able to describe effective behavioral
sequences when discussing how another person encounters a problematic
situation, but they may be completely incapable of generating or
carrying out a similar behavioral sequence for their own situation. It
is important to remember here what is meant by the term "skill": "the
ability to use one's knowledge effectively and readily in execution or
performance."2 Thus having a skill means not only having a specific
response in one's behavioral repertoire (e.g., saying "no"), but also
having the ability to respond in a way likely to have the intended
effect. The ability to hold a flute in your hands, blow out air, and
move your fingers over the flute's finger holes, for example, does not
mean that you are a skillful flute player. Mastering any skill of
consequence ordinarily takes practice and feedback, often repeated many
times over. Even if people have a very strong knowledge of interpersonal
skills, any number of factors can interfere with their use of those
skills. For example, an interpersonal mistake that many individuals make
is premature termination of relationships. Such termination can be due
to difficulties in several skill areas. Problems in distress tolerance
can make it difficult to tolerate fears, anxieties, or frustrations that
are typical in conflictual situations. Problems in emotion regulation
can lead to difficulties with decreasing anger, with frustration, or
with fear of another's reaction. Inadequate problem-­ solving skills can
make it difficult to turn potential relationship conflicts into positive
encounters. Problems 231

232 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES

with attending to the moment in a nonjudgmental fashion (i.e., problems
with mindfulness) can make it difficult either to assess personal wishes
and goals or to assess what is needed to improve the situation.

Obtaining Objectives Skillfully The core interpersonal effectiveness
skills (Sections I--IX of this chapter) teach participants how to apply
specific interpersonal problem-­solving, social, and assertiveness skills
to modify aversive environments and to obtain their goals in
interpersonal encounters. The module focuses on situations where the
objective is to change something (e.g., requesting someone to do
something or take a point of view seriously) or to resist changes
someone else is trying to make (e.g., saying no). Thus it is most
properly considered a course in assertion, where the goal is for persons
to assert their own wishes, goals, and opinions in a manner that leads
other people to respond favorably. The skills taught in this part of the
module maximize the chances that a person's goals in a specific
situation will be met, while at the same time not damaging (and,
ideally, even enhancing) the interpersonal relationship and/or the
person's self-­ respect. The instructional content is divided into
several segments.

Factors That Reduce Effectiveness and Goal Identification Sections I--IV
deal with identifying factors that contribute to interpersonal
effectiveness, as well as things that interfere with being effective.
The particular behavioral patterns needed for social effectiveness are
almost totally a function of a person's goals in a particular situation.
Thus the ability to analyze a situation and to determine goals is
crucial for interpersonal effectiveness. Section IV of the module in
particular addresses this challenge.

Objectives Effectiveness: DEAR MAN Section V focuses on objectives
effectiveness---­ specific skills for getting what one wants, summarized
with the mnemonic DEAR MAN: Describe, Express feelings, Assert wishes,
Reinforce, (stay) Mindful, Appear confident, and Negotiate.

Relationship Effectiveness: GIVE Section VI covers relationship
effectiveness---skills for keeping a relationship, summarized with the
mnemonic GIVE: (be) Gentle, (act) Interested, Validate, (use an) Easy
manner.

Self-­Respect Effectiveness: FAST Section VII describes skills for
self-­respect effectiveness---keeping one's self-­respect; the mnemonic
here is FAST: (be) Fair, (no) Apologies, Stick to values, (be) Truthful.
Section VIII focuses on guidelines for modulating how intensely to ask
for what one wants or say no. Section IX, the last section of core
skills, focuses on troubleshooting---how to figure out why interpersonal
skills may not be working. In this part of the module, it is especially
easy to spend too little time on teaching the skills of asking or saying
no in an effort to have time for everything else. At least half of this
part should be devoted to the objectives, relationship, and self-­respect
effectiveness skills (Sections V, VI, and VII). In-­session practice and
role plays of these new behaviors are essential; these activities
constitute an important part of all interpersonal skills training
programs. However, integrating behavioral practice of new behaviors
within sessions can be one of the most difficult aspects of skills
training for new therapists and for those not trained in behavior
therapy. Thus it can be very easy to just let it slip by in this module.

Skills for Building Relationships and Ending Destructive Ones The skills
in this part of the module (Sections X-- XIII) are designed specifically
to teach individuals how to meet new people and interact in a way that
facilitates the development of trust and friendship, and that reduces
the likelihood of conflict. It also covers how to end relationships that
are damaging.

Finding Potential Friends In Section XI, the skills are aimed at getting
individuals started at actively finding people who might become their
friends. This is particularly important

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills • 233

for those individuals who are isolated and feel lonely much of the time.

Mindfulness of Others Mindfulness of others and sensitivity to others'
needs are critical components of developing and maintaining
relationships and are covered in Section XII. Notice as you teach these
skills that the mindfulness skill of describing is referred to often.
Describing one's own or another's reactions, thoughts, or feelings is
the opposite of making judgmental comments about oneself or others. This
is a critical interpersonal skill, because judgmentalness is often
poisonous in both new and ongoing relationships.

How to End Relationships Staying in destructive relationships too long
can, of course, be just as problematic as not having relationships.
Skills for those who have difficulty ending relationships are covered in
Section XIII. These individuals often have enormous difficulties in
saying no, as well as difficulties in observing their own limits.
Emotion dysregulation is often the culprit here---fear of what might
happen to oneself or the other if the person leaves the relationship,
out-of-­ control grief at another's current or potential suffering,
excessive guilt at causing another pain, and compassion for another
while failing to have compassion for oneself. In these cases, people
often vacillate between avoidance of conflict and intense confrontation.
Unfortunately, the choice of avoidance versus confrontation is often
based on an individual's current emotional state (i.e., mood dependency)
rather than on the needs of the situation. Interpersonal effectiveness
skills are difficult to develop in a vacuum; perhaps more than any other
set of skills, they depend on simultaneous improvement across all skill
areas. The skills in this part of this module do not cover the finer
points of finding love or a life partner, or of developing intimate
relationships and deep and lasting friendships. Nor are the skills
directed at how to make time alone more palatable. The skills, however,
are essential basic skills for anyone who wants to meet new people, find
and keep love or a partner, form and maintain lasting intimate
friendships, and build a life where time spent alone is filled with
satisfying activities.

Walking the Middle Path As noted above, the skills for walking the
middle path (Sections XIV--XVII) were originally designed for family
skills training with adolescents and their caregivers. The skills,
however, are also important for adults and can be helpful in any
relationship. They are also essential for DBT skills trainers. There are
three skill sets in walking the middle path: dialectics, validation, and
behavior change strategies. Taken together, the skills in this part of
the module focus on balancing acceptance and change in interpersonal
relationships.

Dialectics The skill of dialectics is covered in Section XV. As
discussed in Chapter 1, dialectics as a world view forms the basis of
DBT. It has three primary characteristics. The first stresses the
wholeness of reality and directs our attention to the immediate and
larger contexts of behavior, as well as to the interrelatedness of
individual behavior patterns. Second, from a dialectical perspective,
reality is comprised of internal opposing forces (thesis and
antithesis), and out of their synthesis evolves a new set of opposing
forces. Dichotomous, extreme thinking, behavior, and emotions are viewed
as dialectical failures; the individual has become stuck in polarities
unable to move to synthesis. Third, dialectics assumes that the nature
of reality is change. Both the individual and the environment are
undergoing continuous transition. In essence, every relationship is one
of continuous transition and change.

Validation Although validation as a skill is covered as one of the
relationship effectiveness GIVE skills (see above and Section VI), it is
retaught in Section XVI in more depth, because it is so essential to
developing and maintaining close and intimate relationships. Validation
has to do with communicating clearly to others that you are paying
attention to them, that you understand them, that you are nonjudgmental,
that you have empathy, and that you can see the facts or the truth of
their situation. The key to teaching validation is for participants
already to have a firm foundation in mindfulness. Validation requires
the ability to observe and describe without necessarily adding to what
is observed, and to listen and

234 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES

interact nonjudgmentally. As you teach the validation skills, you may
need to review the mindfulness skills. How to recover from invalidation
is also included in this section. This skill teaches participants how to
validate themselves effectively when necessary. For a thorough
discussion of validation and how to use it see Linehan (1997).3

Strategies for Changing Behavior Finally, the middle path skills include
basic behavioral contingency management skills. The basic idea is that
systematic and contingent application of consequences following others'
behaviors can have an enormous impact on their behavior in the future.
Although telegraphing consequences of behavior is part of the core DEAR
MAN skills taught in Section V (Reinforce), in this section specific
contingency management skills are taught---­ including positive and
negative reinforcement, shaping, extinction, satiation, and punishment.
These are the very same skills that therapists also use in DBT. (See
Chapter 5 in this manual, and also see Chapter 10 of the main DBT text.)

Selecting Material to Teach As noted above, there is a great deal of
material for each skill in the interpersonal teaching notes that follow.
Most of it you will not cover the first time you teach specific skills.
The notes are provided to give you a deeper understanding of each skill
so that you can answer questions and add new teaching as you go. As in
Chapters 6 and 7, I have put a checkmark () next to material I almost
always cover. If I am in a huge rush, I may skip everything but
checkmarked points. Similarly, on this manual's special website
(www.guilford.com/skills-trainingmanual), I use stars () for core
handouts I almost always use. And as in Chapter 7, I have indicated
information summarizing research in special "Research Point" features.
The great value of research is that it can often be used to sell the
skills you are teaching. Moreover, as when you are teaching any skills
module, it is important that you have a basic understanding of the
specific interpersonal effectiveness skills you are teaching. Decide
what skills you are going to teach first. Carefully study the teach-

ing notes, handouts, and worksheets for each skill you have selected to
teach. Highlight the points you want to make, and bring a copy of the
relevant pages with you to teach from. Practice each skill, and make
sure you understand how to use it yourself. Before long you will
solidify your knowledge of each skill. At that point, you will find your
own favorite teaching points, examples, and stories, and can ignore
mine. Finally, a number of handouts in this module offer brief,
optional, multiple-choice quizzes of skills taught. They can be used
within group sessions and discussed, or can be assigned as homework. An
answer key for all of these handouts is provided below, and the key for
each handout is provided at the end of the sections in which the handout
might be used.

Answer Key for Multiple-­Choice Handouts Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 11a: Identifying Skills to Find People and Get Them to Like You
• Effective answers: 1A, 2B, 3A, 4A, 5A, 6B, 7B, 8B, 9B, 10B, 11B, 12A
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 12a: Identifying Mindfulness of
Others • Effective answers: 1B, 2B, 3A, 4A, 5A, 6A, 7B, 8B, 9B, 10A,
11B, 12B Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 13a: Identifying How to End
Relationships • Effective answers: 1B, 2B, 3B, 4A, 5B, 6B, 7B, 8B
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 16c: Identifying Dialectics •
Effective answers: 1A, 2B, 3B, 4B, 5A, 6C, 7B, 8B Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 18a: Identifying Validation • Effective answers:
1B, 2A, 3A, 4B, 5A, 6B, 7B, 8B Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 19a:
Identifying Self-­Validation • Effective answers: 1A, 2B, 3A, 4B, 5A, 6B
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 22a: Identifying Effective Behavior
Change Strategies • Effective answers: 1B, 2B, 3A, 4A, 5B, 6B, 7B, 8A

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 1 • 235

Teaching Notes I.

Goals of This Module (Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 1) Main Point:
The basic goal of this module is for participants to learn how to be
effective in interpersonal interactions, so that their interactions with
others will have outcomes they want. These skills teach participants how
to be effective at achieving their own goals without alienating the
other person or losing their self-­respect. Interpersonal effectiveness
skills are also necessary for strengthening current relationships and
for finding and building new relationships. Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 1: Goals of Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills. This handout is
intended to orient participants to interpersonal goals for which the
skills taught in this module might be very useful. Go over it briefly,
link the module to participants' goals, and generate some enthusiasm for
learning the interpersonal effectiveness skills. Then move to the next
handout. If time permits, have participants checkmark the goals that are
most important to them. Spend more time on the handout later, if
necessary. Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 1: Pros and Cons of
Using Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills (Optional). This worksheet is
designed to help participants (1) decide whether they want to use
interpersonal skills instead of power tactics to get what they want, and
(2) decide whether to go after what they want instead of giving up on
getting it. Its major use is to communicate that the goal is to be
effective in getting what they want (i.e., in reaching their own goals).
It is not about being nice, following rules, giving in, or doing what
other people want. This worksheet can also be used as an exercise to
improve the likelihood of being effective when a person is overcome with
emotions (e.g., when the person just wants to yell and scream, or to
avoid an interpersonal situation completely). It can also be used as a
teaching tool for how to figure out goals. For instructions in teaching
pros and cons, see the teaching notes for the Distress Tolerance module
(Chapter 10, Section V) on reviewing pros and cons as a way to make
behavioral decisions. Assign this worksheet as optional if you teach
other handouts in the session that have associated worksheets.

99

Discussion Point: Either before or after reviewing Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 1, ask participants to check off each goal that is
important to them in the boxes on the handout, and then to share
choices.

The goals of interpersonal effectiveness skills include the following:

99A. Be Skillful in Achieving Objectives with Others The skills in this
section are a variation on assertiveness skills. They have to do with
being interpersonally effective in two sets of situations. 1. Asking
Others to Do Things

99

Skills for asking others to do things we would like them to do include
making requests, initiating discussions, solving problems in
relationships/repairing relationships, and getting others to take our
opinions seriously. 2. Saying No to Unwanted Requests Effectively Skills
for saying no to unwanted requests include resisting pressure from
others and maintaining a position or point of view.

236 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 1

99

Discussion Point: Ask participants whether they have more trouble asking
for what they want or saying no to unwanted requests from others. Ask
who has trouble getting others to take their opinions seriously. Are
there some people with whom, or some times when, being assertive is
harder? How about easier? Discussion Point: Discuss with participants
how they view their own interpersonal skills. Some individuals will be
skillful at asking for things but not skillful at saying no, whereas
others can say no but cannot ask for anything. Still others are
deficient across the board. Sometimes individuals are able to apply
skills in some situational contexts but not in others. For example, some
people may be quite comfortable at saying no to strangers but not to
friends; others may be able to ask for help from friends but not from
their bosses. Elicit from each person the situations and skills he or
she feels are strong (enough) and those that need further work. Note to
Leaders: The major goal here is for participants to see the relevance of
interpersonal effectiveness skills training to their own lives by seeing
areas in which they need improvement. Keep in mind that participants'
descriptions of their strengths and weaknesses in these skills may not
correspond with their actual skill levels. Some will report having no
skills, but are able to apply skills in role plays; others may report
strong skills, but then demonstrate clear deficits in role plays. Both
sorts of participants will benefit from support and encouragement in
their process of building mastery and a fact-based sense of
self-­efficacy. Feel free to share with participants your own areas of
strength and weakness. This can serve to normalize the notion of skill
deficits by highlighting that we all have areas in which we can improve
our skills. In my experience, some individuals are exceptionally skilled
in many interpersonal situations and may present as if they do not need
interpersonal effectiveness skills training. However, a closer
discussion, especially of various situational contexts, will reveal that
almost everyone can use some skills training. Therefore, even with a
very skilled person, make every effort to identify areas where that
person can use improvement.

99B. Build Relationships, Strengthen Current Relationships, and End
Destructive Ones

Skills for relationships include skills for doing these things:  Not
letting hurts and problems build up.  Heading off problems.  Repairing
relationships (or ending them if necessary).  Resolving conflicts before
they get overwhelming.

Unattended relationships can develop cracks that create enormous stress.
This stress then increases emotional vulnerability, and life can go
downhill. Unattended relationships often blow up, and can end even when
people want them to continue. Having the ability to repair relationships
is much more important than keeping them from "tearing" in the first
place. However, the longer relationships remain unattended to, the
harder they are to repair. Relationships that are ignored can weaken and
disappear. Once a relationship disappears, it can be difficult to
resurrect it. Sometimes, rather than disappearing, relationships become
intolerably difficult; thus learning how to end an intolerably painful
and hopeless relationship is also an important skill. Note to Leaders:
If you plan on teaching the skills for building relationships and ending
destructive ones (Sections X--XIII of this module), then stress these
skills as a way to both find and build new relationships, as well as to
end hopeless relationships.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handouts 1, 2--2a • 237

99C. Walk the Middle Path A final set of interpersonal effectiveness
skills involves "walking the middle path" (a concept covered in Chapter
7 among the supplementary mindfulness skills). If you are teaching these
skills, emphasize these points to participants:  Keeping relationships
requires balancing our own priorities with the demands of others. 
Relationships require balancing change with acceptance without letting
go of either.

Maintaining relationships also require us to remember that relationships
are transactional. For relationships to work, it is important to
practice looking at all sides of situations, finding the kernel of truth
in other people's views. Although we need to have skills that can get
others to change their behavior, we must also balance that with
accepting others as they are.

II. 

Factors Reducing Interpersonal Effectiveness (Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 2--2a) Main Point: Lack of skill, indecision,
interference from emotions, prioritizing short-term goals over longterm
goals, interference from the environment, and interpersonal myths can
each make interpersonal effectiveness very difficult. Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 2: Factors in the Way of Interpersonal
Effectiveness. This handout can be reviewed quickly. If time is short,
skip the discussion and lecture points provided below. You can revisit
this handout later to troubleshoot difficulties in using interpersonal
effectiveness skills successfully. Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout
2a: Myths in the Way of Interpersonal Effectiveness (Optional). This
handout can be used as part of an exercise on identifying and
challenging worry thoughts and myths. See Section F below for a detailed
description. If time is short, skip this handout and instead describe
several myths when introducing the factors that interfere with
interpersonal effectiveness. Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 2:
Challenging Myths in the Way of Interpersonal Effectiveness (Optional).
Listing the same myths as on Handout 2a, this worksheet helps
participants develop new challenges or rewrite the challenges discussed
in group sessions in more personal language. The important point is for
the participants to "own" a challenge, not to necessarily think up one
on their own. There are also spaces for participants to write in and
challenge their own myths. Be careful about assigning too much homework,
but if you assign this worksheet, be sure to review it with
participants. If necessary, instruct them in how to rate intensity of
emotions. (For instructions, see Chapter 10, Section VI.) Interpersonal
Effectiveness Worksheet 7: Troubleshooting Interpersonal Effectiveness
Skills. If participants have already gone through the Interpersonal
Effectiveness skills module once and this is their second time,
encourage them to use this worksheet. It covers the same topics,
organized in the same sequence as in Handout 2 above. However, it is
overwhelming and hard to use when participants are going through the
module for the first time. It works much better when given at the
module's end or when these skills are repeated. (Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 9: Troubleshooting: When What You Are Doing Isn't
Working. This handout may also be appropriate when the module is
repeated. It also covers the same topics in the same sequence as Handout
2 and Worksheet 7.)

99Being interpersonally skillful is hard. There are many reasons why
interactions may not be effective.

238 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 2

99A. Lack of Needed Skills Say to participants: "When you lack skills,
you don't know what to say or how to act. You don't know how to behave
in order to obtain your interpersonal goals." 1. Lack of Ability versus
Lack of Motivation Lack of ability to behave in a certain way is very
different from lack of motivation. Emphasize that people learn social
behaviors by observing someone else do them first, practicing them, and
refining them until they can be used to obtain good results. People
sometimes don't have enough opportunities to observe; therefore, they
don't learn the behaviors. Or they may not have the chance to practice
the behaviors they do observe. 2. Ability, Observation, and Modification
Tell participants: "Having a skill means that you not only have a
specific ability (for instance, to say no), but that you can do two
other things."  "You have the ability to observe the effect of what you
do and how you do it on others."  "And you can then modify what you do,
based on this feedback, in order to have an in-

tended effect. Becoming interpersonally effective usually requires that
critical skills are overlearned, so that they are automatic when needed.
Any skill of consequence, however, ordinarily takes practice and
feedback many times over to master." Practice Exercise: Hold up your
hands as if you are holding a flute, and ask participants to do the
same. Then ask participants to pucker their lips and blow air as they
move their fingers over the imaginary holes in the flute. Ask them:
"Does this mean that all of you can now play the flute?" The same can be
said for sports, public speaking, solving problems, and---most
importantly---­ interpersonal skills. Elicit examples of skills
participants have learned that took lots of practice to get proficient
at. Note to Leaders: When I teach this, I do the practice exercise above
first. Then, using the information below, I explain why the ability to
blow air and move my fingers does not mean that I can play a flute.

99B. Indecision Say to participants: "Even if you have the ability to be
effective, you may not know or can't decide what you want. There are
several ways that indecision can hinder you."  "Not knowing what you
really want can be confusing and get in the way of being clear about

what you are asking for or saying no to."  "Indecision on how to balance
your needs with those of others can lead to ambivalence and

make it hard for you to know how insistent to be in asking or saying no
to things."  "Vacillating between asking for too much and not asking for
anything, or between the equal

extremes of saying no to everything and giving in to everything, can
keep you in an extreme position and make you unlikely to be effective."
Discussion Point: Discuss the tendency to go to extremes of asking (or
saying no) versus not asking (or giving in). Also discuss tendencies to
go to extremes: complete neediness (asking in a clinging, begging,
grasping, or hysterical manner) versus complete self-­sufficiency (never
asking, saying yes to everything); complete worthiness (asking in an
inappropriately demanding manner or refusing belligerently) versus
complete unworthiness (never asking or saying no). Elicit examples.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 2 • 239

99C. Interference from Emotions Tell participants: "Emotions may get in
the way of your ability to behave effectively. You may have the
capability to use interpersonal skills, but your skills are
mood-­dependent and are interfered with by your emotions."  Emotions can
inhibit skillful actions or overwhelm known skills. In fact, emotions
can be

so strong that emotional actions, words, and facial and body expressions
become automatic.  Automatic emotional reactions can be based on
previous conditioning. Or they can be a result

of believing myths (discussed below).  A person can have skills in one
set of situations but not in another, or in one mood but not in

another, or in one frame of mind but not in another. Discussion Point:
Elicit examples of strong emotions interfering with skillful behavior.
Discussion Point: Elicit examples of having variable skills, depending
on current emotions or mood.

99D. Prioritizing Short-Term Goals over Long-Term Goals Several factors
can cause us to give priority to short-term over long-term goals. Two
major ones are low distress tolerance and failure to think about
consequences. 1. Low Tolerance for Distress Low distress tolerance often
leads us to jump into a situation and demand what we want, even when it
is not in our long-term interest or is inconsistent with our long-term
goals, values, and/ or self-­respect. Example: If our tolerance for
conflict is low, we might end a relationship that we really want, or
give in to another person's wishes when we know we don't really want to.
2. Failure to Consider Consequences Sometimes we don't think about the
consequences of our actions for ourselves and the people we are
interacting with. When angry, we may make threats and demand our way
right this minute; in a calmer moment later, we realize that getting
what we want is less important than the relationship. Discussion Point:
Elicit examples of putting short-term over long-term goals and
regretting it later.

99E. Interference from the Environment Environmental factors, including
other people, may preclude effectiveness. At times even the most skilled
individuals cannot be effective at getting what they want, keeping
others liking them, or behaving in ways that they respect.  When the
environment is powerful, other people may simply refuse to give us what
we want,

or they may have the authority to make us do what they want. Saying no
or insisting on our rights under these circumstances may have very
negative consequences.  Sometimes there is no way to keep the other
person liking us and also get what we want or say no. People may be
threatened, jealous, or envious, or may have any number of other reasons
for not liking someone.  When we are faced with a conflict, and
achieving an objective is very important (e.g., food or medical care for
ourselves or our children), we may have to act in ways that damage our
pride or otherwise hurt our self-­respect.  Fully applying ourselves to
being interpersonally effective is the only way to know whether the
environment is preventing effectiveness. This includes preparing for
assertiveness ahead

240 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 2--2a

of time, and getting feedback on the plan from trusted individuals, such
as getting DBT skills coaching. Discussion Point: Some people believe
that all failures to get what they want from someone else are failures
in skills. They have difficulty seeing that sometimes the environment is
simply impervious to even the most skilled individuals. Thus, when they
fail to get what they want by using interpersonal effectiveness skills,
they may fall back into hopelessness, try an aggressive response, or
threaten (e.g., blackmail) other people. Although increased
interpersonal skills should increase the probability of getting
objectives met, they are not a guarantee. Elicit times when participants
have been very skillful (or seen someone else be skillful) but not
successful at getting what was wanted. Note to Leaders: Some individuals
have a very unrealistic view of the world and of what skilled people can
do. The idea that people often don't get what they want or need isn't
clear to them. The belief that people can always get what they want and
need precludes the necessity of developing distress tolerance skills.
Without such skills, frustration often turns into anger. Be very careful
on this point, especially during homework discussions.

99F. Interpersonal Myths All people have some worries about standing up
for themselves, expressing opinions, saying no, and so on. Sometimes
worries are based on myths about interpersonal behavior. Tell
participants that they can counteract worries and myths in several ways:
Arguing against them logically.  Checking the facts (see Emotion
Regulation Handout 8).  Practicing opposite action (see Emotion
Regulation Handout 10).  Practicing cope ahead with imagined negative
consequences (see Emotion Regulation Hand-

out 19). Counteracting worry thoughts and myths is an example of
cognitive modification or cognitive therapy. It can sometimes be useful
in getting people to do things they really want to do but are afraid to
do. Challenges to myths can be used to challenge worries that crop up
about trying interpersonal skills.

99

Practice Exercise: Conduct an exercise in identifying and challenging
myths. If you use Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 2a, distribute it
here. Avoid giving an introduction to the handout. Instead, ask
participants to read the myths, to circle the ones they believe are true
when they are in emotion mind, and to put a checkmark by the ones they
agree with when they are in wise mind. After the participants have
marked myths as true, ask which myths they checked and which they
circled. There are then two possible ways to proceed: 1. Ask those who
checked or circled a myth to offer challenges to one or both. 2. Use the
devil's advocate technique to discuss myths. In this strategy, you
present a myth and then make an extreme statement in favor of the myth,
thus getting participants to argue the case for the counterstatements.
As the participants argue against the myth, you continue to make extreme
and universal (i.e., applying to all people) arguments to the myth.
After several arguments, you give in and agree with the participants.
(See Chapter 7 of the main DBT text for further discussion of this
strategy.) The discussion on each statement should be resolved by
transcending the extremes to find a synthesis or balancing point of
view. Not every myth has to be discussed in this exercise; the
participants should be included in choosing which ones to go over.
Whichever strategy you use, the task of participants is to develop per-

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handouts 2--2a, 3 • 241

sonalized challenges or counterarguments against the myths. Ask everyone
to write challenges down as participants think them up. Be sure that
each challenge on the one hand contradicts the myth in some way, and on
the other hand is at least somewhat believable to individual
participants. For example, one participant might be able to challenge
the myth "I don't deserve to get what I want or need," with "I do
deserve to get what I want and need," but this might be too strong for
(and therefore rejected by) another participant. However, the second
participant might be able to practice the challenge "Sometimes it's OK
for me to get things I want or need." These challenges can be used as
cheerleading statements later, to help participants get themselves to
act effectively. Note to Leaders: A homework assignment might be to have
participants complete the challenges not covered during the exercise
above. Another assignment might be to have them observe themselves over
the week and write down any other myths that they operate by. They
should also think up challenges to these other myths. It is important to
have participants practice reviewing their personalized challenges, in
order to develop a strong habit of overcoming their myths. It can be
very effective to have participants develop a plan for reviewing their
challenges, such as placing them on their refrigerators or bathroom
mirrors for daily review.

Discussion Point: If you don't use Handout 2a, ask participants what
worry thoughts, assumptions, beliefs, and myths have gotten in the way
of their asking for what they want or need and saying no to unwanted
requests. Then generate challenges as noted in the exercise above for
some or all of the myths. Discussion Point: Unmanaged worries can
interfere with effectiveness even if they are not based on myths (e.g.,
"This person might get upset with me for asking," or "I hope my anger
doesn't get out of control," or "This person might say no to my request,
and I won't get what I want"). Elicit from participants worries that get
in the way of effectiveness.

G. Interplay of Factors Say to participants: "Very often, a combination
of various factors may be keeping you from being effective. For example,
the less you know, the more you worry, the worse you feel, the more you
can't decide what to do, the more ineffective you are, the more you
worry, and so on. Or the more you experience nongiving and authoritarian
environments, the more you worry, the less you practice skillfulness,
the less you know, the worse you feel, the more you can't decide what to
do, and so on."

III. Overview: Core Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills (Interpersonal
     Effectiveness Handout 3) Main Point: Introduce the core DBT
     interpersonal effectiveness skills. These are the basic
     assertiveness skills necessary to achieve objectives, maintain
     relationships, and enhance self-­respect. These three sets of skills
     are referred to by the mnemonics DEAR MAN, GIVE, and FAST. The
     effectiveness of these skills depends in part on two additional
     skills: clarifying priorities and determining how intensely to ask
     or say no. Interpersonal Handout 3: Overview: Obtaining Objectives
     Skillfully. This overview handout can be reviewed briefly or
     skipped, depending on time. Do not actually teach the material
     while going over the points below unless you are skipping the
     related handouts, all of which are ordinarily taught. Worksheet:
     None.

242 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 3--4

Say to participants: "The skills in this section of the module are aimed
at being effective when you ask someone for something or respond to a
request, while at the same time maintaining or even improving both the
relationship and your self-­respect."

99A. Clarifying Priorities Tell participants: "Clarifying your
priorities is the first and most important interpersonal skill. It is
the essential task of figuring out (1) what you actually want and how
important it is, compared to (2) keeping a positive relationship and (3)
keeping your own self-­respect.

99B. Objectives Effectiveness Skills: DEAR MAN Say to participants:
"DEAR MAN is DBT shorthand for the set of skills enabling you to
effectively obtain your objective or goal."

99C. Relationship Effectiveness Skills: GIVE Continue: "GIVE is DBT
shorthand for the set of skills enabling you to create or maintain a
positive relationship while you also try to obtain your objective."

99D. Self-­Respect Effectiveness Skills: FAST Continue: "FAST is DBT
shorthand for the set of skills enabling you to maintain or increase
your sense of self-­respect while at the same time trying to obtain your
objective."

99E. Skills for Evaluating Your Options Conclude the overview by telling
participants: "Every situation is different. Sometimes it is very
important to push hard to obtain your objective; at other times it can
be equally important to give up your personal goals in favor of someone
else's. These skills help you figure out how hard to push for what you
want and how strong to hold to saying no to someone else."

IV. Clarifying Goals in Interpersonal Situations (Interpersonal
    Effectiveness Handout 4) Main Point: To use interpersonal skills
    effectively, we have to decide the relative importance of (1)
    achieving our objective, (2) maintaining our relationship with the
    person(s) we are interacting with, and

<!-- -->

(3) maintaining our self-­respect. The skills we use depend on the
    relative importance of these three goals. Interpersonal
    Effectiveness Handout 4: Clarifying Goals in Interpersonal
    Situations. This handout reviews the goals and priorities an
    individual might have in any interpersonal situation. Be sure that
    participants understand this handout before moving on, as it is an
    important underpinning of subsequent handouts. Generally, what is
    most difficult for participants to understand is that all three of
    these priorities must be considered in every goal-­directed
    interpersonal situation. Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 3:
    Clarifying Priorities in Interpersonal Situations. Review this
    worksheet with participants. In describing the prompting event,
    remind them to use the mindfulness "what" skill of describing (see
    Mindfulness Handout 4). This is very important, because when it
    comes to interpersonal conflict or fears about an interpersonal
    situation, individuals often fail to notice that much of what they
    describe as happening in a situation is actually their
    interpretations or assumptions.

99A. Why Clarify Goals? To be effective in interpersonal interactions,
it is important for us to know what we actually want--- in other words,
what our goal is. This is no easy task, however. Many interactions get
off track

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 4 • 243

because we are not clear about what we really want. Interactions also
get off track when emotions interfere with knowing what we want.
Example: "If you are afraid of asking for what you want or of saying no
to a request, you may be too afraid even to think about what you want."
Example: "Shame and thinking you don't deserve to get what you want can
interfere with believing it is OK to have goals and objectives."

99

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when they have had
trouble figuring out what their actual goal was in an interpersonal
interaction. Discuss how these interactions turned out.

99B. Three Potential Goals in Interpersonal Situations 99 1. Objectives
Effectiveness Say to participants: "Objectives effectiveness refers to
attaining your objective or goal in a particular situation. Generally,
the objective is the reason for the interaction in the first place."
Emphasize: "The key question to ask yourself here is 'What specific
result or change do I want from this interaction?' This is the specific
change or outcome you want from the other person by the end of the
interaction. It may be what the other person is to do, to stop doing, to
commit to, to agree to, or to understand. It is important for the
objective to be as specific as possible. The clearer you are about what
you want, the easier it will be to apply objectives effectiveness
skills, and the clearer you will be as to whether or not you succeed in
reaching your goal."

99

Examples:  "Standing up for your rights in such a way that they are
taken seriously."  "Requesting others to do something in such a way that
they do what you ask."  "Refusing an unwanted or unreasonable request
and making the refusal stick."  "Resolving interpersonal conflict." 
"Getting your opinion or point of view taken seriously."

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants which goals they find
important (standing up for rights, making requests, refusing requests,
etc.). Which are hardest and require the most skills?

99

2.  Relationship Effectiveness Tell participants: "Relationship
    effectiveness refers to keeping or improving the relationship, while
    at the same time trying to achieve your goal in the interaction."
    Emphasize: "The key question to ask yourself here is 'How do I want
    the other person to feel about me after the interaction is over
    (whether or not I get the results or changes I want)?' At its best,
    you will get what you want, and the person may like or respect you
    even more than before. This likelihood is increased by using
    relationship effectiveness skills." Examples:  "Acting in a way that
    makes the other person actually want to give you what you are asking

for or feel good about your saying no to a request."  "Balancing
immediate goals with the good of the long-term relationship."

a.  Improving a Relationship Can Be a Main Objective

Explain to participants: "If the main goal of the interaction is to get
the other person to notice, like, or approve of you, or to stop
criticizing or rejecting you, then enhancing the relationship is the
objective and should be considered under objectives effectiveness. In
that case, relationship effectiveness refers to choosing a way to go
about developing, improving, or keeping the relationship that does not
at the same time damage the relationship over the long run."

244 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 4

Example: "You understand the other person's perspective, while at the
same time you ask this person to change how he or she treats you. You
avoid threats, judgments, or attacks."

99

b.  Always Making the Relationship the Main Objective Doesn't Work

Many individuals, of course, are highly concerned with maintaining
relationships, approval, and liking. Some are willing to sacrifice
personal objectives for the sake of interpersonal relationship goals.
They may operate under the myth that if they sacrifice their own needs
and wants to other people, their relationships will go more smoothly,
approval will be ever forthcoming, and no problems will arise.
Discussion Point: Elicit examples of when participants have made
relationships overly important, at the expense of their own objectives
and self-­respect---or even the relationships themselves.

99

c.  Subverting Personal Needs in a Relationship Doesn't Work

Draw a time line on the blackboard like that in Figure 8.1. At the left
end of the time line, mark the beginning of a relationship. Then move
the chalk toward the right as if time were marching on, and discuss how
a relationship goes if a person constantly subverts his or her own needs
for the sake of a relationship. Although a person can survive in such a
relationship for some time, frustrations will build up and will have to
be dealt with. Usually at the point where frustrations are
long-­standing, the unmet needs are large, and the sense of inequity is
extreme, one of two things will happen: The frustrated individual will
(1) blow up and thereby risk losing the relationship through the other
person's rejection; or (2) in frustration, leave the relationship on his
or her own. Either way, the relationship comes to an end or is in
serious jeopardy. Discussion Point: Discuss the ways in which constantly
subverting personal needs for the sake of a relationship has worked in
participants' lives. Usually someone can give examples of how he or she
has blown up and ruined a relationship. Behaviors that may show up at
the far end of the continuum include violent acts or threats, screaming
or yelling, saying very hurtful things, and suicide attempts. (Other
dysfunctional behaviors can also be used as examples.) Such behaviors
often function to get someone else to take a person's feelings and
opinions seriously, or they may function to get other people to change
their behavior. It is important to elicit from participants how blowing
up or walking out of relationships inadvertently jeopardizes their own
goals. d. Extreme Behaviors May Be Effective in the Short Term but Not
over the Long Term

Say to clients: "Extreme, unskillful behaviors early in a relationship
may get you what you want in the moment, but they can also jeopardize a
relationship's very existence in the long run. Employing interpersonal
skills will not only enhance your relationships, but improve your
chances of obtaining interpersonal and social approval rather than the
opposite." Discussion Point: A strategy that is sometimes useful at this
point and at many other points is to ask participants to imagine another
person behaving toward them in extreme ways, such as using violence,
threats of suicide or other terrible acts, or blowing up. Ask, "How
would it feel?"

Subverting personal needs Relationship over time

You blow up or You end it

FIGURE 8.1. Over time, subverting personal needs in a relationship
usually ends the relationship.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 4 • 245

From that perspective, individuals often find it easier to see the
dysfunctional nature of these behaviors. The main goal here is to elicit
participants' commitment to the value of learning and practicing
interpersonal skills. Of course, commitments often waver in the actual
situations where employing the skills is necessary; nonetheless,
obtaining commitment is the first step in the process of shaping
interpersonal skills. Note to Leaders: Participants may have great
difficulty seeing this point. In my experience, some individuals believe
that extreme behaviors are not only effective but are the only behaviors
possible, given the circumstances of their lives or of the group or
culture in which they are living. It is essential at this point to help
them develop some insight into how these strategies are self-­defeating
in the long run. Other individuals confuse the idea that a behavior can
have a consequence (e.g., can be inconveniencing or hurtful) with the
idea that the person intends the consequence. It is important to discuss
the difference.

99

3.  Self-­Respect Effectiveness Instruct participants: "Self-­respect
    effectiveness is maintaining or improving your respect for yourself,
    and respecting your own values and beliefs, while you try to attain
    your objectives. Self-­respect effectiveness means acting in ways
    that fit your sense of morality, and that make you feel a sense of
    competence and mastery." Emphasize: "The key question to ask
    yourself here is 'How do I want to feel about myself after the
    interaction is over (whether or not I get the results or changes I
    want)?' "

<!-- -->

a.  Improving Self-­Respect Can Be a Main Objective

Say to participants: "If the main goal of the interaction is to do
something that will enhance your self-­respect, then enhancing
self-­respect is the objective and should be considered under objectives
effectiveness. This is particularly the case when the simple act of
standing up and speaking is most important---in other words, when
actually getting what you want is not as important as asserting what you
want (such as asking for something, saying no, or expressing an
opinion). In these cases, self-­respect effectiveness refers to how you
go about improving or keeping your self-­respect. Relationship
effectiveness refers to choosing a way to improve your self-­respect that
does not at the same time inadvertently damage your self-­respect either
short term or long term." Examples: Again, give a number of examples: 
"Standing up for yourself."  "Defending a friend."  "Stepping forward to
do or say something courageous."  "Voting for what you really believe in
(even if you are in the minority or will lose friends

over your vote)."

99

b.  Always Making Self-­Respect the Main Objective Doesn't Work

Some individuals make maintaining their self-­respect the major issue in
almost all interactions. Always wanting to be "on top" or to have
control or power, never letting another person win in an interaction,
wanting to prove a point or defend a position no matter what--- each of
these positions can compromise long-term effectiveness.

99

c.  Violating Our Own Moral Values Diminishes Self-­Respect in the Long
    Term

Giving in on important things just for the sake of approval, lying to
please others or to get what we want, or any activity that is
experienced as "selling out" or "selling our souls" diminishes
self-­respect over time.

246 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 4

99

d.  Acting Helpless Also Diminishes Self-­Respect in the Long Term

Even if acting helpless is strategic---that is, deliberately calculated
to get someone to do something---the strategy will inevitably lead to
reduced mastery and self-­respect if it is overused. Discussion Point:
Elicit from participants times when they have done things in
relationships that reduced their sense of self-­respect. When have they
acted in ways that enhanced their sense of self-­respect? Where do they
need to improve their skills?

C. Deciding on the Relative Importance of the Three Effectiveness
Types 1. All Three Types Must Always Be Considered Emphasize that
participants need to consider all three types of effectiveness in every
situation with a specific interpersonal objective or goal.

99

2.  Each Type of Effectiveness May Be More or Less Important in a Given
    Situation Note that, generally, one type of effectiveness may lose
    importance when pursuing it will interfere with a more highly valued
    type of effectiveness.

99

3.  The Effectiveness of a Behavior in a Particular Situation Depends on
    a Person's Priorities Discuss the following examples of situations,
    goals, and priorities. Example: Situation: Diego's landlord keeps
    his damage deposit unfairly. Objective: Get the damage deposit back
    (most important to Diego). Relationship: Keep the landlord's good
    will and liking, or at least keeping good reference (second most
    important). Self-­respect: Not lose self-­respect by getting too
    emotional, "fighting dirty," threatening. Example: Situation:
    Carla's best friend wants to come over and discuss a problem; Carla
    wants to go to bed. Objective: Go to bed. Relationship: Keep a good
    relationship with the friend (most important to Carla).
    Self-­respect: Balance caring for the friend with caring for herself
    (second most important). Example: Situation: Tiffany wants a raise;
    her boss wants sex in return. Objective: Get the raise; stay out of
    bed with the boss. Relationship: Keep the boss's respect and good
    will (second most important). Self-­respect: Not violate her own
    moral code by sleeping with the boss (most important to Tiffany).
    Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times they have risked
    losing what they want, a relationship, or their self-­respect for a
    short-term relationship gain.

Examples may include attempting or threatening suicide or violence to
get what they want or keep someone from leaving; attacking another
person for voicing criticism; lying (and being found out) to get
something; demanding to get their way; laying a "guilt trip" on another
person to get that person to do something; and so on.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 4 • 247

99

Practice Exercise: Have participants generate other situations and
identify the objective(s) in the situation, the relationship issue, and
the self-­respect issue for each situation. Discuss priorities for each
situation. Continue generating situations until it is clear that the
participants have grasped the essential points. The following examples
can be used; however, be sure to ask participants what would be most
important to them before suggesting the priority given in boldface at
the end of each example.

Example: Situation: Yvonne is in a very difficult financial situation
and has overdrawn her bank account. There is now a big overdraft fee on
the account. Yvonne goes to the bank to ask a clerk to remove the fee.
Objective: Get the overdraft fee removed from the account. Relationship:
Keep the clerk's good will. Self-­respect: Not lie about what happened;
not get too emotional and cry in front of the clerk. In a very serious
financial situation, getting the objective may be most important.
Example: Situation: A friend asks Tony to engage in an illegal activity
with him or her. Objective: Not do anything illegal. Relationship: Keep
a good relationship with the friend. Self-­respect: Not go against Tony's
values. If engaging in activity could lead to legal trouble, getting the
objective may be most important. Example: Situation: Sharon's boss asks
her to stay overtime and finish a project. Objective: Go home and relax.
Relationship: Keep a good relationship with the boss. Self-­respect:
Balance self-care with doing the job well. If the boss does not overdo
these types of requests, keeping the relationship may be most important.
Example: Situation: Sharon's boss asks her to stay overtime and finish a
project. Objective: Go to her child's piano recital right after work.
Relationship: Keep a good relationship with the boss. Self-­respect:
Balance self-care with doing the job well. Even if the boss does not
overdo these types of requests, going to the piano recital may be most
important. Example: Situation: Jim's younger sister asks him to cover
for her and tell their parents she spent the night at Jim's place, which
is not true. Objective: Keep his sister out of trouble. Relationship:
Maintain a good relationship with his sister. Self-­respect: Not violate
his moral code of not lying.

248 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 4, 5--5a

If lying is not a large violation of Jim's moral code, the objective may
be most important. If it is, self-­respect may be most important.
Example: Situation: Juanita gets into a controversy with her partner
about a political issue. Objective: Voice her opinion and have it taken
seriously. Relationship: Maintain a good relationship with her partner.
Self-­respect: Stand up for what she believes. Self-­respect may be most
important. Practice Exercises: Ask participants to generate areas where
they need to ask for something or say no to something. Work with
participants in describing objectives, relationship issues, and self-­
respect issues. Discuss variations of which would be most important.

V.  

Objectives Effectiveness Skills: DEAR MAN (Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handouts 5--5a) Main Point: Objectives effectiveness skills help us to
be as effective as possible in achieving our objectives or goals. The
term DEAR MAN is a way to remember these skills. Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 5: Guidelines for Objectives Effectiveness:
Getting What You Want (DEAR MAN). This handout describes the skills to
use when a person wants to ask for something, say no, maintain a
position or point of view, or achieve some other interpersonal
objective. The skills are Describe, Express, Assert, Reinforce, (stay)
Mindful, Appear confident, and Negotiate. Teach these didactically
rather quickly, and then move to doing role plays. Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 5a: Applying DEAR MAN Skills to a Difficult
Current Interaction (Optional). This handout gives examples of how to
handle situations where the other person also has very good
interpersonal skills and keeps refusing legitimate requests or keeps
asking for what he or she wants even when the first person keeps saying
no. Material here can be woven into your teaching or can be given to
participants as a take-home to read. Skills described can be practiced
if there is time or can be covered in advanced classes. Interpersonal
Effectiveness Worksheet 4: Writing Out Interpersonal Effectiveness
Scripts. This is a worksheet for participants who want to figure out
what they are going to do and say before they practice their
interpersonal skills. Review the worksheet with participants and remind
them to use the mindfulness "what" skill of describing (Mindfulness
Handout 4) when describing the prompting event. Notice that this sheet
requires participants to write down their goals for objectives,
relationship, and self-­respect effectiveness. You might want to review
these definitions, as well as one or two examples, when you review this
sheet. For this lesson on DEAR MAN skills, tell participants to fill out
the worksheet through Step 6 (or as far as you have taught).
Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 5: Tracking Interpersonal
Effectiveness Skills Use. This is a general worksheet for tracking use
of interpersonal effectiveness skills. Like Worksheet 3, it requires
describing the prompting event and figuring out and writing down
interpersonal priorities. It also asks about conflicts in priorities.
(This part does not need to be filled out if there were no conflicts.)
Next, participants describe what they actually said and did in the
situation. The check lines are included on the sheet as a reminder of
what the skills actually are, and to cue the participants both in
practice and in writing down. Finally, the worksheet asks how the
interaction went. Here you want the participants to say

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 5 • 249 whether they actually got their objectives met and what
effects the interaction had on the relationship and their own
self-­respect.

A. What Is Objectives Effectiveness? Say to participants: "Objectives
effectiveness refers to attaining your objective or specific goal in a
particular situation. The objective is ordinarily the reason for the
interaction in the first place. These skills are really the same thing
as assertiveness skills. Several types of situations call for objectives
effectiveness or assertiveness."  "Getting others to do what you ask
them to do."  "Saying no to unwanted requests and making it stick." 
"Resolving interpersonal conflict or making changes in relationships." 
"Getting your rights respected."  "Getting your opinion or point of view
taken seriously."

99B. The DEAR MAN Skills Tell participants: "You can remember these
skills with the term DEAR MAN.4 This stands for Describe, Express,
Assert, Reinforce, (stay) Mindful, Appear confident, Negotiate."

99

1.  Describe the Situation Instruct clients: "When necessary, begin by
    briefly describing the situation you are reacting to. Stick to the
    facts. No judgmental statements. Be objective." Why describe?
    Beginning an assertion by reviewing facts can be useful for a number
    of reasons. First, it ensures that the other person is oriented to
    the events leading to the request, refusal, opinion, or point of
    view. Also, sticking to objective facts helps the two parties get on
    the same page and begin a pattern of agreeing. Finally, if the other
    person is not in agreement on the basic facts of the situation, it
    gives the participant a fair warning that the assertion might not be
    well received or successful. Remind participants that describing
    here is just like using the mindfulness skill of describing. When
    there is conflict or fear that the other person will disagree with a
    participant's version of events, describing accurately can be very
    difficult. To help participants get the idea of describing
    observable facts, have them consider what a third party could have
    observed, or would agree had occurred. Or participants might
    consider what could be submitted for evidence in a court. Example:
    "I've been working here for 2 years and have not gotten a raise,
    even though my performance reviews have been very positive."
    Example: "This is the third time you've asked this week for a ride
    home from work." Example: "I have gone over our budget and our
    outstanding debts very carefully, to see whether we do or do not
    have enough money for a vacation." Example: "I bought this shirt 2
    weeks ago, and the receipt says I can return it within 90 days. The
    clerk refused to take it back, saying it was on sale. But, I have my
    receipt right here, and it says I can return it."

99

Practice Exercises: Role-play some of these examples, and elicit
feedback from group members on the experience of describing events.
Suggest that participants try describing really difficult interpersonal
situations (briefly, giving just the facts) or times when they were
angry with someone. Be sure to give feedback when participants drift
from describing events to describing interpretations as if they were the
events. For example, they should only say, "This is the third time you
have left the front door unlocked," as a prelude to asking someone to
stop leaving the door unlocked if it is indeed the third time.

250 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 5

Note to Leaders: Practice Exercises are essential in teaching
interpersonal skills. Once a chunk of material is presented and
discussed, move to rehearsal, where the material just learned can be
practiced. To get a good situation to practice, elicit examples from
participants, dream them up yourself, or use one or more of the examples
given below. Rehearsal techniques are as follows: • Rapid rehearsal. Go
around the room and have each person briefly rehearse a particular
skill. For example, ask participants to describe a problem situation
where they want to ask for something. For example, "There are a lot of
dishes to wash," as a prelude to asking someone to help wash the dishes.
Next, have participants practice going around and expressing feelings or
opinions about a situation (either the one practiced for describing or a
new one), and likewise for asserting (by asking for something or
refusing directly) and for reinforcing. You can have everyone practice
on the same situation (which either you or the participants make up), or
have each person use a situation from his or her own life. Practicing on
the same situation is usually quicker if time is of the essence. Use
this procedure at least once for each individual skill. • Role playing
with a leader. One person can rehearse (role-play) a situation with you,
the leader, during the session. Usually, this is done when the
participant is describing homework and it seems useful to try acting
differently in the situation right away. It can also be used when a
participant wants (or needs) help with particular types of situations. •
Role playing with other participants. Participants can role-play a
situation, taking turns playing the person who is asking or saying no
and the other person in the situation. Taking the part of the other
person can be very important, because it gives participants an idea of
what it feels like when someone else uses behavioral skills on them. •
Dialogue rehearsal. If a participant simply cannot role-play or refuses
to do so, present the situation in story fashion: Ask, "Then what would
you say?" Wait for a response, and then say, "OK, then the other person
says \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. What would you say
next?" • Covert rehearsal. If a participant refuses even dialogue
rehearsal, ask him or her to role-play the situation mentally and
imagine giving a skilled response. Do a fair amount of prompting to
guide the participant's attention and focus. Do not sacrifice rehearsal
in order to present more material. Role playing is often the most
difficult procedure for therapists with little experience in behavior
therapy; nonetheless, it is essential. (You might try the role-play
procedures with your DBT consultation team, or even with a friend, to
get some practice.) Role playing can also be hard for participants at
first, but with experience it gets easier. At the beginning, you
sometimes have to pull or drag them through the practice. The most
important thing with a reluctant role player is that you not fall out of
role, even if he or she does. Just keep responding to the person as if
you are actually in the situation you are rehearsing. Usually this will
do the trick, and the person will get back into the role play.

2.  Express Clearly Say to participants: "Next, express clearly how you
    feel or what you believe about the situation. Don't expect the other
    person to read your mind or know how you feel. For instance, give a
    brief rationale for a request or for saying no." Why express?
    Explain to participants: "By sharing your personal reactions to the
    situation, you are making it easier for the other person to figure
    out what you really want from the interaction. This can help alert
    the other individual to what makes the situation important to you,
    and can potentially draw personal interest to your situation. This
    can make you feel vulnerable at times, but it also has the advantage
    of providing important information to the other person." Example: "I
    believe that I deserve a raise." Example: "I'm getting home so late
    that it is really hard for me and my family." Example: "I am very
    worried about our current finances."

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 5 • 251

Example: "I believe that I have a right to return this, and I am
distressed that your clerk would refuse to take it back, particularly
because there is no damage to it and I have the receipt."

99

Practice Exercises: Role-play some examples, and elicit feedback from
group members on the experience of hearing expressions of feelings. This
can help clarify the value of expressing genuine thoughts and feelings.

99

Note that the Describe and Express skills are not always necessary. For
example, a person might simply ask a family member going to the grocery
store to get some orange juice (without saying, "We're out and I'd like
some"). In a hot, stuffy room, the person could ask someone else to open
a window (without necessarily saying, "The room is stuffy and I'm
feeling hot"). In saying no to a request, the person might simply say,
"No, I can't do it." Every participant, however, should learn and
practice each of the skills, even if not all of them are always needed.
3. Assert Wishes Tell participants, "The third DEAR MAN skill is to ask
for what you want. Say no clearly. Don't expect people to know what you
want them to do if you don't tell them. Don't beat around the bush,
never really asking or saying no. Don't tell them what they should do.
Be clear, concise, and assertive. Bite the bullet and ask or say no."
Example: "I would like a raise. Can you give it to me?" Example: "I have
to say no tonight. I just can't give you a ride home so often." Example:
"We simply do not have the money for the vacation we planned for this
year."

99 99

Example: "Will you accept a return on the shirt?" a. Expressing Is Not
Asserting

Many individuals feel very uncomfortable with asking an assertive
question, and will need practice and simple feedback on whether or not
they are actually asking a question (often confusing Express with
Assert). b. Asking versus Demanding

Some individuals feel very strongly that asking for things is weak, and
that in many instances they should not have to ask for what they want,
as others should be told or know what to do and do it. There are two
points to make here.  First, orient them to the difference between
assertiveness and aggressiveness. When peo-

ple get their way by demanding and not giving the other person any say
in the outcome, this is controlling, is potentially hostile, and tends
to damage relationships. The group might give feedback on who wishes to
be spoken to that way.  Second, if a person tells someone what to do
(rather than asking the person to do something), but does not request
feedback on whether or not he or she will do it (i.e., with a question
such as "Will you do that for me?"), then by the end of the interaction
the person will not be certain whether or not the goal has been reached.
Has the other person committed to, agreed upon, or accepted anything?

99

Practice Exercise: Role-play the "demanding/telling" versus the "asking"
strategies with participants, asking for feedback on strength of
assertiveness (such as on a scale from 0 to 10).

99

Practice Exercise: Role-play some examples, and ask each group member to
role-play making one request to the person sitting next to him or her.
Go all around the circle. Afterward, have participants discuss how it
felt to be assertive, as well as how it felt to be asked. Give feedback
to participants if they ask in a harsh or demanding way.

252 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 5

4.  Reinforce Say to participants: "The fourth DEAR MAN skill is to
    reinforce the other person. That is, identify something positive or
    rewarding that would happen for the other person if he or she gives
    the response you want. This can involve taking time to consider the
    other person's perspective and motivation, and drawing connections
    between what you're asking for and what the person wants or needs.
    Alternatively, you could offer to do something for the other person,
    if the other does this thing for you. At a minimum, express
    appreciation after anyone does something consistent with your
    request." The basic idea here is that people are motivated by
    gaining positive consequences (and by avoiding negative
    consequences). Explain to participants: "Linking your request to
    consequences that other people desire will make them more likely to
    agree. Also, if other people do not gain at least some of the time
    from complying with a request, taking no for an answer, or listening
    to your opinions, then they may stop responding in a positive way."
    Example: "I will be a lot happier and probably more productive if I
    get a salary that reflects my value to the company." Example: "I
    would really appreciate it if you would accept that I can't always
    give you rides home." Example: "I think we will both sleep better if
    we stay within our budget." Example: "My hope is that we can work
    this out, so that I can continue shopping in this store and
    encouraging my friends to do likewise." Discussion Point: The notion
    of behaviors' being controlled by consequences, instead of by
    concepts of "good" and "bad" or "right" and "wrong," can be
    particularly difficult for some participants to grasp. Discuss this
    idea with participants.

Emphasize to clients that "carrots" are more effective than "sticks."
That is, motivating with positive consequences (carrots) tends to be
more effective than punishments (sticks) not only for maintaining
positive relationships, but also for getting people actually to follow
through with desired behaviors once the punishment is past. Although
identifying positive consequences often takes more effort, it tends to
pay off in effectiveness. However, when a request is extremely important
and there are either no options for positive consequences or they have
not worked, it may be necessary to motivate by introducing a negative
consequence. Note to Leaders: If you plan to teach the behavior change
strategies of reinforcement, punishment, and extinction (see Section
XVII of this chapter and Interpersonal Effectiveness Handouts 20--22),
or have already taught them, you can reference the first two here.
Extinction can be referenced later when you review the broken record and
ignoring attacks (see below).

5.  (Stay) Mindful Tell participants: "The next DEAR MAN skill is to
    stay mindful of your objectives in the situation. Maintain your
    position and avoid being distracted onto another topic. There are
    two useful techniques here."

<!-- -->

a.  The "Broken Record"

Instruct clients: "The first technique is to act like a skipping record
on a turntable. That is, keep asking, saying no, or expressing your
opinion over and over and over. This can include starting the DEAR
script again from the top, or from any part that seems to make the most
sense. Keep saying the exact same thing. The idea is that you don't have
to think up something different to say each time. The key is to keep a
mellow voice tone---'kill them with kindness,' so to speak. The strength
is in the persistence of maintaining the position."

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 5 • 253

Go around and practice this with each person. This is perhaps one of the
most important objectives effectiveness skills. Participants can usually
learn it without much trouble, because it is easy to do and remember. b.
Ignoring Attacks and Diversions

Tell participants: "The second technique is that if another person
attacks, threatens, or tries to change the subject, ignore their
threats, comments, or attempts to divert you. Just keep making your
point and don't take the bait." If participants object to this (and many
will), continue: "Paying attention to attacks gives the other person
control. When you respond to an attack, you often lose track of your
objective---and when that happens, the other person has taken control of
the conversation. Also, if you pay attention to attacks, respond to them
in any way, or let them divert you in the slightest, then you are
reinforcing the attacks and diversions---which means that they are
likely to occur more often. If you want to respond to the attacks, that
is another issue and can be dealt with at another time or after this
discussion is finished." Example: Here is an instance of giving the
other person control: R equester: Would you give me the money you owe
me? Other: You are such a jerk for bringing up the fact that I owe you
money when you know I don't have much money. R equester: I'm not a jerk
for wanting my money back. Other: Yes, you are. You went and told my
wife that I owe you money and that I am 3 months late in paying you
back. R equester: No, I did not tell her that. Who told you that? \[And
on and on and on.\] Check to be sure that participants see that this is
an example of getting off track. Discussion Point: Once participants get
the hang of this skill, it can be quite fun to use. Elicit feedback on
this point from participants, paying special attention to their belief
that they have to respond to every criticism or attack made by another.
Note to Leaders: Be sure to practice both ignoring attacks and the
"broken record" with all participants. Used together, these two
strategies constitute a very effective skill for maintaining a refusal
or putting pressure on someone to comply with a request. When the other
person attacks, a participant should simply replay the "broken record."
It is extremely difficult to keep attacking or criticizing a person who
doesn't respond or "play the game." But being a broken record and
ignoring diversions are a lot harder than they look. The only way for
participants to get the hang of these skills is to practice. Also, it
can be a nice idea to have participants practice with each other, to see
what having their own attacks and diversion strategies ignored or having
another person keep repeating a request, opinion, or refusal feels like.
The key to both the "broken record" and ignoring attacks is to keep
hostility out of the voice while keeping on track.

99

6.  Appear Confident Encourage clients: "Use a confident voice tone, and
    display a confident physical manner and posture, with appropriate
    eye contact. Such a manner conveys to both the other person and
    yourself that you are efficacious and deserve respect for what you
    want. No stammering, whispering, staring at the floor, retreating,
    saying you're not sure, or the like."

99

Discussion Point: Note that the skill is "Appear confident," not "Be
confident." Note that it is perfectly reasonable to be nervous or scared
during a difficult conversation; however, acting ner-

254 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 5--5a

vous or scared will interfere with effectiveness. Elicit examples from
participants about situations where it may be important to appear
confident even when they are not. Discussion Point: How confident to act
in a given situation is a judgment call. A person needs to walk a fine
line between appearing arrogant and appearing too apologetic. Elicit
examples from participants.

99

7.  Negotiate Say to participants: "The final DEAR MAN skill is
    negotiation. Be willing to give to get. Offer and ask for
    alternative solutions to the problem. Reduce your request. Maintain
    your no, but offer to do something else or solve the problem another
    way." Continue: "An alternative technique is to 'turn the
    tables'---that is, to turn the problem over to the other person. Ask
    for alternative solutions." Example: "What do you think we should
    do? I'm not able to say yes, and you really seem to want me to. What
    can we do here? How can we solve this problem?" Discussion Point:
    Negotiating or turning the tables is useful when ordinary requesting
    or refusing is going nowhere. There are many variations on the
    negotiating strategy. Get participants to discuss any time they have
    negotiated or turned the tables.

C. Applying DEAR MAN Skills to a Difficult Current Interaction To turn
around a really difficult situation, a person can focus the skills on
the other person's behavior right now. See Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 5a for examples of effective and ineffective scripts for the
following four steps. 1. Describe the Current Interaction Tell
participants: "If the 'broken record' and ignoring don't work, make a
statement about what is happening between you and the other person now,
but without imputing the person's motives." 2. Express Feelings or
Opinions about the Interaction Say: "For instance, in the middle of an
interaction that is not going well, you can express your feelings of
discomfort in the situation." 3. Assert Wishes in the Situation Say:
"When a person is refusing your request, you can suggest that you put
the conversation off until another time. Give the other person a chance
to think about it. When another person is pestering you, you ask him or
her politely to stop it." 4. Reinforce Say: "When you are saying no to
someone who keeps asking, or when someone won't take your opinion
seriously, suggest ending the conversation, since you aren't going to
change your mind anyway." Practice Exercise: Using Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 5a, go around the room and have one person read an
example of an effective statement, and the next person read one of the
ineffective statements. Keep going until everyone has had a chance to
read a statement. Discuss the difference in emotional responses to both
types of statements.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handouts 5a--6 • 255

99D. Elicit and Review Ideas for Practicing DEAR MAN Skills An essential
component of interpersonal skills training is behavioral rehearsal, both
in sessions and between sessions as homework. It is important to discuss
situations where DEAR MAN skills can be used. 1. Use the Skills If a
Situation Arises Emphasize that participants are to try to use their
skills when a situation occurs between sessions where they can ask for
something or say no. 2. Actively Search for Practice Situations Say to
participants: "If nothing arises in daily life to provide an opportunity
to practice, it is important to dream up situations where you can
practice. That is, do not just wait for a situation to arise where you
can practice. Actively search out situations." If no situations arise
naturally, suggest creating opportunities to practice. The practice
ideas listed below are examples of ones participants can create for
practice. Discussion Point: Elicit from participants what DEAR MAN
skills they are willing to practice during the week. Describe items
below if participants have difficulty coming up with something. Discuss
any objections to doing DEAR MAN. Be flexible here. Remember your
principles of shaping. (See Chapter 10 of the main DBT text.)

3.  Practice Ideas  "Go to a library and ask for assistance in finding a
    book." (Variation: "Go to a store and

ask the salesperson to help you find something.")  "While you are
talking with someone, change the subject."  "Invite a friend to dinner
(at your house or at a restaurant)."  "Ask a waiter/waitress at a
restaurant a question about your bill."  "Take old books to a used-book
store and ask how much they are worth."  "Pay for something costing less
than \$1.00 with a \$5.00 bill, and ask for change."  "Ask for special
'fixings' on a sandwich at a fast-food restaurant." (A variation of this
is to

ask for a substitution on the menu when ordering a meal.)  "Ask a store
manager to order something you would like to buy that is not usually
carried

by the store."  "Ask coworkers or classmates to do a favor for you (such
as fix you a cup of coffee while

they are fixing their own, let you look at their notes, or lend you
their textbook)."  "Ask someone you know for a ride home."  "Disagree
with someone's opinion."  "Ask a parent, spouse, partner, or child to
accept more responsibility in a specific area."  "Ask a friend for help
in fixing something."  "Ask a person to stop doing something that
bothers you."  "Ask somebody you don't know well what time it is."

VI. Relationship Effectiveness Skills: GIVE (Interpersonal Effectiveness
    Handouts 6--6a) Main Point: Relationship effectiveness skills are
    aimed at maintaining or improving our relationship with another
    person while we try to get what we want in the interaction. The term
    GIVE is a way to remember these skills. Interpersonal Effectiveness
    Handout 6: Guidelines for Relationship Effectiveness: Keeping the
    Relationship. This handout describes the GIVE skills: (be) Gentle,
    (act) Interested, Validate, (use an) Easy

256 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 6--6a

manner. Quickly teach these skills didactically, and then, as with the
objectives effectiveness skills, move to doing role plays. Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 6a: Expanding the V in GIVE: Levels of Validation
(Optional). This material lists six different ways to validate (the V in
GIVE). It can be covered with or without using the handout. A fuller
description of these steps in validation is provided in the later
discussion of walking the middle path for interpersonal effectiveness
(see Section XVI of this chapter, and Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handouts 17 and 18). Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 4: Writing
Out Interpersonal Effectiveness Scripts; Interpersonal Effectiveness
Worksheet 5: Tracking Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills Use. These
worksheets are the same as those used for the DEAR MAN skills.
Instructions for their use can be found at the start of Section V,
above.

99A. What Is Relationship Effectiveness? 99

Tell participants: "Relationship effectiveness refers to improving or
maintaining a good relationship with the other person in an interaction,
while at the same time trying to obtain your objective." "When improving
a relationship is the main objective, interpersonal effectiveness
focuses on how you go about trying to improve the relationship. For
instance, is your voice gentle and respectful, or are you angry and
yelling? Do you ask, or do you demand? Do you listen to the other
person, or do you cut this person off?" Example: "If you cry and throw a
tantrum every time your best friends forget your birthday, you will
surely get them to remember your birthday in the future, but they may
remember it with bitterness instead of love and affection. A more
effective approach might be gently reminding them a few days ahead of
time, or asking them with an easy manner to put your birthday in their
calendar so they remember it." Emphasize that relationship effectiveness
is always needed in any interaction. Participants will sometimes insist
that they have no relationship goal in certain interactions---for
example, when dealing with a store clerk they never intend to see again,
or when breaking up with a significant other. You can generally dispel
this idea by asking them to imagine two scenarios. In the first one, the
objective goal is met (e.g., a participant's significant other
understands that the relationship is over), but the interaction is not
relationship-­effective (e.g., the significant other leaves wishing that
the participant would drop dead). In the second scenario, the objective
goal is met, and this time the interaction is relationship-­effective
(e.g., the significant other leaves thinking that the participant has
handled this very respectfully, and wishing the best for the
participant). Ask: All things being equal, which scenario would group
members prefer? The presence of a relationship goal becomes obvious. It
is simply a lower priority.

99B. The GIVE Skills Say to participants: "You can remember these skills
with the term GIVE. This stands for (be) Gentle, (act) Interested,
Validate, and (use an) Easy manner."

99

1.  (Be) Gentle Tell clients: "Being gentle means being nice and
    respectful in your approach. People tend to respond to gentleness
    more than they do to harshness." Clarify that gentleness
    specifically means four things: no attacks, no threats, no judging,
    and no disrespect.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 6 • 257

a.  No Attacks

Begin by saying: "People won't like you if you threaten them, attack
them, or express much anger directly." b. No Threats

Continue: "Don't make 'manipulative' statements or hidden threats. Don't
say, 'I'll kill myself if you . . . ' Tolerate a 'no' to requests. Stay
in the discussion even if it gets painful. Exit gracefully." Emphasize
that attacks and threats have limited effectiveness: "When you use
punishment, threats, or aggression to get what you want, people may do
what you want while you are around them. But when you are not around
them, or when you cannot see or monitor what they are doing, they will
be unlikely to do what you want." Example: A customer service agent at
an airport may be very courteous to a person yelling and screaming about
a missed flight. But the same agent may surreptitiously keep this person
off the next flight to his or her destination. Note to Leaders: This
point concerning threats may be very sensitive with some participants. I
usually present it as if it is not sensitive, and then ask whether
anyone has made threats or been accused of making threats. The idea is
to normalize the interpersonal behavior (making threats, "manipulating")
that some may have been accused of by others. Acknowledge how hard it is
to stop such behavior.

Usually this question will come up: "What does and doesn't sound like a
threat?" More specifically, participants may ask how a person can
communicate a desire to leave a relationship or situation, to quit
something because it is too hard (e.g., a job or school), or to express
an extreme wish (e.g., to commit suicide, beat up a child, or get a
divorce) in such a way that others do not take it as a threat. This is a
good question. Generally, the best way is for the person to couple the
communication with a statement of wanting to work on the relationship or
job, or not wanting to commit suicide or file for a divorce. Say to
participants: "The idea is to make it sound as if you are taking
responsibility for the situation, even if you did not cause it, rather
than making it the other person's responsibility. When others feel you
are making them responsible, they usually say that you are threatening
or manipulating them. In general, if you say that you are going to kill
or harm yourself, use drugs, hit the children, start smoking again, or
go off your diet, but at the same time say that you want help or that
you know you can control yourself, it is not a threat. But it is a
threat to say you are going to do these things if others do not change
what they are doing. It is a threat to say or even imply that you are
going to commit suicide, harm yourself, or use drugs if someone else
doesn't come through for you, do what you want, cure you, or make things
better." Another option is for participants to share dysfunctional
desires by mindfully describing the urges, as opposed to voicing the
urges directly. For example, the statement "My urges for suicide are
getting high," or "I'm noticing a strong urge to use alcohol," will
generally sound less threatening than "I want to kill myself," or "I'm
going to a liquor store."

99

c.  No Judging

Continue: "The third part of gentleness is no judging. That means no
name calling, 'shoulds,' or implied put-downs in voice or manner. No
guilt trips." Discussion Point: The injunction not to judge is woven
throughout all of the skills. But it is so important that it is
emphasized here as a separate skill. Elicit from participants times when
they have felt judged by others. Try a role play to help them see what
it feels like to be judged.

258 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 6--6a

99

d.  No Disrespect

Say: "The last part of gentleness is no disrespect. That means no
sneering, expressing contempt or scorn, or walking out on conversations.
Also, again, it means no put-downs." Discussion Point: Elicit times when
participants have used skillful words, but have communicated nonverbally
that they have no respect for the other's opinion or request. What does
it feel like? Remember, people almost always pay attention to nonverbal
communication over the words used. When have you done the same thing?
Discuss.

99

2.  (Act) Interested Say to participants: "The second GIVE skill is to
    be interested in the other person. Listen to the other person's
    point of view, opinion, reasons for saying no, or reasons for making
    a request of you. Don't interrupt or try to talk over the other
    person. Don't mind-read thoughts or intentions without checking them
    out. Don't assume that your ideas about what is going on inside the
    other's mind are correct, especially if you think the other person
    is being intentionally hostile, hurtful, rejecting, or simply
    uncaring. If you have a concern about what the other person is
    thinking or is motivated by, gently ask, and listen to the answer.
    Be sensitive to the other person's desire to have the discussion at
    a later time, if that's what the person wants. Be patient." (Note
    that this is Level 1 validation on Interpersonal Effectiveness
    Handout 6a.)

<!-- -->

a.  People Respond Well to Interest

Tell participants: "People will feel better about you if you seem
interested in them and you give them time and space to respond to you."
b. The Skill Is "Act" Interested, Not "Be" Interested

Continue: "There are times when you may want for someone to have a
positive experience interacting with you, and you are not actually
interested in what they want to talk about. Choosing to listen means
deliberately choosing to be effective in achieving your goal of helping
them have a positive experience interacting with you." Discussion Point:
Elicit examples from participants.

99

Practice Exercise: Divide participants into pairs. (If necessary, pair
one client with one of your leaders.) Instruct participants that when
you indicate "Start," one person should start talking to his or her
partner about any topic, and the partner should listen intently, nod
occasionally, and in general appear very interested. After several
minutes when you indicate "Switch," the talker should continue talking
on the topic, but the partner should look as uninterested as possible
(e.g., file nails, look around, pick up things to read, go through his
or her wallet or purse). After several minutes, stop and then do it
again, this time with the listening partner now doing the talking.
Discuss how difficult it was to keep talking or even stay organized on
the topic once no one was listening. Note to Leaders: This exercise is a
very effective way to demonstrate the negative effects of discounting or
invalidating another person. Many participants also want to discuss how
often this happened, or is still happening, to them in their lives. The
main point is that no matter what has happened to them, it is not
effective to turn around and do the same to others. You can also note
that when they feel ignored, participants can apply objectives
effectiveness skills to get others to change such behaviors.

Discussion Point: Some people find it very easy to be quiet and listen
to others. But other people find it very hard. Such a participant may
have a racing mind and may always be a step or two

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handouts 6--6a • 259

ahead of the person talking, or may have an impulsive tongue that just
seems to start talking on its own. Discuss.

3.  Validate Say to participants: "The third GIVE skill is validation.
    This means communicating that the other person's feelings, thoughts,
    and actions are understandable to you, given his or her past or
    current situation." (Note that this is actually an example of Level
    2 validation on Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 6a.)

<!-- -->

a.  Validate the Why Even While Disagreeing with the What

Note that we can validate a reason why a person is feeling, thinking, or
doing something, without agreeing with what they are actually thinking
or doing. Example: We can say, "I know that you feel you have to yell at
me, because if you don't you will keep things inside of yourself and
never get what you want. At the same time, I don't like it at all, and I
really want you to stop yelling and try just telling me what you want me
to do."

99

b.  Validate with Words

Continue: "Acknowledge with words the other person's feelings, wants,
difficulties, and opinions about the situation, without judgmental
words, voice tone, facial expression or posture." \$ Story Point: Tell
the following story or one like it. "Johnny is sitting in class, trying
to pay attention, and he accidentally knocks his notebook off his desk,
making a loud noise on the floor. The peers next to him chuckle. The
teacher stops in her tracks and says, 'There you go again, John,
disrupting the class, trying to get attention. . . . I am really getting
tired of this behavior!' Johnny feels extremely embarrassed, hurt, and
angry, since he'd been making a true effort to focus and behave more
skillfully. He later goes home and recounts the story to his mother, who
replies, 'Why do you keep doing this to yourself? You're never going to
get into college at this rate. You'd better shape up!"1 Discussion
Point: Ask participants what they think Johnny must have felt after his
teacher's and mother's responses. Why were these responses so hurtful?
What was missing from their responses?1 c. Read and Validate the Other's
Nonverbal Signals

Say to participants: "Validating often requires you to read and
interpret the other person's nonverbal signals, such as facial
expression and body language. These are clues to figuring out what
problems the person might be having with your request or your saying no.
Acknowledge those feelings or problems. For example, you can say, 'I
know that you are very busy,' 'I can see that this is really important
to you,' 'I know this will take you out of your way a bit,' or something
like that." (Note that this is an example of Level 3 validation on
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 6a.) Continue: "In addition, notice
and validate when other people are right about what they are saying,
when their behavior fits the facts of the situation, or when they are
making a lot of sense given the current facts." (Note that this is an
example of Level 5 validation on Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout
6a.) Example: "You are demanding that a person return something you
loaned him or her. The person reminds you that he or she already gave it
back. Drop your defensiveness and admit you were wrong when you remember
that the other person is correct."

260 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 6--6a, 7

d.  Actions Speak Louder Than Words

Explain to participants: "Validating with words can sometimes be
invalidating. This is true when the situation calls for action but we
only validate with words. It is important to validate with action when
the situation calls for it and you believe another's request is indeed
valid." (Note that this is an example of Level 5 validation on
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 6a.) You can give these two examples
of ineffective validation with words only: Example: "You are returning a
shirt you bought, but you don't have your receipt. The store clerk asks
you to follow him to go and talk with his supervisor. You say, 'I
understand that we will need to talk with the supervisor,' but you don't
make a move to follow the clerk."

99

Example: "You are screaming out the window in a fire, 'Help me, help me,
it's hot in here,' and the firefighter yells up, 'I see that you are
hot,' instead of climbing up right away to get you out."

99

Practice Exercise: Ask a participant to come stand near you. Then put
your foot on the participant's foot. Ask the participant to tell you
when it starts to hurt. As soon as he or she says something, keep your
foot pressure at that level and say, "I can see that this hurts your
foot." Repeat several times. Discuss.

Emphasize that validating others is effective for improving
relationships any time: "A conflict situation does not have to arise;
you don't need to make a request of someone or want to say no to
validate another's feelings, thoughts, or actions." Note to Leaders: For
a fuller understanding of validation see notes associated with handouts
17--18. You can also read a chapter I wrote that describes validation in
great detail.3

99

4.  (Use an) Easy Manner Tell participants: "The final GIVE skill is an
    easy manner. That is, try to be lighthearted. Use a little humor.
    Smile. Ease the other person along. Wheedle. Soothe. This is the
    difference between the 'soft sell' and the 'hard sell.' Be
    political." Discussion Point: Elicit from participants conversations
    they have had where the tension was so thick it could be cut with a
    knife; the moments seemed to drag on and on; or it felt like walking
    near a land mine, where any wrong step could lead to an explosion.
    Using an easy manner helps create a comfortable atmosphere in such
    situations. It helps to convey the message that the conversation is
    safe and that the other person can be relaxed, without worrying too
    much. Discuss.

Emphasize to participants: "Get people to like giving you what you want.
People don't like to be bullied, pushed, or made to feel guilty."
Although some participants may have been called manipulators by others,
a really good manipulator makes other people like giving in. The premise
in DBT is that individuals need to learn to be better at inducing others
to do what they want them to do, while at the same time getting the
others to like doing it.

VII. Self-­Respect Effectiveness Skills: FAST (Interpersonal
     Effectiveness Handout 7) Main Point: Self-­respect effectiveness
     skills help us to keep or improve our self-­respect, while at the
     same time we try to get what we want in an interaction. The term
     FAST is a way to remember these skills. Interpersonal Effectiveness
     Handout 7: Guidelines for Self-­ Respect Effectiveness: Keeping
     Respect for Yourself. This handout describes the self-­respect
     effectiveness skills: (be) Fair, (no) Apologies, Stick to values,
     (be) Truthful. As with the DEAR MAN and GIVE skills, teach these
     didactically rather quickly, and then move to doing role plays.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 7 • 261 Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 4: Writing Out
Interpersonal Effectiveness Scripts; Interpersonal Effectiveness
Worksheet 5: Tracking Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills. These
worksheets are the same as those used for the DEAR MAN and GIVE skills.
Instructions for their use can be found at the start of Section V,
above. Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 13: Self-­ Validation and
Self-­ Respect (Optional). This might be a good worksheet to use when
interpersonal effectiveness skills fail and self-­validation is needed.
The worksheet can be used in conjunction with Handout 7 (see above), as
well as with Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 17: Validation.

99A. What Is Self-­Respect Effectiveness? Say to participants:
"Self-­respect effectiveness refers to acting in a manner that maintains
or increases your self-­respect after an interpersonal interaction. How
you go about attempting to obtain your objectives requires self-­respect
effectiveness skills. The key question here is how to ask for what you
want or say no to a request in such a way that you will still respect
yourself afterward." Example: Some people lose respect for themselves if
they cry and/or get extremely emotional during an interpersonal
interaction. Others lose self-­respect if they give in and act passively,
rather than sticking up for themselves. Still others lose respect for
themselves if they get extremely angry, mean, or threatening. Ask: "Do
you stand up for your peer group's values or your own values? Do you put
on a tough attitude to avoid humiliating yourself, but at the same time
lose self-­respect by being mean and tough? Do you lie or tell the truth?
Do you act competent or incompetent?" Emphasize that self-­respect
effectiveness is always needed in any interaction. The usual problem
here is that on the one hand, participants have not considered how to
keep their own self-­respect, or, on the other hand, they have focused on
it to the extreme. The goal here is to identify the skills needed to
keep self-­respect while not forgetting the mindfulness "how" skill of
effectiveness (see Mindfulness Handout 5). Tell participants: "Giving up
getting your objective in favor of doing what you believe is necessary
to keep your self-­respect is not always the best decision."

99B. The FAST Skills Say to participants: "You can remember these skills
with the term FAST. This stands for (be) Fair, (no) Apologies, Stick to
values, (be) Truthful."

99

1.  (Be) Fair Tell participants: "The first FAST skill is to be fair to
    yourself and the other person in your attempts to get what you want.
    It is hard to like yourself over the long haul if you consistently
    take advantage of other people. You may get what you want, but at
    the risk of your ability to respect yourself." Continue: "Validate
    your own feelings and wishes as well as the other person's. It is
    also hard to respect yourself if you are always giving in to others'
    wishes and never sticking up for your own wishes or beliefs."
    Discussion Point: Some individuals always prioritize others' needs
    ahead of their own. What impact does this have on self-­respect?
    Discuss with participants.

99

2.  (No) Apologies Say to participants: "The next FAST skill is not to
    overapologize. When apologies are warranted, of course, they are
    appropriate. But no apologizing for being alive, for making a
    request, for having an opinion, or for disagreeing. Apologies imply
    that you are wrong---that you are the one making a mistake. This can
    reduce your sense of mastery over time."

262 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 7

Explain that excessive apologies can hurt relationships. Making an
apology can at times enhance a relationship. Excessive apologies,
however, often get on other people's nerves and usually reduce both
relationship and self-­respect effectiveness.

99

3.  Stick to Values Continue: "The third FAST skill is to stick to your
    own values. Avoid selling out your values or integrity to get your
    objective or to keep a person liking you. Be clear on what, in your
    opinion, is the moral or valued way of thinking and acting, and hold
    on to your position." Discussion Point: When a situation is dire, or
    lives are at stake, people might choose to give up their values. The
    problem is that many individuals have black-and-white views on this
    issue: Either they are willing to sell out everything to get
    approval and liking (to give up their entire "selves," it seems), or
    they interpret everything as an issue of values and view flexibility
    of any sort as giving up their integrity. Elicit examples. Note to
    Leaders: This Discussion Point assumes that participants know their
    own values and are clear about what they believe is moral and
    immoral. Many individuals, however, have difficulties with one or
    both of these. For these individuals, it can be helpful to review
    Emotion Regulation Handout 18: Values and Priorities List.

Note that values can be at issue in relationships: "A conflict between
what others want you to do and what your own moral code or personal
values tell you to do is not uncommon. It is difficult to maintain your
self-­respect when you give in to others and do or say things you believe
to be wrong. It can also be very difficult to stand up for yourself,
particularly when your values are not the values of the other people in
the relationship. Losing your self-­respect in a relationship can lead
over time to a corrosion of the relationship. This corrosion, or falling
apart, can sometimes be very subtle, but in the end it can destroy a
relationship." Discussion Point: Elicit and discuss times when
participants have been in a situation where a person or group wants them
to do or say something that conflicts with their own moral values.
Discuss the difficulties of standing up for oneself. Discuss the
consequences of giving in and violating one's own values.

99

4.  (Be) Truthful Tell participants: "The final FAST skill is to be
    truthful. Don't lie, act helpless when you are not, or exaggerate. A
    pattern of dishonesty over time erodes your self-­respect. Even
    though one instance may not hurt, or may even occasionally be
    necessary, dishonesty as your usual mode of getting what you want
    will be harmful over the long run. Acting helpless is the opposite
    of building mastery." Discussion Point: At times, being honest may
    actually reduce relationship effectiveness. The "little white lie"
    was invented for just this reason. Any attempt to convince
    participants that honesty is always the best policy will probably
    fail. Discuss this point with participants. The crucial idea is that
    if one is going to lie, it should be done mindfully rather than
    habitually.

Stress that mastery is the opposite of passivity. Building mastery
requires doing things that are difficult, that involve a challenge.
Helplessness is the enemy of mastery. Overcoming obstacles is one route
to mastery. Most successful people in this world do not have fewer
obstacles; they just get up after falling down more often than
unsuccessful people do. Getting up after falling down is mastery.
Falling down is irrelevant. The drive to mastery seems to be innate.5
Small children learning how to walk keep falling down and getting up,
falling down and getting up.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handouts 7--8 • 263 Note to Leaders: The concept of mastery here is very
similar to the skill of building mastery in emotion regulation (see
Emotion Regulation Handouts 14 and 19).

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when they have done
things that reduce their own sense of self-respect. When have they
enhanced their sense of self-­respect? Where do they need to improve
their skills?

99C. Balancing Self-­Respect Effectiveness and Objectives Effectiveness
Make these points to participants in regard to balancing self-­respect
and objectives effectiveness:  "No one can take away your self-­respect
unless you give it up."  "Using DEAR MAN skills can improve your
self-­respect by increasing your sense of mastery.

But using DEAR MAN ineffectively sometimes leads to a loss of
self-­respect for the other person."  "You can also enhance self-­respect
by giving up things you want for the welfare of the other person." 
"Balancing what you want and what the other person wants and needs might
be the best path to self-­respect."

99D. Balancing Self-­Respect Effectiveness and Relationship Effectiveness
Make these points to participants in regard to balancing self-­respect
and relationship effectiveness:  "Using GIVE skills well will probably
enhance your sense of self-­respect, because most peo-

ple's sense of self-­respect is somewhat dependent on the quality of
their relationships."  "However, if you frequently use GIVE skills with
a person who abuses you or doesn't care

about you, your self-­respect is likely to erode over time."  "Using GIVE
skills when they are needed, and putting them away when harshness and
bold-

ness are necessary, might be the best path to self-­respect."

VIII. Evaluating Your Options: How Intensely to Ask or Say No 99
      (Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 8)

Main Point: It is important to consider whether to ask for something or
say no, and how strongly to ask or say no. Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 8: Evaluating Options for Whether or How Intensely to Ask or Say
No. The first page of this handout can be reviewed rather quickly.
"Factors to Consider" should be discussed to be sure that participants
understand each point. Getting and giving examples are both important
here. Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 6 can also be used to teach
this skill either before or after going over the factors to consider in
Handout 8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 6: The Dime Game:
Figuring Out How Strongly to Ask or Say No. Use this worksheet with
participants in class as a way to teach this skill. Bring 10 dimes with
you to the class, and extra copies of the worksheet for participants to
use as homework practice.

99A. Range of Intensities for Asking and for Saying No Discussion Point:
Draw a vertical line on the board with "Low intensity" at the top
(number it 1) and "High intensity" at the bottom (number it 10), like
Figure 8.2. Identify low-­intensity behaviors (not asking, hinting,
asking tentatively, giving in to other's requests, etc.), and
high-­intensity

264 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 8

behaviors (speaking firmly, insisting, resisting, refusing to negotiate,
etc.). Go around the room and ask each participant to identify where he
or she tends to fall on this continuum, and what the pros and cons are
of that approach. Alternative Discussion Point: Instead of having the
discussion described above, review levels of intensity on the first page
of Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 8, and then ask participants to
put a checkmark where they usually fall when asking for something and
another checkmark when saying no. Then ask participants to put an X
where they wish they could be for both. Discuss.

1.  Interpersonal Effectiveness Changes as Situations and Timing Change
    What works in one situation at one point in time may not work in
    another situation or in the same situation at another point in time.
    Example: "Being pushy may get your 16-year-old child to pick you up
    from work when you are too tired to take a bus, but may not work
    when you ask your husband or wife." Example: "Asking your mother to
    make you a special meal that she always makes you when you go home
    may be very effective at one point in your life, but when your
    mother is in bed dying of cancer, asking may damage your
    self-­respect and sense of morality." Emphasize that appropriateness
    is not black or white; there are levels for asking and saying no.
    Being interpersonally effective requires thinking through whether it
    is appropriate to ask for something or to say no to a request.
    Contrary to what many people think, the answer is not usually as
    clear-cut as it is for the example of the mother in bed with cancer.
    Instead, there are levels of asking and levels of saying no.
2.  Analyze Each Situation to Determine How Intensely to Ask or Say No
    Tell participants: "Asking and saying no can be very intense and
    firm, where you try every skill you know to change the situation and
    get the outcome you want. Asking and saying no can also

Low intensity (let go, give in) Asking

Saying no

Don't ask; don't hint.

1.  Do what the other wants without being asked.

Hint indirectly; take no.

2.  Don't complain; do it cheerfully.

Hint openly; take no.

3.  Do it, even if you're not cheerful about it.

Ask tentatively; take no.

4.  Do it, but show that you'd rather not.

Ask gracefully; but take no.

5.  Say you'd rather not, but do it gracefully.

Ask confidently; take no.

6.  Say no confidently, but reconsider.

Ask confidently; resist no.

7.  Say no confidently; resist saying yes.

Ask firmly; resist no.

8.  Say no firmly; resist saying yes.

Ask firmly; insist; negotiate; keep trying.

9.  Say no firmly; resist; negotiate; keep trying.

Ask and don't take no for an answer.

10. Don't do it.

High intensity (stay firm) FIGURE 8.2. Options for whether or how
intensely to ask or say no.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 8 • 265

be of very low intensity, where you either don't ask or say no, or are
very flexible and willing to accept the situation as it is."

99B. Factors to Consider Go over the "Factors to Consider" from
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 8 with participants. 1. Capability
(Your Own or the Other Person's) Encourage participants: "Increase the
intensity of asking if the other person has what you want. Increase the
intensity of saying no if you do not have (and therefore cannot give or
do) what the other person wants." 2. Your Priorities When an objective
is very important, the intensity of asking or saying no should be
higher. When getting an objective interferes with a relationship and/or
with self-­respect, then intensity should be lowered to the degree that
the relationship and self-­respect are important. Say to participants:
"Often relationship issues are such that you may be willing to trade an
objective for keeping the other person happy. If so, lower the intensity
of the response. If getting an objective requires sacrificing your
self-­respect, then intensity might need to be lowered." 3. Self-­Respect
Say: "Increase the intensity of asking if you usually do things for
yourself and are careful to avoid acting helpless. Increase the
intensity of saying no if saying no will not result in feeling bad about
yourself, and if wise mind says no." 4. Rights Say: "Increase the
intensity of asking if the other person is required by law or moral code
to give you what you want. Increase the intensity of saying no if you
are not required by law or morals to give the other person what he or
she wants (in other words, saying no would not violate the other
person's rights)." 5. Authority Continue: "Increase the intensity of
asking if you are responsible for directing the other person or telling
him or her what to do. Increase the intensity of saying no if the other
person does not have authority over you, or if what the person is asking
is not within his or her authority." 6. Relationship Go on: "Increase
the intensity of asking if what you want is appropriate to the current
relationship. Increase the intensity of saying no if what the other
person wants from you is not appropriate to the current relationship."
7. Long-Term versus Short-Term Goals Continue: "Increase the intensity
of asking if being submissive will result in peace now but create
problems in the long run. Increase the intensity of saying no if giving
in will get you short-term peace but not a long-term relationship you
wish to have." 8. Reciprocity Say: "Increase the intensity of asking if
you have done at least as much for the other person as you are
requesting, and you are willing to give if the other person says yes.
Increase the intensity of saying no if you do not owe the other person a
favor, or the other person does not usually reciprocate."

266 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 8--9

9.  Homework Say: "Increase the intensity of asking if you know all the
    facts necessary to support a request, and both the goal and the
    request are clear. Increase the intensity of saying no if the other
    person's request is not clear or you are not sure of what you would
    be saying yes to."
10. Timeliness Tell participants: "Increase the intensity of asking if
    this is a good time to ask (the other person is in the mood for
    listening and paying attention; he or she is likely to say yes to a
    request). Increase the intensity of saying no if this is not a bad
    time for you to say no." Point out here that wise mind can be used
    as an additional factor in deciding whether to ask or say no and how
    intensely to push for what one wants. Tell participants to use wise
    mind to calibrate the importance of other factors described above,
    and to attend to any factors not included in the list. The more
    important a factor, the more it should be weighted in the final
    tally of pros and cons for levels of intensity. In using wise mind
    as a factor, however, it is important actually to be in wise mind
    (and not in emotion mind).

99C. Figuring Out How Strongly to Ask or Say No: The Dime Game Practice
Exercise: Use Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 6 to give
participants practice in deciding whether or how strongly to ask for
something or say no to a request.

99

1.  Ask a participant to give an example of a situation where he or she
    is trying to decide whether to ask for something or say no to
    someone. Be sure to use a real situation, not one made up. Give the
    participant the 10 dimes you brought to the session. Using that
    situation, go over the worksheet. Ask each question on the left side
    if the person is trying to decide whether to ask someone for
    something. Ask questions on the right side if the person is trying
    to decide whether to say yes or no to a request. On the left side,
    have the participant put a dime in the bank for each "yes" answer.
    On the right side, have him or her put a dime in the bank for each
    "no" answer.

99

2.  On the left side, count the number of "yes" responses. The
    participant should then go into wise mind and decide whether one or
    more "yes" responses should be added or subtracted. If after this
    adjustment there are more "yes" than "no" responses, then
    participants should make the request. The more "yes" responses, the
    stronger the request should be.

99

3.  On the right side, count up the number of "no" responses. The
    participant should then go into wise mind and decide whether one or
    more "no" responses should be added or subtracted, and also whether
    other factors should be considered. If there are more "no" than
    "yes" responses, then the participants should say no to a request
    made of him or her. The more "no" responses, the more it makes sense
    to increase the intensity of saying no to the other person.
4.  Ask participants for another situation where they are having
    difficulty asking for something or saying no to something. Put the
    10 dimes back on the table, and then go through the questions on
    Worksheet 6 with another participant, following the instructions
    above. Continue doing this with several participants.

<!-- -->

IX. Troubleshooting Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills (Interpersonal
    Effectiveness Handout 9) Main Point: Difficulty in obtaining an
    objective can be due to many possible factors. When we can identify
    the problem, we can often solve it and be more effective at getting
    what we want.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 9 • 267 Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 9: Troubleshooting:
When What You Are Doing Isn't Working. This handout gives questions for
diagnosing which factors are reducing interpersonal effectiveness. These
are the same factors briefly described on Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 2. Troubleshooting is best taught by reviewing Worksheet 7 (see
below). Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 7: Troubleshooting
Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills. Have participants follow along with
the worksheet as you review the material. It may be useful to have
participants mark on the worksheet their most common problems as you go
through. If you do this, give them extra copies of the worksheet to use
as homework.

99Tell participants: "When what you are doing isn't working, you can
troubleshoot by asking yourself the questions on Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 9 and Worksheet 7."

99A. Lack of Skill

99

Say to participants: "When you lack the skills, you don't know how to
act or speak effectively to obtain your objectives, maintain the
relationship, and keep your self-­respect." Many people have simply not
been taught the interpersonal skills they need to be interpersonally
effective. In this module, the skills are taught, but only a limited
amount of time is spent on each skill. A participant may have missed
some of the important skills classes, or may have been too shy to do
role plays. To be interpersonally effective takes much practice and much
role playing. Practice also takes discipline and the overcoming of fear.
Some participants may not have practiced enough to get a skill down.
Have participants ask themselves: "Do I have the skills I need?" The
first step in answering this question is to carefully read over the
instructions for each skill tried. If this does not help, the next step
is to write out a script and then practice the script with a friend or
in front of a mirror. Participants should get some coaching if needed in
how to use the skills or in how to select the skill likely to be the
most effective. Discussion Point: Elicit from participants interpersonal
effectiveness skills they believe they have not learned sufficiently to
use in daily life. Discuss whether their problems are due to not
learning them in the first place or not practicing them enough to feel
confident in using them. Discuss possible solutions to such problems.
Note to Leaders: This is a good time for you to share with participants
times you have misused interpersonal skills and how you revised what you
were doing to get a better outcome. It is important to encourage both
participants and their individual therapists (if they have such
therapists) to review and practice skills often, to be sure that the
participants are using the skills correctly. It is very easy just to
assume this, but the assumption is often incorrect.

99B. Unclear Objectives 99

Tell participants: "Not knowing your objectives in a situation can make
it almost impossible to be effective. When you don't know what you want,
getting what you want is mostly based on chance." Have participants ask
themselves: ASK: "Do I know what I want in the interaction?" If they are
not sure, they should fill out a pros-and-cons worksheet (Interpersonal
Effectiveness Worksheet 1) comparing different objectives; they can also
use emotion regulation skills, including opposite action, to reduce fear
and/or shame about asking or saying no. Discussion Point: Elicit from
participants times when they were ambivalent about what they really
wanted, could not decide on an objective, or did not know what their
priorities were in a situation. Discuss the role of fear of conflict or
of potential guilt or shame in these situations.

268 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 9

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when fear and shame
have gotten in the way of knowing what they want. When this is the case,
it may be very hard to reduce indecision and ambivalence without first
reducing anxiety and fear. Similarly, a person may feel ashamed of
asking for something or feel too ashamed to say no. As with anxiety and
fear, reducing shame may be an essential first step in clarifying goals.
Discuss ways of figuring out what is wanted.

99C. Short-Term Goals Interfering with Long-Term Goals

99

Explain to participants that at times, impulsively going for short-term
goals can interfere with getting what we really want in the long term.
This is true when we sacrifice a relationship or our self-­ respect to
get an immediate goal or reduce distress. It can also happen when we
consistently give up getting what we want or need in order to avoid
conflict and keep others happy in the short term. Have participants ask
themselves: "Are my short-term goals getting in the way of my long-term
goals?" If they are not sure, they should fill out another copy of
Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 1, comparing short-term with
long-term goals. Advise them, "Wait until you are not in emotion mind to
do this. Try to get in wise mind." Discussion Point: Elicit from
participants times when they have let short-term goals trump longterm
goals. Discuss the consequences of doing that for themselves, as well as
the consequences for the long-term relationship with the other person.

99D. Emotions Getting in the Way of Skills

99

Say to participants: "At times, your emotions may be so extreme that you
simply cannot get into wise mind in order to figure out what to do and
say. Instead of saying something skillful, you make emotional statements
that are extreme and ineffective---or you retreat into silence, pout, or
leave the interaction, which are also ineffective strategies.
Out-of-­control sobbing and crying may make it all but impossible to
communicate what you want to say. Although tears can often be an
effective communication, at other times they can become a vortex of
catastrophizing: The more you cry, the more distressed you become; the
more you cry, the less you can control what you say and do during
interactions. This can also happen with extreme anger or other intense
emotions. In these situations, you can be said to fall into a sea of
dyscontrol. Reasonable mind does not have a chance to surface and
moderate the influence of emotion mind. You may have the skills, but
emotions interfere with using your skills." Have participants ask
themselves: "Am I too upset to use my interpersonal skills?" Explain to
them: "Trying complicated skills when you are at your skills breakdown
point can be intensely frustrating and eventually lead you to give up on
skills. The problem is that you may be so far into emotion mind that you
don't even know you have hit your skills breakdown point. One solution
is to practice your most important interpersonal skills over and over
when you are not in emotion mind. However, even when you have practiced
the skills, you are sometimes too overwhelmed with emotion to use them.
When this happens, use crisis survival and emotion regulation skills to
stop out-of-­control unskillful responses and to reduce emotional
arousal." Give participants this list of skills to use when they are
upset:  The STOP skill (see Distress Tolerance Handout 4) to keep from
saying things they will regret.  Opposite action (see Emotion Regulation
Handout 10) to get themselves to use skills they

know they need to do but don't want to use.  Self-­soothing skills (see
Distress Tolerance Handout 8) before an interaction, to get themselves

calm enough for the interaction.  TIP skills (see Distress Tolerance
Handout 6) to regulate their emotions rapidly. If they can

get their emotions regulated, taking a short break before the
interpersonal interaction to do so will be well worth it.  Mindfulness
of current emotions (see Emotion Regulation Handout 22) to become aware

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 9 • 269

of their emotions---­particularly those that may be interfering with
their skills---and then to refocus completely on the present objective.
Discussion Point: Elicit from participants emotions that get in their
way interpersonally. Make a list on the board. Then elicit skills that
could be used both to regulate emotions and to help participants use
interpersonal skills more effectively.

99E. Worries, Assumptions, and Myths Interfering

99

Tell participants: "Worries about negative outcomes, and assumptions and
myths about the value of expressing your opinions or thoughts, can cause
much trouble when you are trying to improve your interpersonal skills.
Some beliefs invalidate ever asking for what you want, such as believing
that asking for things or saying no is always selfish. Other myths
interfere with maintaining relationships, such as believing that people
should know what you want without having to ask." Have participants ask
themselves: "Are worries, assumptions, and myths getting in the way of
using interpersonal skills?" Then advise them: "Try challenging myths
and checking the facts when you are worrying and making assumptions.
Practicing opposite action all the way is a good way to test assumptions
and myths about feared negative consequences. It is important when
practicing to focus both on your current objectives and on the other
person." Discussion Point: Elicit worries, assumptions, and myths that
get in the way of skillful behavior. Write some on the board. Get
participants to counter myths for each other, and write their revisions
on the board. Be sure all participants also write down the revisions in
their notes. Discussion Point: Even when worries are true (e.g., maybe
the other person does become annoyed by the request or says no), they
can distract participants from being fully present when asserting
themselves, and therefore can decrease effectiveness. Discuss options
for managing worries, such as pushing away, turning the mind, and (if
necessary) pros and cons of worrying.

99F. Environment More Powerful Than Skills

99

Say to participants: "When you don't reach your objectives, it is
helpful to search for ways in which you were not skillful. It is also
important to consider the power of the environment, compared to your own
power as a person making a request or saying no. For example, in a
company beset by financial losses, requests for raises may be denied no
matter how skillful you are in asking. If the police arrive at your home
with a warrant for your arrest, your refusing to be arrested will
probably be met with force. Refusing to pay a bill that you owe may mean
dealing with a bill collector. Getting a stubborn spouse or partner to
empty the garbage every night may be met with a resistance that no use
of skills can overcome." Have participants ask themselves: "Are the
other people in the interaction so powerful that they don't have to do
anything I ask? Do they have the authority to make me do what they
want?" Advise them: "Try problem solving just to be sure. If the
objective is important, try to find an ally who is as powerful as or
more powerful than the person you are interacting with. If all else
fails, practice radical acceptance of not getting what you want, or of
having to do what someone else asks you to do." Discussion Point:
Discuss how and why some people might resist a request or refuse to
accept no from another person, simply because they feel personally
threatened by the request or the refusal. Ask participants to discuss
possible solutions to such a problem. Discussion Point: Elicit
situations where skills didn't work and couldn't be made to work because
the other person in an interaction was so powerful that a participant
had almost no influence or leverage. Discuss what it would be like to
practice radical acceptance in these situations.

270 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 9--11

Discussion Point: Elicit situations where participants were powerful and
someone else did something outrageous to get them to do what the other
person wanted. What did that feel like? Note to Leaders: When done
intentionally as a means of influence, the use of outrageous behavior
(including threats of dire consequences such as suicide, being unable to
cope, losing everything, etc.) is rightfully called "manipulation." This
can, and at times should, be discussed. However, it must be done
carefully. See an extensive discussion of this topic in Chapter 1 of the
main DBT text.

X.  

Overview: Building Relationships and Ending Destructive Ones
(Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 10) Main Point: This section of the
module teaches supplementary DBT skills for building relationships and
trust with other people, as well as for ending relationships that are
destructive, hopeless, or unwanted. Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout
10: Overview: Building Relationships and Ending Destructive Ones. This
is an overview handout to be reviewed briefly. Stay on it longer if you
are using it to review skills already taught. If you are teaching only
some of the skills on this handout, consider skipping the overview
entirely. Do not teach the material while covering this handout, unless
you are skipping the related handouts (Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handouts 11 through 13a). Worksheet: None.

99A. Finding Friends and Getting Them to Like You Forming friendships is
the first step in reducing interpersonal isolation and loneliness.
Covered here are basic principles of finding people and developing
friendships---­including the principles of proximity and similarity, as
well as very basic skills of starting and maintaining a conversation,
expressing liking, and joining groups.6

99B. Mindfulness of Others Friendships last longer when we are mindful
of others. This skill includes observing and paying attention to others,
describing what is observed rather than judging it, and participating in
the flow of interactions. The skill of mindfulness of others is an
extension of the relationship effectiveness skills (GIVE) taught earlier
in this module.

99C. Ending Destructive, Hopeless, or Unwanted Relationships Sometimes
relationships must be ended. This can be the case when there is little
hope of improving a relationship, the relationship is abusive, or it
interferes with very important lifetime priorities. These skills focus
on how to end such relationships effectively.

XI. Skills for Finding Potential Friends (Interpersonal Effectiveness
    Handouts 11--11a) *Main Point: Finding people and getting them to
    like us often requires an active effort. It usually does not happen
    by itself. To be successful, we have to know where and how to look.
    Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 11: Finding and Getting People
    to Like You. This handout reviews skills for how to search for
    friends, as well as some ideas on how to be effective at finding
    them.* The skills in this section are adapted from Linehan, M. M., &
    Egan, K. J. (1985). Asserting yourself. New York: Facts on File.
    Copyright 1985 by Facts on File Publications. Adapted by permission
    of the authors.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handouts 11--11a • 271 Review each section, and then discuss it before
moving to the next section. This handout can be taught didactically or
very interactively, depending on time. Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 11a: Identifying Skills to Find People and Get Them to Like You
(Optional). Skip this handout if you do not have extra time, or give it
out as homework and then discuss it at the next session. The correct
responses are listed below in the teaching notes, as well as at the end
of the introduction to this chapter. Interpersonal Effectiveness
Worksheet 8: Finding and Getting People to Like You. Review this
worksheet with participants. Remember to remind participants to use the
mindfulness "what" skills of describing (see Mindfulness Handout 4) when
describing events and what they or others have said or done. This is
"practicing mindfulness" when participants are writing down homework
practice. The first section of the worksheet asks participants to
describe any opportunities they have had to make contact with people, to
mix with people like them, to ask questions or give answers, or to join
in a group conversation. It is essential here to get participants to
think flexibly and "outside the box."

99A. Why Find Friends? Say to participants: "Finding people and getting
them to like you is the first step in decreasing isolation and
loneliness. It is also important whenever you move to a new location,
take a new job, or join a new group." Discussion Point: For some people,
making friends is very easy and seemingly effortless. For others, it can
take a lot of work and a long time. Some people have lots of friends to
do things with; others have only one or two very good friends. Some
people have lots of acquaintances but few good friends; others have a
few good friends but very few acquaintances. Elicit from participants
what types of friends they have and what types of friends would they
like to have.

1.  Friends Are Essential for Happiness Many people believe that
    "needing" friends and relationships means being emotionally
    dependent, and that they should be able to be happy alone. This
    belief flies in the face of almost everything we know about human
    happiness. Although there are indeed some people who are happy with
    lives of solitude, for most humans all over the world, intimate and
    supportive relationships with others are an essential aspect of
    happiness.

99

2.  All Human Beings Are Lovable by Someone You will need to counteract
    the belief of many participants that they are unlovable. The idea,
    however, is not to engage in cognitive modification to get clients
    to see their own lovable characteristics. Although this may work
    sometimes, it often fails if the persons do not believe that they
    are currently loved (or have ever been loved) or are connected to
    someone somewhere by love. Thus it is easier to point out that, in
    essence, all people are indeed lovable by someone. That is, by
    virtue of inclusion in the human race, participants are lovable.
    Participants will often try to disprove this by bringing up
    individuals who have committed horrible crimes (e.g., torture, or
    murder followed by cannibalism). Point out how after these people
    are put in prison for life without parole, some woman or man on the
    outside will very often correspond with them and fall in love with
    them.

99B. Proximity Favors Friendship7 Say to participants: "A first step in
forming new relationships is to find opportunities to make cas­ ual but
regular contact with people in your everyday environment. There are many
ways to do this. If you share an office with a lot of people, turn your
desk to face the middle of the room instead of the wall. Use elevators
or the coffee machine when lots of other people are also there. Go to
parties

272 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 11

when invited; stay after activities for a while to chat with others;
gravitate to where other people are. Given a choice of a class, job, or
housing, you can opt for more or fewer opportunities to make contact
with others. Mundane as it sounds, a lot of people find many of their
friends among classmates, members of groups or churches they join, and
work colleagues. Online dating sites may be good for finding romantic
partners, but they may not be as useful for finding nonromantic friends.
That said, there are many other online opportunities to find potential
friends. For example, a hiker can go online to find hiking partners; a
music buff can go online to find other people who like the same music."
We make friends with people we see most often. Researchers at the
University of Leipzig found that students were more likely to become
friends with people sitting next to them than to others in a class, even
when they were randomly assigned to their seats in the classroom.8 There
is now a large body of research that adds weight to these findings. It
does not seem to matter why people are brought together; in one study,
it was because their names began with the same letter of the alphabet.9

99C. Similarity Tends to Increase Liking Tell participants: "A second
step in making friends is to mix with people whose attitudes are similar
to yours. When you discover them, be sure to let them know that's the
case. It may be true occasionally that 'opposites attract,' but for most
of us most of the time, it isn't. Instead, birds of a feather have a
great tendency to flock together. Almost always we like those who share
our attitudes to issues like politics, lifestyle, morals, and so on.
These attitudes are the ones that matter. Groups based on
characteristics (such as age or single parenthood) that are unrelated to
these attitudes are often only partly successful." Note to Leaders: The
belief that "opposites attract" may be hard to shake. If so, describe
some of the research described below to make your point.

Point: There is a lot of research showing that similarity increases
attraction. Similarities not 99 Research only in attitudes, but also in
personality traits, activities, age, education, ethnic background,
religion, socioeconomic status, and occupations, have each been shown to
increase attraction between people. In sum, we seem to like people who
remind us of ourselves.10--15 The tendency to like those who are similar
to us shows up very early in development. For example, one study showed
that children as young as 3 years old chose puppets whose food
preferences matched their own and also preferred to play with another
child who shared their toy preferences.16

Point: Similarity and liking do not always go together, however, and
similarity can sometimes 99 Research actually be threatening.17 For
example, it has been found that if people who are similar to us also
have something unattractive about them (such as having been in prison or
in a mental hospital), we tend to like them less than we do people who
are dissimilar, but have nothing unattractive about them. In this case,
the similarity is threatening; it does not really validate our view of
the world, and suggests that we too are vulnerable to the aspect that is
unattractive. This is one reason why it can be effective for people not
to reveal personal problems very early in forming new relationships.

99D. Conversation Skills Are Important Three behaviors are typical of
people who are rated as "good conversationalists": They ask plenty of
questions; they give "positive feedback" (indicating that they have
heard, understood, and ap-

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 11 • 273

preciated what the other person says); and they carry their end of the
conversation. Carrying one's end of a conversation means speaking
roughly half of the time---not all the time, but also not so little that
the other person is under pressure to keep the conversation going. 1.
Ask and Respond to Questions There is a thin line between asking
questions skillfully and turning a conversation into an interrogation
session. If both speakers are skilled, the questions tend to be
reciprocated.

99

Discussion Point: Read the following two conversations, and then have
participants discuss which one sounds like the better conversation.
Conversation 1 Person A: Do you know many people here? Person B: No, but
I am a friend of Bill's. Do you know him? Person A: No, but I work with
his sister, Susan. How do you know Bill? Person B: We went to high
school together. Are you a musician like Susan? Conversation 2 Person A:
Do you know many people here? Person B: No, I don't. Person A: Are you a
friend of Susan's? Person B: Yes. Person A: How do you know her? Person
B: We work together. Note that one reason why the first exchange seems
altogether smoother and easier (and results in greater liking) is that A
and B are not only asking each other questions, but also volunteering
more information than is actually asked for, which quite naturally leads
to more questions. Discuss.

2.  Make Small Talk Conversations do not have to be deeply meaningful to
    be enjoyable. The value of "small talk" or "chit-chat" should not be
    underestimated. Good conversationalists can participate actively in
    small talk. Students in one experiment who were asked to get to know
    each other without using small talk found the task impossible. They
    simply didn't know where to begin.
3.  Self-­Disclose Skillfully18 Appropriate and skillful
    self-­disclosure---not too much and not too little---­requires social
    sensitivity and social judgment. As relationships progress, there is
    a tendency to disclose more and more about ourselves, but too little
    or too much at the wrong time can decrease liking. People seem to
    like each other best when they disclose roughly the same amount and
    kind of information.
4.  Don't Interrupt Skillful conversationalists also do not interrupt.
    Explain to participants: "Interrupting does not always mean breaking
    into someone's sentences. Starting to talk just fractionally before
    or instantly after someone has finished risks giving the impression
    that you are not really listening to them, only waiting for them to
    be quiet so that you can have your say!"

274 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 11

5.  Learn What to Talk About Good conversationalists learn what to talk
    about by observing which topics are being discussed and how people
    react to them. Sometimes the problem is not knowing what to talk
    about. For some people, this means not being sure which topics are
    appropriate for which situations. Although there are no rules for
    this, observing others is a good idea. For other people, the "what
    to talk about" problem has more to do with lack of activity: If
    these persons have few hobbies, do not keep abreast of current
    affairs, rarely venture out to the theatre or the cinema, or rarely
    travel, they might have little to contribute to a conversation.
    Discussion Point: Many individuals feel very socially inadequate;
    understandably, they also find it very difficult to talk about this
    publicly. Ask in a matter-of-fact way who has low self-­confidence
    about their conversation skills. Then ask who has trouble knowing
    what topics are appropriate to talk about, and who has trouble
    thinking of anything to say. Remind participants that their
    difficulties are most likely situation-­specific. Elicit the
    situations that are most difficult. Then have participants
    brainstorm ideas for topics of conversation, or activities to help
    them know what to talk about (e.g., reading newspapers, watching new
    movies). Note to Leaders: This skill can be difficult to teach if
    you yourself have social difficulties or social anxiety in some
    situations. If you do, now is the time to confess it publicly! You
    can be a very useful role model if you also practice homework
    assignments and then discuss them with participants.

99E. Express Liking Selectively It is a lot easier to like someone who
likes us than someone who does not. We can communicate liking and caring
for others in many ways. We can tell them. We can praise or compliment
them. We can seek their company. We can listen to them. We can be
supportive of their needs. We can support their causes or people they
care about. However, there are a number of important caveats about
expressing liking to others, and these should be discussed with
participants.

99

1.  Don't Remark on Obvious or Nonexistent Characteristics Instruct
    participants: "Don't remark on totally obvious positive
    characteristics, particularly if they are obvious to everyone or are
    common among the people you are with. For example, don't comment on
    how pretty a person is when she has just won a beauty pageant, or on
    how well an immigrant reads English when he has been in an
    English-­speaking country for 20 years. Also, don't tell people they
    have skills they don't possess. For instance, don't compliment the
    driving skills of someone who has just failed the road test for the
    third time. We tend to react most positively to people who praise us
    for attributes we would like to have but are not quite sure we
    possess---not for attributes we and everyone else know we have, or
    for ones that we wished we had but know very well we haven't."

99

2.  Don't Praise Everyone for Similar Characteristics To be liked by
    someone who likes everyone is no great honor. Similarly, to be
    praised by someone for characteristics nearly everyone has is not
    likely to increase attraction. Going overboard with praise for
    everyone, in fact, can have unintended negative consequences. The
    absence of praise can then be construed as disapproval, and that may
    reduce liking. Excessive praise can also make others question a
    person's sincerity and wonder whether he or she has an ulterior
    motive. The person may be seen as ingratiating (i.e., praising
    someone to get something). Ingratiating people are generally
    disliked. Expressing liking, therefore, is not always a
    straightforward process.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 11 • 275

99F. Join Conversation Groups If we wait for people to approach us, we
may never have friends. Sometimes we must make the first move in finding
friends. To do this, we need to find new groups of people to be around.
When we are invited to a party at someone's home where we know none of
the guests, it is reasonable to expect that the host or hostess will
introduce us to at least one person or one group of people. But this
does not always happen, and even when it does, we usually cannot stay
with the same person or group for the entire party, meeting, or event.
There are two important skills for joining ongoing conversational
groups. First, we need to know how to tell whether a group of people
having a conversation is open or closed to new people. Second, if the
group is open, we need to learn how to join the conversation.

99

1.  Figuring Out Whether a Group Is Open or Closed It is important to
    determine whether a group is open or closed. Open groups will be
    receptive to our entering the conversation; closed groups may not
    welcome new members. In open groups:  Everyone is standing somewhat
    apart.  Members occasionally glance around the room.  There are gaps
    in the conversation.  Members are talking about a topic of general
    interest.

In closed groups:  Everyone is standing close together.  Members attend
exclusively to each other.  There is a very animated conversation with
few gaps.  Members seem to be pairing off.

2.  Figuring Out How to Join an Open Group Conversation Usually the best
    way to join conversations in open groups is to wait for a lull in
    the conversation, move close to or stand beside a friendly-­looking
    member of the group, and say something like "Mind if I join you?"

99G. Join Organized Groups One of the most important reasons for joining
groups is to meet others. Thus joining ongoing groups that meet
regularly can be an effective way of making friends. 1. Find a Group
That Meets Frequently Explain to participants: "The more frequently the
group meets, the more likely you are to become friends with someone in
the group." 2. Find a Group Where Members Are Similar to You Tell
participants: "It may be more difficult to make friends in groups based
on characteristics such as age, sex, or occupation that are not
associated with attitudes; in this case, the larger the group, the
greater the chance of finding people who share your values. Imagine, for
instance, a small local club for divorced people or for single parents.
The people in it may have so little in common other than their
singleness that meetings become a strain rather than a pleasure." 3.
Find a Group That Has Cooperative Aims In a group organized around a
shared interest, it is better to find a group emphasizing mutual help or
one aimed simply at having a good time, rather than a competitive group
where members

276 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 11--11a, 12

are always pitting their skills against one another. Cooperation is
conducive to liking. People ordinarily appear more attractive to one
another if they are cooperating rather than competing. Practice
Exercise: Give Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 11a: Identifying
Skills to Find People and Get Them to Like You to participants. Explain
the task, and give participants time to check the more effective
response in each pair. Discuss answers. If time permits, ask
participants whether they have been in other situations where it was not
clear to them what would be the better course of action between two
options. Correct responses for Handout 11a are as follows: 1A, 2B, 3A,
4A, 5A, 6B, 7B, 8B, 9B, 10B, 11B, 12A.

XII. Mindfulness of Others (Interpersonal Effectiveness Handouts
     12--12a) Main Point: Friendships are easier to form and last longer
     when we remember to be mindful of the other persons in these
     friendships. Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 12: Mindfulness of
     Others. Notice that the three mindfulness skills described here (B,
     C, and D) are the three core mindfulness "what" skills taught in
     the Mindfulness module. Under each of the "what" skills are the
     three core "how" skills also taught in the Mindfulness module. This
     handout can be taught didactically or very interactively, depending
     on time. Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 12a: Identifying
     Mindfulness of Others (Optional). Use this handout if you have
     extra time in the session, or give it out as homework and then
     discuss it at the next session. The correct responses can be found
     at the end of this section of the teaching notes, as well as at the
     end of the introduction to this chapter. Interpersonal
     Effectiveness Worksheet 9: Mindfulness of Others. Review this
     worksheet with participants. Tell participants to check off any of
     these skills they attempted, whether they completed them
     successfully or not. Remind them that the idea is to practice, not
     to be perfect. As in previous worksheets, remind participants to
     use the mindfulness "what" skill of describing (see Mindfulness
     Handout 4) when describing events and what they or others have said
     or done.

99A. Why Be Mindful of Others?

99

Relationships last longer when we remember to be mindful of the other
persons in these relationships. Mindfulness of others is an extension of
the relationship effectiveness (GIVE) skills taught earlier in this
module (see Section VI of this chapter, plus Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 6). Mindfulness of others is also a reiteration of the core
mindfulness "what" and "how" skills (see Chapter 7, plus Mindfulness
Handouts 4 and 5). The skills here include observing and paying
attention to others, describing what is observed rather than judging it,
and participating in the flow of interactions. Note to Leaders: A good
way to teach these skills is to have participants first read
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 12 and check the boxes on this
handout next to all of those they find difficult and need to work on.
Ask each participant to share which boxes they have checked. Afterward,
teach each of the points, then go back and discuss. If you are worried
about time, you can save this exercise for last.

B. Observing and Attending to Other People Observing and attending to
other people involves several subskills.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 12 • 277

99

1.  Pay Attention with Interest and Curiosity The first subskill is to
    pay attention with interest and curiosity to others around us. The
    important words here are "interest" and "curiosity." When we have
    such an attitude, we are open to getting to know someone new. We are
    also open to learning new information about others. This is, of
    course, critical, since all people and events are in a state of
    constant change.
2.  Be Open to New Information about Others Approaching people with
    interest and curiosity is the opposite of being rigid, or unwilling
    to change our minds about a person when we discover that we have
    been wrong. It is also the opposite of holding a person to what they
    said, believed, felt, or wanted yesterday or even 5 minutes ago.
    People often change their beliefs or what they want. When we are
    mindless, pouting, or willful, we often cannot or will not
    acknowledge that a person has changed---even when we want the
    changes.

99 99

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when others have been
closed to new or corrective information about themselves. How did they
feel? What did they want from the other persons?

3.  Let Go of Overfocusing on Self Say to participants: "You can miss
    much of what the other person is saying or doing when you are overly
    focused on yourself. Although you want to be aware of yourself
    during interactions, a problem arises when you are overly focused on
    yourself. It is hard to be empathic to others or validate what they
    are saying or doing when you are not focused on them." Two things
    can happen when we overfocus on ourselves. First, it can lead to our
    talking mostly about ourselves. Although some of this is good, too
    much makes others feel that they are not very important. This does
    not ordinarily lead to positive interactions. Second, focusing on
    ourselves during interactions can lead to anxiety19 about how we are
    doing and what people are thinking. Anxiety can lead us either to
    avoid being with people or to stay very quiet when we are with them.
    Avoiding people and keeping our mouths shut when around others are
    not effective ways to make or keep friends.

Point: Data on social phobia20, 21 show that individuals who are highly
anxious about joining 99 Research groups or talking in groups are often
overfocused on themselves and on how they appear to others. Part of an
effective treatment is to get these individuals to practice throwing
their complete attention toward the other people they are interacting
with. This may need to be practiced many times, but ordinarily it is
very helpful in reducing anxiety when with others.

Practice Exercise: Conduct two role plays where you ask clients to
manipulate the focus of their attention. In the first role play, ask the
clients to demand a high standard of themselves---that is, to imagine
that they need to appear witty and intelligent at all times and to
constantly monitor how they're fulfilling that standard. In the second
role play, ask the clients to reduce expectations and only focus on what
the other persons say. After the role plays, ask the clients about their
subjective experience of anxiety and how they would rate it (on a scale
of 0--100), and also give feedback on performance. You can ask the other
group members to give feedback as well.

4.  Stay in the Present Another important subskill is to stay in the
    present. That is, we need to listen to other persons in real time,
    instead of planning what we will say next or thinking about the
    future consequences of what the persons are saying.

278 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 12

99

5.  Stop Multitasking Say to participants: "It's essential not to start
    multitasking when you are interacting with someone else. Don't text
    others, or answer and start phone conversations with others, during
    a faceto-face conversation with someone else. It can even mean
    turning off your cell phone if a conversation is important. In
    groups, don't look over a person's shoulder when you are talking
    with him or her, to see if there is someone else you would rather
    talk to. It is difficult for other people to feel that they are
    important to you or that you care about them when you frequently
    turn their attention away from them." Discussion Point: Elicit from
    participants times when other people have paid attention to
    something or someone else during interactions. How did this feel?

99

6.  Give Up Judgments and Always Being Right Judgmental thinking, voice
    tone, and statements are off-­putting to others and spring from an
    attitude that we are right and others are wrong. This is an
    ineffective attitude in interpersonal relationships. Always
    attempting to be right can be lethal in making and keeping friends.
    Others don't want to always be wrong. It makes them feel that we
    don't respect their point of view, and they then want to avoid us.
    Discussion Point: Elicit from participants which of the
    relationship-­observing skills they have most difficulty with.
    Discuss ways to practice being more observing of others.

99C. Describing In regard to mindfulness of others, observing involves
several things.

99

1.  Describe What You Observe in a Matter-of-Fact Way The key words in
    the heading above are "describe" and "matter-of-fact." When we
    describe, we state what we observed: the "who," "what," and "where."
    We might be describing thoughts, feelings, or sensations of our
    own---how something smells or tastes to us, or what we have seen,
    heard, or done. The key to describing, as noted in the discussions
    of the mindfulness skills in Chapter 7, is to distinguish what we
    are observing within ourselves (e.g., thoughts, feelings,
    sensations, images) from what we are observing outside of ourselves.
2.  Put Aside Judgmental Thoughts and Statements Judgmental thoughts and
    statements very often get in the way of describing. Rather than just
    noticing what someone is doing or saying, we add an evaluation of
    "good" or "bad" onto what we observe. In addition, we usually then
    assume not only that we are correct, but also that the entire
    universe should operate on our rules of what is correct and right.
    The best way to keep friends and increase emotional closeness with
    others is to replace judgmental thoughts and words with descriptive
    words.
3.  Don't Make Assumptions about Others We need to avoid assuming what
    others are thinking, how they are feeling, what they must be doing,
    or what they really want or don't want. Such assumptions and
    interpretations of others can cause no end of trouble in
    relationships. This is especially true when we don't bother to check
    the facts. If we want to make and keep relationships, it is
    essential to treat assumptions and interpretations as hypotheses to
    be tested, instead of as known facts. Remind participants:
    "Remember, you can only describe what you observe through your
    senses (touch, taste, smell, hearing, seeing). No one has ever
    observed another person's thoughts, motives, intentions, feelings,
    emotions, desires, or personal experiences. What we can observe, and
    thus describe, are all of these things in ourselves."

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 12 • 279

Interpersonally sensitive people can often correctly infer what is going
on with a person even when the other person says nothing about what is
going on. As we will see later in the section on validation, being able
to "read" other people correctly from knowledge of who they are, things
that have happened, and nonverbal communication is very important.
However, even when we know people very well or know all that has
happened with respect to a certain situation, we still must be open to
being wrong. We can check the facts by asking questions and sometimes by
watching how people react to what we say and do. 4. Don't Question
Others' Motives and Intent Another thing that can be very damaging to
relationships is questioning other people's motives or intentions.
People feel pushed away when we question their motives. The most common
example is assuming that if words or actions have a certain effect, then
that effect must have been intended. For example, it is all too easy to
assume that "if I feel manipulated by what you said or did, then you
must have intended to manipulate me," or that "if I feel angry about
what you did, then you intended to make me feel angry." Questioning
other people's motives is also common in people who have trouble
trusting others. Mistrust of specific people without good reasons,
however, delays forming friendships and gets in the way of intimacy and
closeness.

99

5.  Give Others the Benefit of the Doubt Giving other people the benefit
    of the doubt is a very effective skill for maintaining
    relationships. Even when there is some justification for inferring
    that another person has some negative intention, usually there is at
    least some small chance of another possibility. Remembering to give
    the benefit of the doubt can make it easier to follow up with
    checking the facts. As with opposite action, it is important to give
    the benefit of the doubt all the way---that is to really open up to
    the possibility that your thoughts about the other person's
    intentions could really be wrong and that there could be other
    benevolent motivations. 22 Discussion Point: Elicit from
    participants situations where they inferred that someone else had a
    negative intention, only to find out later that they were mistaken.
    Have participants consider whether others have afforded them the
    benefit of the doubt.

6.  Allow Others to Earn Your Trust Many individuals who struggle with
    trust have mistaken notions about the process of building trust. For
    example, some will insist that building trust takes time, as if time
    itself leads to increased trust. In reality, trust is built when one
    takes risks with others by choosing to give them opportunities to
    prove themselves trustworthy; when such individuals act in
    trustworthy ways, then trust is earned. Without mindfulness, it may
    take months or even years before opportunities to earn trust are
    given, reinforcing the notion that trust "takes time." On the other
    hand, participants can actively practice choosing to allow others to
    earn their trust. Of course, when others respond in untrustworthy
    ways (e.g., deliberately taking advantage), then decisions to stop
    trusting them are reasonable. Discussion Point: Have participants
    reflect on examples in which either they gave others opportunities
    to earn trust and examples in which they did not. Elicit also
    examples of others' giving them a chance to earn their trust.22

Too little and too much trust can both be problems. Paranoia is the
persistent belief that others are out to harm us or manipulate us, when
there is little or no objective evidence that this is so. Clearly,
paranoia does not bode well for building close personal relationships.
The opposite of paranoia, however, can be thought of as "trust
disorder." This involves believing everything that

280 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 12--12a, 13

people tell us and never doubting them or their motives, despite
evidence that they might not be trustworthy. Entering relationships
naively with untrustworthy or dishonest people can also interfere with
finding friends and building closeness and intimacy. Once we are hurt by
someone like this, it can be difficult to start over again in a new
relationship. Mindfulness does not require being naive to the facts of
human nature, discounting negative information about someone, or
ignoring warning signals that a relationship may not turn out as well as
we hope.

99D. Participating with Others In regard to mindfulness of others,
participating means "jumping into the relationship." In other words, it
means completely "buying into" or throwing ourselves completely into a
conversation, group activity, or relationship. It means letting go of
standing outside a group or relationship.

99

1.  Throw Yourself into Interactions We can throw ourselves into a
    conversation or completely "buy into" it without simultaneously
    throwing ourselves into an ongoing relationship. Staying in the
    present means participating in the present.
2.  Go with the Flow We need to "go with the flow" of the other person
    in an interaction or of a group activity, rather than trying to
    control every activity, decision, and interaction as if our lives or
    well-being depended on it. Going with the flow does not mean giving
    up control of everything. When relationships are abusive, or when
    groups want us to do things that violate our morals or that make us
    feel extremely uncomfortable, staying in control of at least what we
    do is important. Having at least some control of what others do can
    be very important when those others are our children, children in
    our care, or people who report to us whose work we are responsible
    for. Having some control can also be important with people who could
    potentially hurt us (such as those who spend our money, take or
    dispose of our property, write untrue things about us online, etc.).
3.  Become One with Group Activities and Conversations Once we have
    become involved in a conversation or group activity, we need to
    "become one" with the interaction by letting go of self-focus and
    resisting efforts to pull back after we throw ourselves in. Practice
    Exercise: Give Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 12a: Identifying
    Mindfulness of Others to participants, and explain the task. Give
    participants time to check the more mindful response for each pair.
    Discuss answers. If time permits, ask participants if they have
    other situations where it is not clear to them what would be the
    more mindful course of action between two options. Correct responses
    for Handout 12a are as follows: 1B, 2B, 3A, 4A, 5A, 6A, 7B, 8B, 9B,
    10A, 11B, 12B.

<!-- -->

XIII. How to End Relationships (Interpersonal Effectiveness Handouts
      13--13a) Main Point: Ending destructive relationships and those
      that interfere with pursuing important goals can sometimes be more
      difficult than forming relationships in the first place.
      Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 13: Ending Relationships. The
      skills for ending relationships

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handouts 13--13a • 281 described on this handout are drawn from
mindfulness (wise mind), emotion regulation (problem solving, cope
ahead, opposite action), and interpersonal effectiveness (DEAR MAN, GIVE
FAST) skills. The only new skill is that of practicing safety first when
ending abusive or life-­threatening relationships. The key to teaching
these skills is to make them relevant to participants by discussing
relationships they have ended, ones they are considering ending, or ones
they wish they had already ended. Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout
13a: Identifying How to End Relationships (Optional). You can use this
handout if you have extra time in the session, or give it out as
homework and then discuss it in the next session. It can also be
skipped. Correct responses are listed at the end of this section's
teaching points, as well as at the end of this chapter's introduction.
Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 10: Ending Relationships
(Optional). Assign this worksheet only to those thinking about ending a
relationship. If they are trying to leave an abusive or dangerous
relationship, review it with them and highlight the necessity of calling
a domestic violence hotline (either a local one or, in the United
States, the National Domestic Violence Hotline; see the end of this
section). As with previous worksheets, remind participants to use the
mindfulness "what" skill of describing (see Mindfulness Handout 4) when
describing events and what they or others have said or done. Spend some
time helping participants figure out how to concisely state the core
problems leading to their wish to leave a relationship. Interpersonal
Effectiveness Worksheet 1: Pros and Cons of Using Interpersonal Skills
(Optional). This worksheet can also be used in teaching this skill set.

99A. Ending Important Relationships Requires Clear Thinking and
Interpersonal Finesse

Important relationships come in all varieties: friendships, marriages or
other committed life partnerships, parent--child relationships, sibling
relationships, work relationships, and psychotherapy or counseling
relationships, to name a few of those ordinarily most important. Each of
these relationships can vary in the degree to which they enhance or
reduce the quality of our lives.

99B. Decide to End Relationships in Wise Mind, Never in Emotion Mind
Even in a good relationship, it is not uncommon to have momentary wishes
to end it when we are frustrated, angry, or otherwise unhappy.
Ordinarily these feelings pass and we forget them. Unfortunately, many
people end relationships in emotion mind. If they had waited until the
emotion passed, the value of the relationships might have looked very
different. 1. Strong Negative Emotion Can Lead to Rash Actions in
Interpersonal Situations When we are highly aroused, our behavior is
likely to be mood-­dependent, and our ability to take a balanced
long-term view of our relationships deteriorates. In addition, our
ability to think clearly, communicate effectively, or problem-solve
issues in our relationships becomes limited. High negative arousal can
also fuel judgmental thinking, which can then further escalate conflict.
With conflict escalating, we may find ourselves walking out of a
relationship in a fit of extreme anger or frustration. In retrospect, we
may regret leaving. It may also be impossible to resurrect the
relationship. 2. Think Through the Reasons for Ending a Relationship
before Ending It It may be useful to write out the pros and cons of
staying versus ending the relationship before making a decision.

282 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 13

3.  It Makes Sense to End Destructive Relationships Tell participants:
    "A relationship is destructive when it destroys either the quality
    of the relationship or aspects of yourself, such as your physical
    body and safety, your self-­esteem or sense of integrity, or your
    ability to find happiness or peace of mind."
4.  It Makes Sense to End a Relationship That Seriously Interferes with
    Your Quality of Life Continue: "A relationship interferes with your
    quality of life when it blocks or hinders your pursuit of goals that
    are important to you, your ability to enjoy life and do things you
    like, your relationships with other persons (which a very jealous
    partner or friend may resent), or the welfare of other people you
    love."
5.  It Makes Sense to Stay in a Relationship When the Cost of Leaving Is
    Greater Than the Cost of Staying An example of a relationship in
    which the cost of leaving might be greater than that of staying
    might be this: One person is caring for a partner who has a
    degenerative brain disorder, which results in a complete change of
    personality. The partner who was once loving is now angry,
    frequently out of control, incapable of self-care, and unable to
    recognize the caregiving partner. The caregiver may regard staying
    within such a relationship as a moral duty, and ending the
    relationship may result in intense remorse and guilt. In such a
    situation, however, it will be important for the caregiver to find
    ways to create sufficient separation to maintain some quality of
    life both within and outside of the relationship.
6.  It Is Important to Differentiate between Justified and Unjustified
    Guilt in Deciding Whether to End a Relationship "Justified guilt" is
    feeling guilty when a completed or intended action violates our
    important moral values. "Unjustified guilt" is feeling guilty for
    something that does not in reality violate our moral values.
    Unjustified guilt is often a result of paying attention to what we
    believe others will think, rather than to what we ourselves think.
    (See Emotion Regulation Handouts 8a and 11.)

99C. Try Problem Solving to Repair a Difficult Relationship Problem
solving may be effective in repairing a relationship when the
relationship is important and there is reason for hope. 1. Problem
Solving May Involve Doing Some Serious Work on the Relationship Tell
participants: "In a relationship with a friend, partner, or other person
you are very close to, the two of you may need to do some serious work
on the relationship. To get started with problem solving, review the
problem-­solving steps in Emotion Regulation Handout 12. Using a
relationship workbook or other set of guidelines may be helpful here
also. For example, The High-­Conflict Couple, a book written for couples
by Alan Fruzzetti, 23 gives many guidelines that can be useful in any
high-­conflict relationship." 2. Problem Solving May Require Getting
Other People Involved to Help In a marriage or a committed partnership,
problem solving may require couple counseling. In a relationship with a
relative, it may require asking other relatives to help out. In a work
setting, it may require working with a mediator. When the decision is to
maintain the relationship, but also to increase personal time and
separation, joining a support group may be of help.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 13 • 283

99D. Use Cope Ahead Skills to Plan How to End a Relationship See Chapter
9, Section XVI, and Emotion Regulation Handout 19 for further details on
cope ahead. 1. Decide Whether to End the Relationship in Writing, on the
Phone, or in Person Tell participants: "The decision about how to end
the relationship will depend greatly on the type of relationship you
have, how long you have had the relationship, and the degree of intimacy
with the other person." 2. Write a Script in Advance Say to
participants: "Write out ahead of time exactly what you want to say and
how you want to explain your decision. If you are ending the
relationship in writing, such as through a resignation letter at work or
by e-mail with a long-­distance e-mail friend, ask someone you trust to
read what you have to say before sending it. It is very easy for
judgmental, condescending, or insensitive comments to creep into
writing, despite your best efforts to send a different message. A second
reader can often pick this up for you." 3. Practice What to Say
Continue: "If you are going to end the relationship on the phone or in
person, practice in your imagination what you will say, how you will say
it, and when you will tell the other person you want to end the
relationship. Practice in front of a mirror saying what you want to say.
Practice with close friends and get their feedback on how you sound." 4.
Troubleshoot Ahead of Time Tell participants: "Troubleshoot ahead of
time what you will say or do in response to what the other person might
say or do. It is important here to try to predict what the other person
will actually say or do, and then be prepared with a variety of
responses."

99E. Be Direct: Use DEAR MAN, GIVE FAST Skills Important relationships
ordinarily cannot be ended with a simple DEAR MAN, GIVE FAST statement
as outlined in Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills Handouts 5--7.
However, these steps can guide how a conversation about ending a
relationship is approached. 1. DEAR Say to participants: "Most important
at first is to be direct and clear. Describe the relationship problems
that have led you to want to end the relationship. Express clearly how
you feel about it, and assert that you now want to end the relationship.
Have the other person confirm his or her understanding that the
relationship is over, and if possible, reinforce by letting the other
person know how ending the relationship will be good for both of you. If
this is not the case, focus on how a good ending will be in both your
interests." 2. MAN Encourage participants: "Stay mindful, and appear
confident. If you are sure that ending the relationship is in your
interests, it is important not to give in to entreaties to stay in the
relationship. This may be particularly important if you are more
important to the other person than he or she is to you. Be careful not
to go to extremes, however, unless you really do want to end all contact
with the person. For example, if you want to get a divorce, end a sexual
relationship, or move out of a place you share with a roommate, you may
still want to be friends. Thus it is important to not burn any more
bridges than you have to. Although you may not be willing to

284 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 13

negotiate whether to end the relationship or not, be ready to negotiate
how to end it, if that is at all possible."

99

3.  GIVE The person ending a relationship is generally the person in the
    high-power position. Thus the GIVE skills are particularly important
    in these situations. Tell participants: "Be gentle. Inhibiting
    attacks, threats, judgments, and condescending words and expressions
    can be extremely helpful in smoothing an ending to the relationship.
    This can be very difficult to do when guilt about ending can easily
    lead to blaming and judging the other person. Although you may know
    that you will end the relationship no matter what the other person
    says, listen to and validate the person's point of view. This can
    make it easier for both of you to work out an ending that causes the
    least hurt for the other person."
4.  FAST Say to participants: "Finally, be fair, and make no apologies.
    Leaving a relationship with your self-­respect intact requires you to
    be truthful about the problems (even if you are tactful about how
    you frame them) and not to sacrifice your values or integrity. This
    can be particularly difficult when the reason for ending is that you
    have changed, rather than that the other person is doing things that
    make the relationship impossible for you."

99F. Practice Opposite Action for Love If Needed Tell participants:
"Even though you may know that a relationship must end, at times that
does not coincide with an end of love. This is often the case when you
love a person but finally realize that the relationship is either
destructive or incompatible with your life goals. Incompatible values,
career demands, the well-being of children, unwillingness to move to
distant locations, and many other considerations may make an alliance
impossible between two people, even though there is great love."
Continue: "The central question here is whether or not loving the other
person enhances or damages your life. Many times, continuation of love
is life-­enhancing. At other times, it is not. For example, a woman
addicted to drugs who loves a drug addict may need the relationship to
get her own drugs. Even though her partner may pimp her out to other men
to make drug money, she may still love him and find it very difficult to
end the relationship. This also happens often in relationships with
abusers. Being mistreated does not always end love. In these situations,
to keep from returning to destructive relationships, opposite action for
love (as described in Emotion Regulation Handout 11: Figuring Out
Opposite Actions) may be called for."

99G. Practice Safety First! Emphasize to participants: "It is very
important to realize that in a physically abusive relationship or one
where you fear for your life, it is very important to get appropriate
advice about how to leave the relationship safely. In many abusive
relationships, the time of ending and leaving the relationship is a time
fraught with danger. Thus the threat of danger should not be taken
lightly if your partner in a relationship has been physically abusive or
has threatened your life. In these cases, safe housing and a plan for
safely leaving the relationship may be necessary. Call the local
domestic violence hotline in your city or county for help. It is also
important to get advice from a professional who is trained and
experienced in working with individuals in abusive relationships." Note
to Leaders: In the United States, you can also refer participants to the
National Domestic Violence Hotline website
(www.thehotline.org/tag/safety-­planning). You can find non-U.S. hotlines
via your search engine. In addition, if you are not trained and
experienced in working with abused and battered individuals in
relationships, it is important to refer participants to an expert who
has such training and experience (or to get consultation from such a
person).

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handouts 13a--14 • 285

Practice Exercise: Give Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 13a:
Identifying How to End Relationships to participants, and explain the
task. Give participants time to check the more effective response for
each pair. Discuss answers. If time permits, ask participants if they
have other situations where it is not clear to them what would be the
more effective course of action between two options. Correct responses
for Handout 13a are as follows: 1B, 2B, 3B, 4A, 5B, 6B, 7B, 8B.

XIV. Overview: Walking the Middle Path Skills (Interpersonal
     Effectiveness Handout 14)1 Main Point: This set of skills helps
     participants effectively manage themselves and their relationships
     through (1) dialectics, or balancing acceptance and change; (2)
     validation, or working on acceptance; and

<!-- -->

(3) behavior change strategies, or working on change by managing cues
    and consequences. Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 14: Overview:
    Walking the Middle Path. Briefly review this overview handout. Stay
    on it longer if you are using it to review skills already taught. If
    you are only teaching some of the skills on this handout, consider
    skipping it entirely. Do not teach the material while covering this
    handout unless you are skipping the related handouts. Worksheet:
    None.

99A. Walking the Middle Path

The middle path is one of harmony with reality as it is. The middle path
requires the fine-­tuning of opposites that in turn produce life's
movement, speed, and flow---for example, accepting reality, and also
working to change reality; validating ourselves and others, and also
pointing out errors; working and resting; or tightening and loosening
strings on a violin. Walking the middle path does not mean 50% of one
point of view and 50% of another. Nor does it mean a centerpoint between
two extremes. To walk the middle path is to move away from extreme
emotional responses, actions, and thinking, and toward balanced and
integrative responses to life situations. Walking the middle path allows
moving to an extreme and then returning to a state of balance.

B. Dialectics Dialectics teaches us that all things are interconnected
and in a constant state of change. It paves the way to the middle
path---that is, the path of balancing extremes.

C. Validation Validation skills are necessary in all relationships. They
communicate that a person's feelings, thoughts, and actions are
understandable, given the person's past or current situation. On the
other hand, validation does not validate the invalid. The skills taught
here review and add more detail to the validation skills taught earlier
in this module as part of the relationship effectiveness skills. In
other words, they involve increasing the V in GIVE. A corollary of the
point above about validation is that experiencing high levels of
invalidation can be traumatic. When that happens, self-­validation is
needed for recovery.

99D. Behavior Change Skills Behavior change skills use behavioral
principles of contingency management (i.e., use of consequences) and
stimulus control to increase desired behaviors or to decrease undesired
behaviors.

286 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 15, 16--16c

XV. Dialectics (Interpersonal Effectiveness Handouts 15--16c)1 Main
    Point: A dialectical stance is essential for walking the middle
    path, because it decreases a sense of isolation, conflict, and
    polarities. Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 15: Dialectics. This
    handout briefly outlines the basics of a dialectical perspective.
    Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 16: How to Think and Act
    Dialectically. This is an extension of Handout 15 and gives examples
    of specific ways to act dialectically. Interpersonal Effectiveness
    Handout 16a: Examples of Opposite Sides That Can Both Be True
    (Optional). This handout can be very useful for in-­session
    discussion to demonstrate how opposites can indeed both be true.
    Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 16b: Important Opposites to
    Balance (Optional). This handout can be very useful during a
    discussion of how to balance life patterns and in doing homework to
    identify what life patterns need better balance. Interpersonal
    Effectiveness Handout 16c: Identifying Dialectics (Optional). Use
    this handout if you have extra time, or give it out as homework and
    then discuss it at the next session. The correct responses are
    listed at the end of this section's teaching points, as well as at
    the end of this chapter's introduction. Interpersonal Effectiveness
    Worksheet 11: Practicing Dialectics; Interpersonal Effectiveness
    Worksheet 11a: Dialectics Checklist; Interpersonal Effectiveness
    Worksheet 11b: Noticing When You're Not Dialectical. These
    worksheets offer three different formats for recording dialectics
    practice. Worksheet 11 asks participants to practice their
    dialectical skills only twice between sessions. Worksheet 11a
    instructs participants to practice and gives multiple opportunities
    for each skill, as well as multiple check boxes for each skill.
    Worksheet 11b is aimed at increasing participants' awareness of not
    being dialectical in their interactions, and of the negative
    outcomes that often follow nondialectical behavior. This worksheet
    takes the place of a pros-and-cons worksheet, in that the objective
    is to motivate dialectical behavior.

99A. Why Be Dialectical? 99 Dialectics helps us stay away from extremes
and walk the middle path in our thinking and actions. It is a world
view, and also a way of resolving disagreements and searching for the
truth.

99B. Dialectics: What Is It? There are four main ideas in the
dialectical perspective.

99

99

1.  The Universe Is Filled with Opposing Sides and Opposing Forces For
    everything that exists, there is an opposite. If there is a box,
    there is a "not box"; if there is light, there is dark; if there is
    up, there is down; there is fat and there is thin; there is male and
    there is female; there is a positive electrical charge and a
    negative charge; there is something and there is nothing; physicists
    trying to identify the most fundamental element of existence found
    matter, and then they found antimatter. Every part has a whole, and
    every whole has a part. It is impossible to understand something
    without knowledge of its opposite. Everything that exists is made of
    opposing forces that both hold things together and create constant
    change. Without gravity, we would fly away from the earth. Electrons
    are bound together to the nucleus of an atom by electromagnetism.
    Dialectics tells us that opposing points of view can both be true.
    When we consider what is left out of our own point of view (i.e.,
    when we consider opposing points of view), we can find

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 15 • 287

a synthesis of both perspectives. This is how we can get unstuck from
where we are and change occurs. Discussion Point: Discuss with
participants the idea that everything in the universe includes an
opposite.

99

2.  Everything and Every Person Is Connected in Some Way Dialectics
    reminds us of our connection to the universe. Understanding the
    interconnectedness of all things increases our understanding of our
    influence on others and theirs on us. It becomes easier to
    understand and validate both others and ourselves. This statement
    can be taught from three different perspectives, described below.

<!-- -->

a.  We Are All Connected to Each Other Physically

To make this point, ask participants to notice that the air they are
breathing in and out is in turn being breathed in and out by others. Ask
them to notice that their feet are touching the floor that is touching
every other person in the room. This floor is also touching the hallway;
the hallway is touching the steps down to the street; the street is
touching blocks far away, which in turn are touching roads going to
mountains; the mountains in turn are touching the sky; and so on. The
idea is that we can make a direct link between ourselves and the
farthest star. b. Each of Us Has Parts, and Each Is Part of a Greater
Whole

Each of us has parts (e.g., arms, legs, blood vessels, cells), and each
of us is part of a greater whole (e.g., a family, a workplace, a city).
The parts participate in creating the whole (e.g., the leg contributes
to the whole body), and simultaneously the whole body (e.g., blood
vessels, hip bone) contributes to the parts. Example: It is not possible
for the participants of the skills training program to avoid altering
the program within which they interact. The program would not exist
without them. It is certainly also the case that they will
simultaneously be affected by the program.

99

c.  Separation Is an Illusion

Modern physics tells us that separation is an illusion produced by the
tendency of our brains to perceive objects as separate. Quantum physics,
for example, finds that when we get down to the very smallest molecule
and keep going to even smaller bits of matter, we ultimately find that
matter dissolves into emptiness. Documented spiritual experiences
suggest that from the beginning of recorded human history, individuals
have had profound experiences of reality as a unity---of the universe as
one. Discussion Point: Many individuals have had experiences of unity
(i.e., of being one with their surroundings or with the entire
universe). Sometimes these experiences take place in a spiritual
context, but at other times they occur in definitely secular
circumstances. Elicit from participants whether they have ever had such
an experience. Discuss the impact, if any, of each experience on the
life of the participant who had it. Note to Leaders: It is important to
validate experiences of unity or oneness. These can take many forms. The
usual problem is that such an experience is invalidated or deemed
unimportant by a participant. Frequently the person may not have told
anyone about the experience. Remind participants with such experiences
to remember these. Thinking about the experiences can remind them that,
indeed, they are not alone and are not unconnected to others and to the
universe. For characteristics of spiritual experiences, look at the
criteria outlined in Mindfulness Handout 7: Goals of Mindfulness
Practice: A Spiritual Perspective.

288 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 15

99

99

3.  Change Is the Only Constant Dialectics helps us radically accept the
    changes that are continually occurring. This in turn helps us become
    more flexible. Such flexibility makes it easier for us to go with
    the flow, which in turn makes peak experiences more likely.
    Everything in the universe is always changing. Indeed, reality
    itself is a process of continuous transformation. Some changes are
    fast (such as light waves moving through the air, or our abdomens
    going in and out as we breathe); others are very slow (such as the
    wearing down of a river rock as water washes over it, or mountains
    being pushed up out of the earth). Each day is either shorter or
    longer than the day before. Flowers come up, bud, bloom, die, and
    decay. Stars move slowly across the sky. The earth moves around the
    sun. Example: We are all older than we were a second ago. Our bodies
    are in a constant process of change: Cells are falling off; new air
    with new particles is entering our bodies; food we have eaten is
    being digested; the position of our teeth in our mouths is changing,
    even if very slightly. If we had a powerful magnifying device, we
    would see the components of the molecules in our bodies flying
    around. Our brains are changed with each new experience we have;
    neurons are constantly firing and sending messages along the neural
    network, thus permanently changing the overall network. Discussion
    Point: Discuss the sayings "You can't step in the same river twice"
    and "Even one vote changes the outcome."

Meaning and truth also evolve over time. What was true for a person in
the past may no longer be true, simply because both the person and the
environment are changing over time. What existed yesterday, last year,
or 5 years ago does not exist now in exactly the same way. From what
exists now, something new will emerge. Reality itself evolves
transactionally over time. Truth is neither absolute (and never
changing) nor relative (and dependent only on who is looking at it).
Instead, it evolves over time.

99

Example:\* Mary, Helen, and Judy each have a daughter. Each has held a
set of values that have guided how they have raised their daughters. As
their daughters become adults, however, they are rejecting many of their
mothers' values.  Mary decides that either (1) her own values are right,
and thus she has failed in raising her

daughter; or (2) her daughter's values are right, and thus the core
values guiding her own life are wrong and she is unlikely to get her
daughter's respect. This is a view of truth as absolute.  Helen decides
that her daughter's having different values is not important. She
believes that all people have their own values, and that there are no
right or wrong values. It is important to respect others' values rather
than judge them, and she respects her daughter's values. This is a view
of truth as relative.  Judy reasons that values change over time as they
interact with changing environmental circumstances. As we all act on our
values, the environment changes and as the environment changes, our
values develop further. Judy respects her daughter's values as arising
out of both the values she taught her daughter and the experiences her
daughter has had that Judy never had. Judy does not see either herself
or her daughter as wrong, and decides to try to see whether she can
learn from her daughter's values just as her daughter learned from hers.
This is a dialectical view of truth as evolving over time. Example:
Mark, Howard, and George are college juniors who are fed up with
constant tests, paper assignments, and grading. They are losing their
love of learning. \*This example (Mary, Helen, and Judy) and the next
one (Mark, Howard, and George) are adapted from Basseches, M. (1984).
Dialectical thinking and adult development. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Copyright 1984 by Ablex Publishing Corporation. Adapted by permission of
ABC/CLIO.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 15 • 289  Mark's experience is that he learns more when he has
freedom to pursue his own intellec-

tual interests. He also believes, however, that university professors
must know what they are doing, and that required courses and
standardized tests and assignments must be the soundest educational
method. This is a view of truth as absolute.  Howard believes that
students should be able to pursue courses they want to take. He does not
accept that it is educationally legitimate for teachers to dictate what
students should learn. In his view, giving standardized tests and
assignments is a subjective decision made by professors---and he
believes that by requiring them, his teachers are using their power to
impose on students how to learn. He decides to cultivate the fine art of
pleasing professors by giving them what they want. This is a view of
truth as relative.  George recognizes that colleges perform both a
certification function for society and an educational function. The
conflict between these two functions is at the core of the frustration
with exams and standardized assignments. The certification function
requires tests and grades; the education function requires opportunities
free of arbitrary tests and writing assignments. George recognizes that
change will require an evolution in the relationship between the
university and society over time. He decides to learn what he can so as
to contribute to this evolution. He also recognizes that in the
meantime, he will have to make compromises between what is needed for
certification that he has learned and what is needed for his own
education. This is a dialectical view of truth as evolving over time.
Example: Adults often look back on the hard work and sacrifices they
made when young to get ahead, and then they impose the same hard work
and sacrifice on the young people around them now. For these adults, the
meaning of hard work and sacrifice was learned over time in specific
circumstances. Its meaning for those who are younger will also evolve
over time in specific circumstances, and it is likely to be different,
particularly if sacrifices are forced upon them.

99

4.  Change Is Transactional Dialectics helps us analyze how we are being
    influenced by our environment and how we are influencing our
    environment. This in turn leads to a better understanding of our own
    behavior and or our relationships. Dialectics leads to
    understanding, not to blame. The world is one large system with many
    interacting parts. The sun, the trees, the water, the fruit, the
    farmer, the grocer, the teacher, the friend, the parent, the
    sibling---these things are all interconnected and influence one
    another. So at any given moment, things are never the same as the
    moment before or the moment after. Each individual influences his or
    her environment, just as each environment influences the individual.
    Reciprocity is the key word here. A affects B, which alters B, which
    in turn alters A, and so forth. Each person has a completely
    different "family" that has a unique impact on his or her life. The
    "family" can consist of partners, children, parents, grandparents,
    siblings, teachers, peers, therapists, coaches, and others. The
    impact that these people in the environment have on the individual
    is just as varied as the impact the individual has on those in the
    environment. Example: A relatively new and successful school teacher
    gets a new student who has a learning disability. Not having had
    much experience with this, she does a lot of extra work to figure
    out how best to teach him, and he progresses well through her class.
    The student comes out of the class not only learning the material,
    but also feeling more secure in his abilities. At the same time, the
    teacher has evolved from the experience and is now much better
    prepared for teaching the next student she encounters with a similar
    learning disability, and feels more secure in her ability to learn
    about different learning styles. Student and teacher have both grown
    and evolved as a result of the experience. 24 Emotion dysregulation
    is a good example of the transactional nature of change and of
    learning. Two functions of emotions are to activate behavior and to
    communicate to others so that they

290 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 15, 16--16a

will respond. When the functions are discouraged or blocked by the
environment, the emotions may escalate. This in turn can lead to
stronger efforts by the environment to block the emotions. After a time,
a vicious cycle can occur. Discussion Point: Describe the following
situation: Mom takes Catalina (age 6) to a Yo-Yo Ma concert with seats
in the center of the orchestra section. As Yo-Yo Ma plays the cello,
Catalina looks up at the stage and thinks she sees a small fire behind
the stage. She whispers to Mom that there is a fire. Mom looks and does
not see it. \[Ask participants what they think Mom will say back to
Catalina.\] Mom whispers back that there is no fire. Catalina looks
again and sees the fire again. \[Ask participants what they think
Catalina will do now.\] Catalina whispers louder, "There's a fire!" Mom
still does not see the fire. \[Ask participants what they think Mom will
do now.\] Mom whispers even louder, "No, there is not!" Seeing it again
\[ask, "What will Catalina say?"\], Catalina says loudly, "Mom! Fire!"
Mom says \[ask, "What and how?"\] loudly, "BE QUIET!" After a few more
rounds, Mom scoops Catalina up and carries her out of the concert hall.
She feels safer and calms down. \[Ask, "Did Mom reinforce Catalina for
escalating?"\] Alas, Mom has just reinforced Catalina for escalating.
\[Ask, "Did Catalina calming down reinforce Mom for escalating when she
took her out of the concert hall?"\] Catalina has reinforced Mom for the
escalated action of taking her out of the concert.

C. How to Think and Act Dialectically Review Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 16 with participants. Note to Leaders: At either the beginning
or end of discussing this handout, it can be helpful to ask participants
to check off which dialectical strategies they most need to work on. Or
you can ask them to circle those skills they are most interested in
practicing. The list of strategies is quite long, and it is not
necessary to go over every one. Select and focus on those giving the
most trouble to participants.

99

1.  There Is Always More Than One Side to Anything That Exists; Look for
    Both Sides

<!-- -->

a.  Ask Wise Mind: What Am I Missing?

Example: Demanding adherence to rules that were correct when a person
was a child misses that the person is no longer a child. Example:
Following guidelines for appropriate behavior set by one's previous
employer misses that appropriate behavior may be different in another
company or at a higher rank in the same company. Example: Screaming at a
boyfriend, "You never think about me! You only care about yourself!"
when he turns on a TV football game instead of talking to her.
Discussion Point: Ask group members to consider what's being left out in
the third example above. Generate more balanced alternative explanations
for the boyfriend's turning on the football game. If the group fails to
generate any examples, you may choose to give the following: The woman
realizes that football is her boyfriend's passion, and that watching one
game does not mean he does not care for her. She also remembers that her
boyfriend does think about her quite often. This "both--and" perspective
synthesizes the "either--or" stance so commonly held by emotionally
dysregulated individuals. (See "Move Away from Extremes," below.) b. Ask
"Where Is the Kernel of Truth in the Other Side?": Find the Truth in
Both Sides

Say to participants: "Practice looking at all sides of a situation and
all points of view. Remember that no one, including you, has the
absolute truth. There is wisdom to be gained from examining the truth in
opposite perspectives." You can use the examples on Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 16a (e.g., "You are tough, AND you are gentle") as
illustrations.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handouts 16--16b • 291

Each person has unique qualities, and different people have different
points of view. This point normalizes and accepts differences among
people, rather than seeing differences as cause for conflict. Some
people believe that anything that deviates from their own point of view
is wrong. Example: On a driving vacation to Europe, Mary wants to get up
early in the morning to go out exploring and see everything. Bill wants
to sleep in and enjoy the free breakfast the hotel provides. The truth
from Mary's perspective is that this is a once-in-a-­lifetime opportunity
to see Europe, and they can always sleep and eat breakfast at home.
Sleeping is wasting time on the trip. The truth from Bill's perspective
is that he is mentally fatigued from his full-time job and
responsibilities at home, and that sleeping in and relaxing over
breakfast are what vacations are all about. Discussion Point: If you
have time, ask each participant to check off the dialectical oppositions
on Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 16a that they have the most
trouble with. Also ask participants to write in any other oppositions
they have trouble with. Discuss how to find the syntheses of each of the
opposites.

99

c.  Move Away from Extremes

Encourage clients to let go of seeing the world in "black-or-white,"
"all-or-­nothing" ways. Many individuals think in extremes and rigidly
hold to a single point of view. Life is black or white, viewed in
dichotomous units. Such people often have difficulty receiving new
information; they search instead for absolute truths and concrete facts
that never change. The goal of dialectics is not to get participants to
view reality as a series of grays, but rather to help them see both
black and white, and to achieve a synthesis of the two that does not
negate the reality of either. Example: A man was extremely concerned
about his wife's habit of running up debt on their joint credit cards.
He was afraid that she would run up so much debt that they would go
bankrupt. The first thing he thought to do was to try to take away her
credit cards. But doing that would alienate his wife, and this would
only increase his distress. So he started to ignore the topic of money
completely, in order to avoid his emotional distress---the opposite
extreme of trying to keep her from having any access to credit cards.
Rather than opting for either one of these two extreme positions, he
decided to consider both. This led him to find a third option, a "middle
path" synthesis: to speak calmly to his wife about how to create a
budget for both of them that they could monitor together. Discussion
Point: Discuss the role of emotions in making extreme statements, such
as when a teenage boy comes home after curfew, and his father tells him,
"You're grounded for the rest of the school year!" Ask participants for
other examples of extreme behavioral responses. d. Balance Opposites

Say to participants: "Work to balance the opposites in your life. For
instance, validate yourself as well as others. Accept reality, but also
work to change it. Hold someone close, while also letting the person
go." Discussion Point: If you have time, review Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 16b, and ask participants to check off the
dialectical oppositions that they have the most trouble balancing. Also
ask participants to write in any other dichotomies they have trouble
balancing. Discuss.

99

e.  Make Lemonade Out of Lemons

Making lemonade out of lemons is the art of taking something that seems
apparently problematic and turning it into an asset. From another
perspective, it is finding the silver lining in

292 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 16

the darkest cloud. For example, suffering can enhance empathy and allow
one to understand others who are suffering. Problems in everyday life
are an opportunity to practice skills. Indeed, from the point of view of
learning new skills, not having problems would be a disaster, since
there would be nothing to practice on! The key idea here, of course, is
not to act as if the lemon was actually lemonade all along. Such a
position is invalidating and oversimplifies the difficulties of turning
something very painful and difficult into something valuable or useful.
Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when they have been
able to make lemonade out of a lemon. What personal difficulties have
they had that they learned from or that somehow influenced them in a
positive way? Discuss.

99

f.  Embrace Confusion

Embracing confusion, or entering the paradox, is entering into the world
of "yes and no" or "true and not true" and allowing it to be what it is.
It is becoming comfortable with paradox and confusion. Say to
participants: "It is possible for a person to want you to be happy, but
also refuse to do what you want. I can be right that it is too cold, and
you can be right that it is too hot. I can do my best and still do
better." Discussion Point: Read over and discuss the opposites that can
both be true on Handout 16a at this point, or come back to this point
when you teach the handout. If you are not using the handout, elicit
from participants paradoxes in their own lives. g. Play Devil's Advocate

Playing devil's advocate is arguing against a cause or position simply
for the sake of argument or to determine the validity of the point of
view. Using this strategy can make it easier to find the truth in both
sides of an argument. Tell participants: "When you are working with your
own sets of beliefs, it can be helpful to use the two-chair technique.
Put two chairs near each other. Sit in one chair to make one side of the
argument; sit in the other to take the opposing view; and switch back
and forth until clarity is obtained about both points of view." (See
Chapter 7 of the main DBT text for a fuller discussion of this
strategy.) Practice Exercise: Elicit from participants various dilemmas
or conflicts they have had in their lives. Select one to use as a
practice case, and ask the person to play the devil's advocate for both
sides of the dilemma, using the two-chair technique. Discuss. h. Use
Metaphors and Storytelling

Metaphors and stories have been used throughout history to convey
complex events that can have multiple meanings. Stories are also an
avenue of clarifying what a person is leaving out in his or her
understanding of something. For example, a person may be focused on not
wanting to come to the skills training group and decide that skills are
not needed to get to his or her goals. You can point out that this is
like getting in a boat to go across a river when the boat has no bottom
on it. Trying to be what others want a person to be is like a tulip's
trying to be a rose just because it happens to have been planted in a
rose garden. Finding a tulip garden is an alternative. Learning
acceptance is like a gardener's learning to love the dandelions that
come into the garden year after year, no matter what the gardener does
to keep them out. Moving slowly across a mountain ledge without looking
down can be both life-­threatening and the only way to survive when
edging across the ledge is the only route to safety. Discussion Point:
Elicit from participants any stories they have been told or have heard
that have helped them hold complexity and opposites in their mind at
once. Discuss.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 16 • 293

99 99

2.  Be Aware That You Are Connected

<!-- -->

a.  Treat Others As You Wish Them to Treat You

Tell participants: "Remember that if you are harsh, critical, or
invalidating, you are likely to be treated the same way." Discussion
Point: Discuss the sayings "What goes around comes around," and "The
waves and the ocean are one." Discuss how awareness of connection fits
with the values of the "golden rule." Discuss how using GIVE skills over
time is like investing in a bank that will pay dividends---even if there
is no immediate return on every act of kindness. b. Look for
Similarities among People Instead of Differences

It is easy to feel separate from people when we think they are different
from us. It is also much easier to be judgmental and critical of those
we see as very different from ourselves. We tend to feel closer to
people who seem to be like us. Discussion Point: Elicit from
participants people they feel close to and people they feel distant
from. Ask, "Are you more similar to people you feel close to or people
you feel distant from?" Discuss. c. Notice the Physical Connections
among All Things

Say to participants: "Once you actually pay attention to the physical
world, you find that everything is indeed connected to everything. Each
part of your body is connected to another part, your body is connected
to the floor, which is connected to the outside (even if by being
connected to many things in between), and so on and so on." Practice
Exercise: This can be a good time to do the "Acceptance by the Chair"
mindfulness exercise. For a description, see Section VI, Part E (the
final exercise there) in Chapter 7 of this manual.

99

3.  Embrace Change

<!-- -->

a.  Throw Yourself into Change

As long as change is a fact of life, we might as well not only allow it,
but also embrace it by throwing ourselves into it. Discussion Point:
Elicit from participants times when they have allowed change, even when
it was difficult. When has it been easy to embrace change? Discuss. b.
Practice Radical Acceptance of Change

Tell participants: "When people and relationships begin to change in
ways you don't like, practice radical acceptance of those changes. Allow
those you care about to grow, develop, and change over time. Be patient
with gradual changes; prepare for sudden changes." Discussion Point:
Many individuals have trouble with change. Elicit from participants what
types of change they have difficulties with. Discuss how to radically
accept change. (See Distress Tolerance Handout 11.) c. Practice Getting
Used to Change

Encourage participants to get used to change by purposely making changes
in small ways. Note that for people who don't like change, this will be
practicing opposite action. (See Emotion Regulation Handouts 9--11.) The
idea is to get comfortable with change by practicing it.

294 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 16--16c, 17--19a

Discussion Point: Ask who likes change and who does not. For those who
do not like change, discuss how they could get more comfortable with it.

99

4.  Remember That Change Is Transactional

<!-- -->

a.  Observe How Everything Affects Everything Else

Say to participants: "Pay attention to the effects of what you do and
say on others, and to how what they do and say affects you. Notice how
your mood affects others around you, and how others' moods affect you.
Seeing your own and others' behaviors as arising from transactions
occurring over time can help you let go of blame."

99

b.  Practice Letting Go of Blame

Encourage participants to remind themselves that all things are caused
by many interactions over time. Dialectics is incompatible with blame,
primarily because it focuses on how all things are caused and how those
causes are transactional over time. Note also how this is similar to
what is taught in nonjudgmentalness. Practice Exercise: If you have
time, give Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 16c: Identifying
Dialectics to participants, and explain the task. Give participants time
to check the most dialectical response in each group. Discuss answers.
If time permits, ask participants if they have other situations where it
is not clear to them what would be the most dialectical course of action
between two or more options. Correct responses for Handout 16c are as
follows: 1A, 2B, 3B, 4B, 5A, 6C, 7B, 8B.

XVI. Validation Skills (Interpersonal Effectiveness Handouts 17--19a)1
     Main Point: Validation of others' feelings, beliefs, experiences,
     and actions is essential in building any relationship of trust and
     intimacy. To recover from invalidation, we can use the same skills
     to validate ourselves, along with checking the facts and
     acknowledging that invalidation hurts. Interpersonal Effectiveness
     Handout 17: Validation. The handout reviews the reasons for
     validation, what validation is, what is most important to validate,
     and cautions about validation. It is important to address these
     issues, but unless there is misunderstanding of validation, this
     handout can usually be reviewed rather quickly. Interpersonal
     Effectiveness Handout 18: A "How To" Guide to Validation. Spend
     most of your time on this handout. It is very important to have
     participants practice the different types of validation and discuss
     problems in validating others. This handout is based on the six
     levels of validation that are taught to therapists and skills
     training leaders. The skills can also be taught to participants as
     a review of the GIVE skills. Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout
     18a: Identifying Validation (Optional). Use this handout if you
     have extra time, or give it out as homework and then discuss it at
     the next session. The correct responses are listed at the end of
     Section E below in the teaching points, as well as at the end of
     this chapter's introduction. Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout
     19: Recovering from Invalidation. Review the main points on this
     handout. If you do not have time to review this handout, give as
     one of the homework assignments Interpersonal Worksheet 3, and
     instruct participants to use the same validation strategies they
     learned to validate others with themselves. Interpersonal
     Effectiveness Handout 19a: Identifying Self-­Validation (Optional).
     Use this hand-

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 17 • 295 out if you have extra time, or give it out as homework
and then discuss it at the next session. The correct responses are
listed at the end of Section F below, as well as at the end of this
chapter's introduction. Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 12:
Validating Others. Participants are to fill out this worksheet whenever
they have an opportunity to practice their validation skills, even if
they did not validate. The first section of the worksheet asks
participants to check off what validation skills they practiced "on
purpose" with others. The phrase "on purpose" is emphasized, so that
participants will put some effort into actually trying out the skills
with others. The next part of the worksheet asks participants to write
down validating statements they made to others, as well as any
invalidating statements they made. The ability to notice invalidating
statements that participants make themselves is every bit as important
as the ability to craft and make a validating statement. The worksheet
also asks participants to describe a situation where they practiced
validation, including writing down exactly what was said, the
interpersonal outcome of what was said, and how they felt after the
interaction. The worksheet then asks participants to rehearse validating
statements by writing down what they would do differently next time (if
anything). Remind participants that they are unlikely to remember
exactly what they did and said in a situation if they don't write it
down near the time of the interaction. Interpersonal Effectiveness
Worksheet 13: Self-­Validation and Self-­Respect. As with Worksheet 12,
remind participants to fill this sheet out whenever they have an
opportunity to practice their self-­ validation skills, whether or not
they actually practiced. Adapt the instructions for Worksheet 12 for
self-­validation.

99A. What Is Validation? 99 1. Validation Is Finding the Kernel of Truth
in Another Person's Perspective or Situation When we validate others'
experiences, emotions, thoughts, words, or actions, we are verifying the
facts of the situation. Example: If a friend says his arm hurts, we can
sympathize with him or offer help---­validating that indeed his arm does
hurt. Example: If a person feels intensely sad following the death of
her dog, we can both acknowledge her feelings, and also verify that it
makes sense and is reasonable to feel so sad following the death of a
beloved dog. Example: When we are going out for dinner, if one person
says he doesn't have much money to spend, we can validate that we hear
and understand this by suggesting an inexpensive restaurant for a meal.
Example: If a knowledgeable person is taking us on a tour, we can follow
her, validating that she knows what she is doing and where she is going.
Her behavior makes sense. 2. When We Validate, We Communicate That We
Understand the Person's Perspective

99

We acknowledge that all emotions, thoughts, and behaviors have a cause,
even if we don't know what the cause is. Example: If George forgets an
appointment with Mike, Mike can acknowledge that it is understandable,
given how much is going on in George's life right now. Example: If Sara
drops and breaks something very valuable that Ruth owns, Ruth can
acknowledge that it was an accident. Example: If Dave has an alcohol
problem and keeps relapsing, his friend Keisha can communicate that she
understands that urges to drink can feel irresistible, and that it can
be really hard to get off of alcohol.

296 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 17

99

3.  Validation Does Not Equal Agreement Validation does not necessarily
    mean liking or agreeing with what the other person is doing, saying,
    or feeling. It does not mean agreeing with what you do not agree
    with. lt means understanding where the other person is coming from.
    Example: A friend had two beers at a concert; then, when driving
    home an hour after the second one, he was stopped and given a DUI
    citation. We might say, "I understand how it made complete sense to
    you to think you would be safe driving after waiting an hour."
    Discussion Point: How can we validate without agreeing? Many people
    get this point confused. Elicit ideas from participants for how to
    validate the other person in the following situations, or in
    situations the individuals bring up. (1) In a political discussion,
    a person says something we strongly disagree with (e.g., "I can see
    you and I come from very different political sides"). (2) A person
    wants to go to a movie we don't want to go to (e.g., "I see why you
    would want to go to that movie. I am really hoping we can go to this
    other movie").

99

4.  Validation Does Not Mean "Making" Something Valid Validation does
    not mean endorsing or verifying that which is invalid. Example: "If
    someone is angry at you for eating the last piece of cake, and you
    did not eat it, you might validate that the person is angry, but you
    would not validate that you actually ate the cake."

B. Why Validate? 1. Validation Improves Our Interactions with Others It
shows that:  We are listening and understand.  We are being
nonjudgmental.  We can see the facts or truth of a situation.

2.  It Improves Interpersonal Effectiveness It reduces several obstacles
    to effectiveness:  Pressure to prove who is right.  Negative
    reactivity.  Anger.

3.  It Makes Problem Solving, Closeness, and Support Possible It also
    makes others more receptive to what we have to say. Discussion
    Point: Elicit times when participants have felt invalidated, and
    contrast those with other times when they felt validated. How were
    the two times different? How did they feel each time? How did it
    affect their behavior each time?

4.  Invalidation Hurts

99

Example: Bill is sitting in an important meeting, listening to a
presentation by a visitor to his company, when he accidentally knocks
his notebook computer off the edge of the table, making a loud noise on
the floor. His team leader stops, turns, and says, "Geez, stop
multitasking! We've got an important guest." Bill feels extremely
embarrassed and angry, since he'd been paying close attention to the
talk and was using his computer to take notes for the team. He later
recounts the story to his partner when he gets home, who replies, "Why
do you keep doing this to yourself? You're never going to get a
promotion at this rate."

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 17 • 297

Discussion Point: Ask participants what they think Bill must be feeling
after his team leader's and partner's responses. Why are these responses
so hurtful? What is missing from their responses? Highlight that what is
missing is any understanding of Bill, his behavior, and his feelings.
Discussion Point: Ask participants what would be a validating thing the
team leader could do. A reasonable response here would be for the team
leader simply to ignore the dropping of the computer, since ignoring it
would imply that it is insignificant and nondeliberate. Next, ask, "What
would be a validating response Bill's partner could give?" If group
members have trouble generating a validating response, then offer an
example of one, such as "Oh, Bill, that must have been so upsetting and
frustrating for you, especially since you were doing everyone a favor by
taking notes." If participants say that this sounds too "sappy,"
encourage them to put into words a validating response they would
welcome from someone.

99C. Important Things to Validate 99 1. Validate Only the Valid
Validating only what is valid is very important, because when we
validate something we are not only verifying it; we are also reinforcing
the experiences, emotions, thoughts, words, or actions that we validate.
2. Validate the Facts of a Situation 3. Validate a Person's Experiences,
Feelings/Emotions, Beliefs, Opinions, or Thoughts

99

Example: If Antwan says his arm hurts and therefore he should not go to
school on an important testing day, Mom might validate the pain in the
arm, but invalidate the idea that staying home is necessary. Example: If
Maria feels intensely afraid of going to bed without her shoes on, Emma
may validate that it makes sense (given that Maria was attacked by an
intruder in her bed), but not validate that going to bed without shoes
on is dangerous. Example: If Jorge is upset, saying he failed an
important exam, Juan may look at his passing score and validate that he
didn't do as well as he wanted to, but invalidate that he failed the
exam. 4. Validate Suffering and Difficulties In the three examples
above, Mom, Emma, and Juan all validate the other person's suffering or
difficulties.

99D. How Can You Tell What Is Valid? Something is valid when it is any
or all of the following. 1. Relevant and Meaningful to the Case or
Circumstance Example: When asked whether you think Bill Jones has been a
good leader, it is relevant and meaningful to discuss Bill Jones'
leadership skills and beliefs; ignoring Bill Jones and talking instead
about how terrible you think Susan Smith is as a leader is irrelevant.

99

2.  Well Grounded or Justifiable (in Terms of Empirical Facts, Logically
    Correct Inference, or Generally Accepted Authority) Example: It is
    valid to say it is raining when it in fact is raining, but not when
    the sky is clear.

298 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 17--18

99

3.  Appropriate to the End in View (i.e., Effective for Reaching the
    Individual's Ultimate Goals) Example: If Joanne (who has a drinking
    problem) says that drinking makes her feel better immediately, we
    can validate the fact that alcohol has this effect, but also
    invalidate that drinking to solve problems will be effective when
    Joanne wants to go up the corporate ladder.

99E. How to Validate The levels of validation below and on Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 18 are the same as those that therapists use in
individual DBT treatment, and that all team members use on DBT teams.
For the most part, they build on each other. At each subsequent level
from 1 to 6, the validation is stronger. Note to Leaders: Review Handout
18 and read the examples. If time permits, ask participants for other
examples.

99

1.  Pay Attention Tell participants: "When you pay attention, you treat
    the individual and what he or she is saying or doing as relevant and
    meaningful---as requiring serious attention. It communicates that
    the person, in the moment, is visible, seen, and important to you.
    Be mindful of your own nonverbal reactions in order to avoid
    invalidation---for example, rolling your eyes, sucking your teeth,
    walking away, or saying, 'l don't care what you say.' " As noted in
    the discussion of the mindfulness-of-­others skills (see Section XII,
    above), one of the most important characteristics of a good
    relationship is that people pay attention to each other. People will
    stop bringing us flowers if we ignore them when they do. People will
    stop wanting to be around us if we ignore them when they are around.
    Even when we disagree or don't understand, we need to pay attention
    to people's behavior, beliefs, and feelings. How would we ever learn
    anything new or get to know others if we ignored them whenever we
    disagree? Emphasize to participants that paying attention is not
    agreeing or approving of a person's activities, emotions, beliefs,
    or other experiences. It simply says that the person is alive and
    counts. When we ignore a person, we communicate that the person's
    activities, feelings, beliefs, or experiences are not relevant,
    meaningful, or important to us. Although in the grand scheme of
    things all beings are important, much of what people do and say is
    either unimportant, irrelevant, or ineffective. When this is the
    case, it makes sense to ignore them temporarily, particularly if we
    want them to stop what they are doing or saying. Examples: We might
    ignore people when they throw a tantrum and only pay attention to
    them when they ask for what they want. We might ignore a person who
    is insulting us rather than attack back. If a person keeps changing
    topics or changing his or her mind about something, we might ignore
    that also and just keep doing whatever we are doing. If a TV
    commentator is known for exaggerating facts, we might ignore that
    show and watch something else. Practice Exercise: If this has not
    already been done, use the exercise for paying attention described
    in the GIVE skills (see Section VI, B, 2, "\[Act\] Interested").

99

2.  Reflect Back without Judgment Say to participants, "The goal at the
    next level of validation is to communicate that you have accurately
    heard what the other person has said. Be open to correction. It is
    important not to add your own assumptions and interpretations."
    Example: A person might say in a desperate voice, "She hates me." To
    validate, we might say,

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 18 • 299

"So you are feeling desperate and really certain that she hates you . .
. " (leaving off the statement "That's silly, because you should know by
now that she does not hate you"). Emphasize to participants that
reflecting back does not imply approval or encouragement. Nor does it
imply evaluation of effectiveness or value. To validate does not mean
that we necessarily agree or think that this is the only perspective
possible. Validation at this level does not require us to add, in word,
deed, or nonverbal response, that the other person's responses
correspond to the empirical facts when they may not. Example: We can
validate that a person thinks someone is threatening them without
agreeing that they are actually being threatened. We can validate that a
person feels angry without agreeing on what the person is angry about.
Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when others have not
heard what they had to say accurately. How did it feel? Discuss.
Practice Exercise: Pair participants up. Ask one person in each pair to
describe a situation in the last week from his or her life or skills
practice. Instruct the other person to listen and then reflect back to
the talker. At first, the person's reflecting should try to offer an
accurate understanding of what was said. Then halfway through, they are
to reflect back a misunderstanding of what the person said. Instruct the
talker to keep going, trying to explain the situation to the listener.
After some time, ask participants to switch roles and have the listener
talk and the talker listen. Discuss how it felt to be understood and to
be misunderstood.

99

3.  "Read Minds" Explain to participants: "Level 3 validation is
    figuring out what is going on with a person without his or her
    telling you in words. In everyday language, this is known as
    'interpersonal sensitivity.' There are a number of ways to read what
    is going on with another person. Voice tone and body language,
    including facial expression, can communicate aspects of experience
    that a person has not put into words. Observe the person's posture,
    face, and behavior. Put that information together with what is
    happening and what you already know about the person. At times just
    knowing the situation, such as when a loved one has died suddenly or
    a person has just gotten engaged, may be enough to enable you to
    read what is going on with the person. Then express how you think
    the person may be feeling, wishing, or thinking. When someone knows
    how you feel or think without your having to tell them directly, it
    is almost always experienced as validating. At a minimum, such
    validation communicates that you know the other person---that you
    are validating the individual as him- or herself." To practice this
    level of validation, ask participants to find a word to describe the
    feeling they are seeing in the other person, and then tell the other
    person what they see, as in these examples. Example: "I can see you
    are really excited about this idea." Example: "I'm so sorry you
    didn't get the loan for the mortgage on that wonderful house. That
    must be really disappointing." (This is more validating than paying
    attention without saying anything or saying only, "I'm sorry about
    that.") Example: "You must be wondering what is going on with us
    changing the schedule so radically."

<!-- -->

a.  Use Caution and Be Open to Correction

Level 3 validation can be fraught with danger and can have the potential
for great harm. The chief danger is that an incorrect or only partially
correct description of the other person's private experiences will be
shoved down the person's throat. Say to participants: "Do not use
consequences or observed functions of behavior as proof of another's
private intent. If

300 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 18

you feel manipulated by what someone says or does, do not assume that
the intention was to manipulate you. If a friend is late picking you up,
do not assume the person doesn't care about you. Effective Level 3
validation requires you to accept that you might have misread the other
person." b. Offer a Reading of the Other Person a Little Tentatively

It is a good idea to offer a reading of another person as a hypothesis
or guess---for example, "I'm guessing that you were really disappointed
about that," instead of "You're really feeling disappointed about that."
Remind participants: "Remain open to being corrected by the other
person. Remember, no one can actually observe another's internal
thoughts and feelings." Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times
when others asked them for something or said no to a request, with no
apparent understanding of how it would affect the participants. How did
it feel? What do they wish others had said or done differently? Discuss.

99

4.  Communicate an Understanding of the Causes Say to participants:
    "Look for how the feelings, thoughts, and actions of a person make
    sense, given the other person's history and current situation, even
    if you don't approve of the behaviors, emotions, or actions
    themselves. The goal is to communicate to the person that his or her
    behavior is understandable in light of previous events or
    circumstances. In essence, you are saying, 'Given your history of X,
    how could your experience/behavior be other than Y?' " The important
    point to make here is that all behavior is ultimately understandable
    and sensible if we consider the causes.

<!-- -->

a.  Learning History

We can communicate that a person's behavior makes sense because of the
person's learning history, even if it does not make sense in terms of
current events. Example: We can say that it makes sense to be afraid of
walking down an alley if a person was assaulted in a dark alley last
week, even if this particular alley is well lighted, it is daytime, and
the neighborhood is a safe place to walk. Example: We can say to a
recent immigrant to the United States that it makes sense that the
person makes a lot of mistakes in English if he or she never spoke
English before. Example: We can tell someone we understand the person's
anger at us, given that someone told the person we stole his or her
money, even when we are not the ones who stole it. Example: We can
communicate that it makes sense to be somewhat hopeless about a new
weight loss program if every program the other person has tried before
failed. b. A Previous Event

We can communicate that a person's behavior makes sense because of a
previous event, even if it does not make sense in terms of present
facts. Example: We can say that it makes sense to carry an umbrella
walking to work if the weather report said it will be raining today,
even if it is sunny and bright all day.

99

Example: A friend hears that others got invitations and went to another
friend's birthday party and he did not. We can say it makes sense for
him to wonder whether he was left out on purpose. This makes sense even
if the facts are that (unknown to both of you) his invitation was eaten
by the dog.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 18 • 301

c.  A Mental or Physical Disorder

We can communicate that a person's behavior makes sense because of a
mental or physical disorder, even if it does not make sense in terms of
facts. Example: We can say it makes sense that another person would get
tired easily (and much more tired than others) after even light exertion
if the person is just getting over cancer treatments. Example: We can
say it makes sense that a person would feel hopeless if the person has
depression, even if the situation is not hopeless. Example: We can tell
someone that his or her interpretation that we are angry makes sense,
given our gruff voice tone, even if we are anxious instead of angry.

99

5.  Acknowledge the Valid Level 5 validation is communicating that a
    person's experiences make sense because they fit the present facts,
    are well grounded, are logically correct, or are effective for their
    ultimate goals. This level of validation is at the heart of DBT. It
    is the answer of yes to the question "Can this be true?" It involves
    looking for how the person's behavior makes sense because it is a
    reasonable or normative response to a current situation. Example:
    Sharon is sometimes shy in groups. Now she is attending a DBT skills
    training group. When she occasionally speaks up in the group, John
    on the other side of the table gives her an angry, threatening look.
    After one group session, Sharon says to a friend in the group with
    her, "John was giving me really mean looks. I don't want to sit
    anywhere near him next time." A response that would validate Sharon
    in terms of what actually happened would be "Boy, I really
    understand, and I wouldn't want to sit near him either if I were
    you. He gave you quite a look when you spoke up."

99

Tell participants: "At Level 5, also act on what you view as valid.
Often not acting on what a person says or does is invalidating. For
example, a person is screaming for help in a house on fire; the
responding firefighter just looks up and says, 'I see you need saving,'
but doesn't try to save the person. This would be enormously
invalidating." Examples: "If you are criticized for not taking out the
garbage on your day, admit that it is your day and take it out. If
someone presents a problem, help the person solve it (unless they just
want to be heard). If people are hungry, give them food. Acknowledge the
effort a person is making." Again, however, caution is needed. We can
insult and invalidate a person if we try to validate something because
of past causes or personal characteristics, when the present
circumstances make a response valid.

99

99

Example: "You are criticized for not taking out the garbage on your day,
and you respond by saying, 'You are just upset with me because you had a
bad day,' or you say that the other person's upset is due to events in
childhood. These are both Level 4 validation. But using such personal or
past events avoids acknowledging that it is reasonable for the other
person to want you to take out the garbage when it is your turn." Not
only is it not validating, it is often insulting as well. 6. Show
Equality Say to participants: "Respond to the other person as having
equal status with yourself and as being entitled to equal respect. Level
6 validation is the opposite of treating the person in a condescending
manner or as overly fragile. It is responding to the individual as
capable of effective and reasonable behavior, rather than assuming that
he or she is either inadequate or superior. It implies being your
genuine self within the relationship."

302 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 18--19

Practice Exercise: One at a time, have each participant briefly describe
a difficult or frustrating part of his or her day or week; have the
person to their left say something validating (and brief) to the
speaker. Then that person shares with the person to his or her left, who
in turn says something validating, and so on. Continue until all
participants (including the leaders) have shared and been validated.
Then list on the board all the validating behaviors people noticed, and
match them with the methods of validating listed on Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 18.

Continue: "It can be very hard to validate when you do not understand
the other person's point of view, or when the other's feelings or
behaviors make no sense to you. In these situations, you can do one of
two things: Either validate the person's feelings or point of view but
not what the person does; or admit that you don't understand but want to
understand. This is an example of being authentic and treating the
person as an equal." Example: Some people might say that they cannot
understand why a person engages in dysfunctional behavior. The key here
is to recognize that most dysfunctional behavior is a response to
emotional pain when a person cannot find another way to reduce the pain.
In these situations, a validating response could be "l can see that you
are obviously in a lot of pain." ln this case, we are validating the
emotion, though not the behavior. Example: An alternative strategy that
can be very effective is to say, "l know you want me to understand this,
and, believe me, l want to understand this, but l just can't get it.
Let's keep talking. Tell me again." This alternative strategy, presented
in a nonjudgmental way, communicates that our lack of understanding is
the problem in the conversation, not the invalidity of the other
person's emotions or behavior. lt also communicates deep interest in the
other's difficulties. Practice Exercise: If you have time, distribute
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 18a: Identifying Validation, and
explain the task. Give participants time to check the more effective
validating response for each pair. Discuss answers. If time permits, ask
participants if they have other situations where it is not clear to them
what would be the more effective validating course of action between two
options. Correct responses for Handout 18a are as follows: 1B, 2A, 3A,
4B, 5A, 6B, 7B, 8B.

F. Recovering from Invalidation Review Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 19: Recovering from Invalidation with participants. Begin by
saying: "Recovering from invalidation can be just as important as
validating others. There are several types of invalidation. Some are
helpful and some are harmful." 1. Helpful Invalidation Say to
participants: "When your opinions, beliefs, or behaviors are
invalidated, and they are in fact based on false or inaccurate
information, then invalidation can be helpful. When done with respect,
these interactions are usually not distressing and may even be sought.
For example, giving and receiving corrective feedback and engaging in
debates about opinions can be critical to intellectual stimulation and
personal growth." a. Corrective Feedback

Continue: "Corrective feedback is information that clearly shows that
your facts are wrong, or your beliefs don't make logical sense in terms
of the facts, or your behavior is not effective for reaching your goals.
When the feedback is correct and given in a nonjudgmental manner that is
open to discussion and to your point of view, you may agree, change your
mind, feel fine, and go forward."

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 19 • 303

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when they have been
told that their facts are incorrect (and they actually were incorrect).
Elicit times when they have been shown that their opinion on something
does not make logical sense. b. Opinion Debates

Go on: "Opinion debates can occur when a person disagrees with your
opinions or beliefs, such as a political point of view, religious
beliefs, philosophical positions, or other beliefs that another person
could reasonably disagree with. The person may argue strongly against
your point of view. Whether you feel invalidated usually depends on
whether the other person treats your views with respect and listens to
you even when disagreeing. It is easy to feel fine after a hearty but
respectful discussion or debate and continue on your way." Discussion
Point: Elicit from participants times when they have heated political
debates with friends, family members, or colleagues. Discuss who
disagreed with them and how they felt about it.

2.  Corrosive Invalidation Say to participants: "But invalidation can be
    exceptionally distressing when your point of view is disregarded
    while the other person's validity is unquestioned. How distressing
    this is depends on the importance of the person invalidating you and
    the importance of your own position to your self-­respect and ability
    to trust yourself. There are as many levels of harmful invalidation
    as there are levels of validation. Here are several examples of
    harmful invalidation."

<!-- -->

a.  Being Ignored

"Others do not pay attention to what you do or have to say, even when
what you are doing or want to say is valid and relevant. You are treated
as an unimportant and irrelevant person. This is particularly harmful if
this pattern is persistent and long-­lasting. The problem is that you can
easily start feeling unimportant and irrelevant." b. Not Being
Understood

"Others don't understand what you have to say, what you think, or how
you feel, even when you keep trying to tell them. What you say about
yourself or your experience simply does not get through to the other
person. It may be that the person is insensitive, unable to 'get' where
you are coming from, or has his or her own opinions about you, no matter
what you say or do. The problem is that you may start to question your
ability to communicate to others. You can even begin to worry that they
are right about you and you are wrong." c. Being Misread

"Others not only misread you, but are insensitive to what is going on
with you unless you spell it out for them in clear A-B-C language. The
problem is that in these cases, it is easy to feel as if you and your
responses must be very different from others. You may also start to
believe that the other persons are sensitive to you but just don't care
about you. This can lead to believing that you are inadequate or that
there is something wrong with you." d. Being Misinterpreted

"Other persons give understandable but incorrect causes for your
behavior and your experiences. You say how you feel, and the other
persons say, 'No, you don't feel that way.' Or they may misinterpret
with great certainty your intent for doing or saying things. Their
inferences about your intent are often pejorative and hurtful, and may
be based on how your behavior

304 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 19

affects them: 'I feel manipulated; therefore, you must have intended to
manipulate me.' Your reasons for doing or not doing things are
misconstrued often in ways that make you look motivated to be incorrect,
ineffective, or otherwise problematic. Valid reasons for your behavior,
such as previous learning or biological characteristics, are ignored. It
is assumed that if you wanted to be different, you would be different.
The problem is that it is hard to feel accepted and cared about when
people often misinterpret you." e. Having Current Facts Ignored or
Denied

"Facts that explain your reasonable behavior are discounted, rendered
unimportant, or distorted. For example, you are late because of traffic,
and your friend responds, 'Oh, you are always late; don't give me that.'
Responses that make perfect sense under present circumstances are
explained in terms of the past. For example, a current boss who
repeatedly fails to come through with promised support says, 'You
mistrust me because your previous boss made promises she didn't keep.'
The problem is that when current facts are ignored or denied, it can
sometimes lead to serious consequences---for example, when you are
abused but the abuser denies it, or you are innocent but are found
guilty of a crime." f. Receiving Unequal Treatment

"Others treat you as very different from them in essential ways, even
when you are not so different. You are treated as inferior, a child,
fragile, or unable to really understand the other person. The problem is
that when you are treated as different from others, it is hard to feel
that you are part of the group." 3. Traumatic Invalidation Note to
Leaders: The following discussion is particularly appropriate for groups
of clients who have suffered from physical or sexual abuse or other
traumatizing events, and/or who have a formal diagnosis of PTSD.
Personalize the discussion as appropriate for a particular group.

Traumatic invalidation is extreme or repetitive invalidation of
individuals' significant private experiences, characteristics identified
as important aspects of themselves, or reactions to themselves or to the
world. Traumatic invalidation can be focused on individuals' perceptions
of themselves and of their environment, sensory experiences, thoughts
and beliefs, emotions and desires, and/or actions. There is frequently a
violation of the persons' familiar ideas about themselves and the world,
and of the integrity of their own perceptions about themselves and their
environments. Typically, traumatic invalidation comes from a very
important person, group, or authority whom an individual is or was
dependent on for his or her sense of personal integrity and wellbeing.
It can occur only once, as when a mother refuses to believe that her
daughter is telling the truth when she reports sexual abuse by her
father, or when a witness falsely testifies that a person committed a
crime. Or it can be an accumulation of oversights and misreadings of
emotions, motives, and actions by an important person or institution, or
by part or all of a family or other important group, that leads to
psychological exclusion or perception of the individual as an outsider.
The problem with such extreme or pervasive invalidation is that it
results in a threat to the person's psychological integrity and a
confused sense of internal veracity and credibility, putting the person
in a state of pervasive insecurity. Common sequelae of such invalidation
include intrusive thoughts and memories; reexperiencing of the
invalidation; intense shame, confusion, anger, and defensiveness;
markedly increased interpersonal sensitivity to subsequent invalidation;
intense efforts to get validation from the invalidator, as well as
persistent efforts to obtain validation from others; and avoidance of
contact with invalidators and difficulties in trusting other people.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 19 • 305

4.  Recovery from Harmful Invalidation Give Interpersonal Effectiveness
    Handout 19 to participants. Say to them: "There are many things you
    can do to recover from harmful invalidation. Here are some of them."

99

a.  Check the Facts

"Check all the facts in a nondefensive way. Check them out also with
another person you can trust to validate the valid. This is a critical
step after invalidation, so that you do not reexperience invalidation."
b. Acknowledge and Work to Change Your Invalid Responses

"If your responses were incorrect or ineffective, admit it and try to
change what you are thinking, saying, or doing. Also, stop blaming; it
rarely helps a situation." c. Drop Judgmental Self-­Statements

"Even if you did make a mistake or believed something that is not
correct, it does not mean you are 'stupid' or even to blame for not
knowing the facts. Remember that there are often many valid reasons for
invalid behavior." d. Remind Yourself That All Behavior Is Caused

"It is also important to remind yourself that all behavior is caused,
and that this is true of your responses also. Remember that you are and
have always been doing the best you can, given the circumstances and
your personal history." "Admit that it hurts to be invalidated by others
even if they are right." e. Be Compassionate toward Yourself. Practice
Self-­Soothing. Admit That It Hurts to Be Invalidated by Others Even If
They Are Right.

"Keeping a stiff upper lip may be needed while around the person
invalidating you, but on your own, there is every reason to be
compassionate and self-­soothing. It does hurt to be invalidated."
f. Remind Yourself That Invalidation, Even When You Are Right, Is Rarely
a Catastrophe

"Keep in mind that invalid responses---either someone else's or your
own---are generally not the end of the world." g. Acknowledge Your Valid
Responses

"If your responses were valid under the circumstances, acknowledge that
you are correct, or that your responses are reasonable and normal for
the situation. Self-­validation can take a lot of work and a lot of
verbal processing with others. But it is well worth the effort." h.
Describe Your Experiences and Actions in a Supportive Environment

"Describing your experiences and behaviors can be vital in letting go of
invalidation. The describing process is similar to exposure therapy for
trauma and anxiety disorders. Through the experience of nonreinforced
shame and personal invalidity evoked in describing, you can gradually
learn that your responses are understandable and valid in important
ways."

99

Practice Exercise: Ask participants to check off on Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 19 each set of behaviors they have difficulty
with. Then read each one and ask who checked it off. Consider using this
information to give homework assignments for the week.

306 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 19--19a, 20--22

99

i.  Use All the Steps for Validating on Yourself

"Validating yourself may seem like a very simple point, but people often
forget this. Each level of validation we have talked about can be used
on yourself."  "Pay attention to your own behavior (thoughts, feelings,
and actions)."  "Reflect by describing to yourself your own private
(thoughts and feelings) and public

(actions) behaviors."  "Be mindful of your own emotions and situation.
Be sensitive to what your emotions

and the situation may be telling you about what you need."  "Try to
understand your deepest thoughts and feelings. Again, recognize that all
of

your behavior is caused, and therefore inherently understandable.
Remember that you are doing the best you can."  "Acknowledge the valid
by standing up for yourself when your behavior is valid, even if others
don't see it."  "Treat yourself with respect. See yourself as equal to
others."

99

j.  Practice Radical Acceptance of Yourself

"Practicing radical self-­acceptance requires acknowledgment that being
invalidated by others hurts. It requires compassion toward yourself and
self-­soothing. It will ultimately be much easier if you can also
practice radical acceptance of the person who has invalidated you."
Encourage participants to use some of the reality acceptance exercises
in Distress Tolerance Handout 11b: Practicing Radical Acceptance Step by
Step and Distress Tolerance Handout 14: Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands.
For example, imagining the invalidating person with a half-smile and
willing hands can be very useful. Practice Exercise: If you have time,
distribute Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 19a: Identifying
Self-­Validation, and explain the task. Give participants time to check
the more effective validating response for each pair. Discuss answers.
If time permits, ask participants if they have other situations where it
is not clear to them what would be the more effective validating course
of action between two options. Correct responses to Handout 19a are as
follows: 1A, 2B, 3A, 4B, 5A, 6B.

XVII. Strategies for Changing Behavior (Interpersonal Effectiveness
      Handout 20--22a)1 Main Point: There are very effective strategies
      for increasing behaviors that we want in ourselves or others
      (reinforcement, shaping) and for decreasing behaviors that we do
      not want (extinction, satiating, punishment). The secret to being
      effective at behavior change is to learn these strategies and put
      them into action. Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 20:
      Strategies for Increasing the Probability of Desired Behaviors.
      Review the main points on this handout. It is important that
      participants understand the concepts of reinforcement (a
      consequence that increases behavior), shaping (reinforcement of
      small steps leading to a larger change), and intermittent
      reinforcement (occasional reinforcement that makes a behavior
      persist). Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 21: Strategies for
      Decreasing or Stopping Undesired Behaviors. This handout teaches
      extinction, satiation, and punishment. It is very important to
      teach clearly the distinction between extinction and punishment.
      Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 22: Tips for Using Behavior
      Change Strategies Effectively. This handout outlines important
      issues in selecting and implementing consequences.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handouts 20, 22a • 307 Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 22a:
Identifying Effective Behavior Change Strategies (Optional). Use this
handout if you have extra time, or give it out as homework and then
discuss it at the next session. The correct responses are listed at the
end of this section's teaching points, as well as at the end of this
chapter's introduction. Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 14:
Changing Behavior with Reinforcement; Interpersonal Effectiveness
Worksheet 15: Changing Behavior by Extinguishing or Punishing It. It is
important that participants actually try the behavior change strategies
they are learning in this module. Be sure to assign one or both of these
worksheets as homework. Review the instructions on the worksheet with
participants and carefully review their homework in the next session.
These skills are often difficult for therapists and skills trainers to
learn. It may also take some time for participants to learn and use
them.

Note to Leaders: One of the best and easiest books to read on behavior
change is a book titled Don't Shoot the Dog,25 which lists both
effective and ineffective ways to promote change. The examples are very
good, and assigning this book can be very helpful. It is routinely
assigned for parents in our adolescent DBT programs. Many of the
adolescents also read it.

A. Strategies for Increasing the Probability of Desired Behaviors

99

1.  What Is Reinforcement? Reinforcement is any consequence that
    increases the frequency of a behavior. All human beings, as well as
    other animals, are influenced by the consequences of their
    behaviors. Note to Leaders: It is essential that participants get
    the main point here: Reinforcement is a consequence that increases a
    behavior. Have them repeat it to you. Tell participants to memorize
    this definition. Throughout teaching these skills, periodically ask
    them to tell you what reinforcement or a reinforcer is.

Discussion Point: Ask participants what behavior of their own they would
like to increase. Suggest writing it down on the line at the top of
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 20.

99

a.  It Is Not Necessary for People to Be Aware That Their Behavior Is
    Being Influenced by Consequences

What is required for a reinforcer to work is that an individual is aware
of the reinforcing event's having occurred (e.g., sounds would not
reinforce a deaf person; visual pictures would not reinforce a blind
person). What is not required is that the person be aware of the
connection between the reinforcer and his or her own behavior. 26, 27

99

b.  People Commonly Reinforce Others' Behavior without Realizing That
    They Are Doing It

Example: "If every time a person gets angry and attacks you, you give
the person what he or she wants, you will see that over time the
tendency of the other person to get angry goes up." Example: "If
whenever you bring up a painful topic, a friend of yours with an alcohol
problem starts feeling an intense urge to have an alcoholic drink and
tells you of the urge, and then you immediately sidestep talking about
the painful topic, you can predict that the friend's urges to drink will
become more frequent when you start discussing painful topics the friend
wants to avoid."

308 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 20

c.  Reinforcement Is the Most Effective Way to Increase the Frequency of
    a Behavior

Reinforcement tells a person what will be rewarded in specific
situations (and what will not be rewarded). If a maladaptive behavior is
being reinforced, it is very common for others to believe that the
person behaves this way on purpose to get the reinforcer. This is based
on the premises that individuals know what is reinforcing their own
behavior, and that reinforcement of behavior is associated with
behavioral intent. Neither of these is necessarily true; however, these
beliefs are the genesis of much pain and suffering. Crying, suicide
attempts, tantrums, and pouting are written off as attempts to get
attention. Anger, tiredness, anxiety, and fear are written off as
attempts to avoid doing what is needed. A cry for help is viewed as
manipulative, and so on. Alas, such inferences are pejorative, often
wrong, and very hurtful. We need to remember the point made above:
People are often not aware of what reinforcers are actually controlling
their behavior. Although an individual has to experience a reinforcer,
the individual does not have to be aware of the connection between the
consequence and his or her own behavior for reinforcement to work.
Statements about what is controlling one's own behavior are opinions.
Alas, opinions can be based on many things other than the facts.

99

2.  Why Reinforce? Some people think that behavior should occur on its
    own---that we should not have to reinforce to get individuals to do
    the "right" thing. This is a basic misunderstanding of human (and
    animal) behavior. One of the most important tasks of rearing
    children, for example, is systematically reinforcing effective
    behaviors. In essence, knowing what is "right" is learned. Doing the
    right thing is also learned. Reinforcement is an important way that
    we learn. The idea that people "should" do the right thing just
    because it is right ignores the fact that all behavior is caused.
    Note to Leaders: This point can be very controversial. Discuss with
    participants. Use as many examples as needed to get the points
    across. If necessary, bring up a lot more examples. If you find it
    useful, go to very extreme examples of how effective reinforcement
    can be, such as in "brainwashing."

99

3.  Two Types of Reinforcement

<!-- -->

a.  Reinforcement as Reward

Reinforcement as reward (sometimes called "positive reinforcement")
increases the frequency of behavior by adding a positive consequence.
Examples: Praise, frequent flyer miles on an airline, an earned
privilege, money, a smile, or a satisfying outcome to an interpersonal
situation can each increase behavior when it occurs as a consequence of
a specific behavior.

99

Discussion Point: Ask participants what things would be rewards or
positive consequences for the behavior they have chosen to increase.
That is, what would make them more likely to engage in the behavior?
Suggest writing down individual reinforcers on the handout. Note to
Leaders: Guide participants to keep reinforcers realistic, safe, and
appropriate for the goal behavior. For instance, a new car is not a
realistic reinforcer for exercising 5 days a week for a month; drinking
alcohol, using drugs, and letting go of responsibilities are not
effective; going to Africa on a safari may be unrealistic. Also
encourage participants to search for meaningful reinforcers beyond just
money, such as time spent with a parent, a child, or a friend.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 20 • 309

b.  Reinforcement as Relief

Reinforcement as relief (sometimes called "negative reinforcement")
increases the frequency of behavior by removing an unpleasant condition.
Examples: "A headache goes away if you take an aspirin; your boss stops
nagging you when you get your reports in on time; people stop bothering
you for information if you throw a tantrum; an annoying noise stops when
you buckle your seatbelt in your car; feelings of sadness and fear
lessen when you drink a lot of alcohol; a back pain gets relieved when
you get a massage."

99

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants consequences of specific
behaviors that provide relief in their lives. Suggest writing these down
on the handout. Ask what kinds of behaviors---their own or others'---are
maintained by ending unpleasant and/or painful conditions. Note to
Leaders: Negative reinforcement can be a touchy topic to discuss in a
group setting. Often dysfunctional behaviors, such as self-­cutting,
drinking, using drugs, or lying, are reinforced by subsequent relief of
emotional suffering. Telling someone, "I am suicidal," can be reinforced
by the listener's responding with greater sympathy or switching from a
painful topic of conversation to focusing on the suicide ideation.

Discussion Point: Ask participants to identify negative situations or
sources of discomfort that they would like relieved or removed.

Example: A teenage girl might mention a parent's nagging her to clean
her room. What new behavior might help reduce this discomfort? For
instance, if the teen's cleaning her room led to a reduction in the
parent's nagging, the adolescent might be more likely to pick up after
herself in the future. Elicit one or two other examples from the group.
Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when they have given
people they love much more time when the loved one is in trouble than
when the person is not.

99

4.  What Is Shaping? Shaping is reinforcing small steps that lead toward
    a bigger goal. Each successive step toward a larger goal needs to be
    reinforced until the new behavior is stable. This increases the
    chances of continuing to work toward the goal.

99

Example: "You can take small, reinforced steps toward finding a job.
Apply online for one job on Monday and reinforce that. Apply for two
jobs on Tuesday and reinforce that. Continue until a good part of every
day is spent looking for a job." Example: "If your goal is to get up
early five mornings a week to exercise for half an hour, you can first
reinforce yourself for getting out of bed early, then reinforce yourself
for exercising for 10 minutes, then 20 minutes, and so on." 5. Why Use
Shaping? Shaping is useful because some behaviors are very difficult to
learn in one step, particularly behaviors that are complex and require a
lot of steps. Discussion Point: Ask participants whether they or family
members have ever been frustrated with themselves for not starting a
large project until the night before. How would shaping apply? Elicit
examples. Examples for writing a report might include deciding on these
steps: Step 1 would be to sit down and outline the report the week
before the due date and then, once that's done, to allow some TV time.
Step 2 would be to write the introduction and provide a small
reinforcement for that, and so on.

310 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 20

Discussion Point: Ask participants to identify one or two steps on the
way to changing a behavior of their own that they want to change.

99

6.  Timing Counts in Reinforcement Tell participants: "Reinforce
    immediately following the desired behavior. If you wait too long,
    the reinforcer won't be connected with the behavior."

99

Example: "You are trying to improve your backhand in tennis, and your
coach is observing 30 swings. Would you prefer your coach to tell you,
'That's the swing! Nice job!' immediately after you use the right form,
or would you prefer the coach to wait until you are done and then say,
'Your 14th swing---I liked that one'? Practice Exercise: Play the
"clicker game." To play this game, you need to bring a loud clicker (or
whistle) to the skills training group. You then ask one person to
volunteer to play the role of the learner (which we call the "dog") and
one person to play the role of the "dog trainer." The task of the dog
will be to learn new behaviors taught by the trainer. Once a person is
selected to play the dog, that person goes out of the room. The
trainer's task is to teach the dog new behaviors by reinforcing
successive steps toward the behavioral sequence that is being taught.
Before bringing the person playing the dog back into the room, the group
decides on what sequence of behaviors to teach the dog. Examples might
be for the dog to walk to a whiteboard, turn around two times, and then
go sit down, or for the dog to walk in and then go to a window and close
the blinds. An easier task might be to train the dog simply to turn
around or just walk to the window. Do not make the task too easy or too
hard. Instruct the person who is playing the dog that when he or she
comes into the room, the trainer is going to try to teach him or her new
behaviors by clicking the clicker every time he or she is engaging in
the behaviors wanted. The task of the trainer is to click the clicker
(or blow the whistle) immediately after every time the dog takes a step
toward the desired behavior. The trainer should not use the clicker or
whistle when the dog is not engaging in the correct sequence of
behaviors. If the person playing the dog gets off track, the trainer can
ask the dog to go back to the door and start over. Starting over can be
done multiple times in one game. Once the game is over, discuss how it
went and what participants learned. Note to Leaders: It is essential
that you practice playing the clicker game before you teach it.

7.  Reinforcement Schedules Say to participants: "When and how often a
    behavior is reinforced are very important if you want the behavior
    to persist without your having to reinforce it every time it occurs.
    There are several different types of reinforcement schedules."

99

a.  Continuous Reinforcement

Say: "In continuous reinforcement, every instance of a designated
behavior is reinforced. This can be important at the beginning when you
are trying to shape and establish a new behavior. Continuous
reinforcement will get a behavior to occur at very high frequency.
However, if that is all you do, the behavior will disappear quickly as
soon as you stop reinforcing it."

99

Example: "If your car starts every time you turn the ignition key but
one day it does not, you may try to get it going a few times, but you
will quickly stop. If you have a car that often does not start but
usually does after many tries, you may keep trying for a really long
time." Example: "If your sick mother always answers the phone but does
not today, you may drop everything and run over to her home. If she only
intermittently picks up the phone, you may keep calling her for several
days."

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handouts 20--21 • 311

99

Example: "Putting money into a vending machine ordinarily produces the
soda you want. Once the vending machine does not work once or twice, you
are unlikely to keep trying that machine." b. Intermittent Reinforcement

Continue: "In intermittent reinforcement, the designated behavior is
reinforced only some of the time. You can make a behavior almost
indestructible (that is, impervious to change) by putting it on an
intermittent reinforcement schedule and then gradually lengthening the
number of responses required for reinforcement or increasing the length
of the interval before responses are reinforced. This is particularly
likely to work if you make the length of time between reinforcements
variable (and therefore unpredictable). Behaviors that are otherwise
incomprehensible can often be explained by principles of intermittent
reinforcement."

99

Example: Addiction to gambling occurs because of intermittent
reinforcement. Example: Staying with and feeling love for an abusive
partner are often on a very thin intermittent reinforcement schedule;
the abusive partner perhaps reciprocated love frequently in the
beginning of the relationship, and then gradually lengthened the time
between expressions of love. Example: A parent can inadvertently put a
child on an intermittent reinforcement schedule by responding to
tantrums only episodically.

B. Strategies for Decreasing or Stopping Undesired Behaviors Review
Interpersonal Handout 21 with participants.

99

1.  What Is Extinction? Extinction is the reduction of a behavior by
    removing ongoing reinforcement. Example: "When attention is
    reinforcing an unwanted behavior, you instead ignore it." Example:
    "When your child's demands are reinforced by your giving in to the
    demands, you instead do not give in." Tell participants: "Extinction
    works best when an alternative behavior replaces the unwanted
    behavior. In particular, you can extinguish a behavior and at the
    same time soothe." Example: "Your child throws a tantrum to get you
    to take him with you on a walk. You can say, 'I know this is hard
    for you, and I am sorry you are so distressed, but you will have to
    stay home and I will be home before long.' Then leave the child at
    home and go out for a walk."

<!-- -->

a.  Be Aware of the "Behavioral Burst"

When a behavior has been reinforced and then reinforcement is stopped,
the behavior will initially increase; that is, there will be a
"behavioral burst." (If there is not a behavioral burst, the wrong
reinforcer may have been withheld.) If the reinforcement remains stopped
and is not restored, the behavior will decrease over time.

99

Example: If a little girl begins to throw a tantrum in the supermarket
because she wants Cocoa Puffs cereal, a parent is likely to give in to
stop the escalation of the tantrum. Giving in, however, reinforces the
tantrum and makes it more likely to occur during the next supermarket
visit. By contrast, if after reinforcing tantrums repeatedly the parent
withholds reinforcement---that is, does not buy the Cocoa Puffs---the
tantrum is likely to escalate in the moment (making everyone unhappy!).
However, if the parent holds the line by not giving in during this and
subsequent shopping trips---that is, tolerates the behavioral burst of
the escalating tantrum---the tantrum behavior is likely to extinguish
over time. Extinc-

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 21 • 313

99

3.  What Is Punishment, and How Is It Different from Extinction?
    Punishment is adding a consequence that decreases a behavior. The
    consequence can be adding something negative (e.g., time out for a
    child, traffic tickets, verbal criticism) or taking away something
    positive (but not previously a reinforcer of the behavior). The
    difference between this and extinction is that extinction involves
    taking away a reinforcer for a behavior, while punishment involves
    taking away something unrelated to reinforcement. Example: "Let's
    say that your sister harasses you to spend more time taking care of
    your mother, who is sick. Your sister does this by nagging,
    criticizing, or 'guilt-­tripping' you. So far, you have given in and
    spent more time with your mother. Extinction of this harassment
    would involve defining this behavior for your sister as unwanted and
    unhelpful, and then never, ever agreeing to spend more time helping
    out with your mother when your sister harasses you. Punishment might
    involve withdrawing warmth, refusing to meet with your sister,
    calling your sister names, bringing up past transgressions, and
    making her feel criticized and guilty." Example: "Your son throws
    tantrums when you tell him he has to go to bed. Usually, in the face
    of tantrums, you give in and let him stay up for a little more time.
    Extinction would be to not give in and not let him stay up when he
    throws a tantrum---that is, removing the reinforcer. Punishment
    would be taking away an hour of TV every time he throws a
    tantrum---a consequence not related to your previous reinforcing
    behavior." Note to Leaders: Emphasize that punishment may make a
    person stay away from the punisher, hide a behavior, or suppress the
    behavior when the punisher is around. Punishment may at times be
    necessary, but it is essential to keep it specific, time-­limited,
    and appropriate to the "crime," as well as to reinforce an
    alternative behavior. Otherwise, punishment will not work.
    Punishment by itself does not teach new behavior, and it may even
    lead to self-­punishment.

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants some examples of behaviors
that appear necessary to punish rather than extinguish. For each
example, debate the possible advantages versus disadvantages of
punishment. a. The Relative Ineffectiveness of Punishment

Punishment is one of the least effective ways to change behavior over
the long term. Punishment suppresses the punished behavior when the
person punishing is nearby, but the behavior tends to recur when the
punisher is not present. It also doesn't teach any new behaviors to
replace the punished ones. b. The Need for Alternative Behaviors

When punishment is used, alternative behaviors must be reinforced to
replace the behavior being extinguished. Neither extinction nor
punishment teach new behaviors. People cannot unlearn old behaviors. It
is not in any person's (or animal's) evolutionary interest to be able to
wipe out old behaviors easily. One never knows whether behavior that is
problematic now will be very useful in some new, as yet unimagined
context. Thus, although punishment can get a person to stop behaving a
particular way, the capability for the behavior is always present. In
sum, people can learn new behaviors, but they can't unlearn old
behaviors. c. Overcorrection Research Point: A form of punishment called
"overcorrection" has been found in several studies to stop various types
of dysfunctional behaviors.28 Overcorrection is both a form of
punishment and a form of repair that fits the "crime." Studies have
found that overcorrection is more effective than correction

314 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 21--22

alone.29 Instructions need to be explicit; the rationale of
overcorrection needs to be clearly stated; and there should be positive
consequences for engaging in the overcorrection, which are also clearly
laid out. The required corrective behavior is thus dialectically related
to the problem behavior.

There are three steps in overcorrection when it is used as a punishment
following the occurrence of a problem behavior.  First, the person
punishing withholds something the punished person wants, or adds

an unpleasant consequence. The most effective consequence is one that
expands a natural but undesirable (from the punished person's point of
view) effect of the behavior.  Second, the punisher requires the person
to engage in a new behavior that both corrects and overcorrects the
harmful effects of the problem behavior. (This requires, of course, that
the person figure out clearly what harm was actually done.)  Third, once
the new "overcorrecting" behavior occurs, the punisher immediately stops
the punishment by undoing the negative conditions or stopping the
withholding. Thus the punished person has a ready way to terminate the
behavior. The challenge, of course, is to devise outcomes and
overcorrection behaviors that are undesirable enough, without being
trivial or unrelated to the behaviors the punisher wants to teach.
Example: "Your son has friends over when you are gone, and they leave
the living room a mess. You then withhold permission for his friends to
come over, and also for his going out with friends. The required
correction is to clean up the living room completely, and overcorrection
is to clean up the entire downstairs. As soon as this is done, his
friends can come over again, and he can visit his friends." Example:
Several clients left a group session early and trashed the entrance to
our clinic. This damaged not only the clinic entrance, but also my
ability to be relaxed about leading a group if someone left early. The
consequence I put on them was that they could not come back to the group
until they organized and paid for repairs; the overcorrection was to
make it more beautiful than before. Correction and overcorrection to my
loss of faith were to hire and pay for a person to sit in the clinic's
reception area during group sessions until the clients were out of the
group. Example: "A person spills something on your floor. Correction
would be to clean it off the floor, and overcorrection would be to clean
the entire floor." Example: "If a couple is persistently late for dinner
engagements, they could correct by finding a way to meet you on time,
and overcorrect by offering to pick you up or pay for your parking."
Example: "You drop and break a vase at your friend's house. Correct by
replacing the vase. Overcorrect by filling it with beautiful flowers."

C. Tips for Using Behavior Change Strategies Effectively Review
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 22 with participants. 1. Summarize
Behavior Change Strategies Learned So Far Go over the strategies
participants have learned thus far, particularly reinforcement,
extinction, and punishment.

99

2.  Not All Consequences Are Created Equal The power of something to be
    a reinforcer or a punishment depends on a number of things---for
    example, the intrinsic value of the consequence to the person, the
    setting, and how sated or deprived the person is of something
    desired.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills: Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 22 • 315

a.  The Value to the Person Counts

"One person's poison can be another person's passion." A reinforcer is
something a person will change his or her behavior to get (positive
reinforcement) or get relief from (negative reinforcer). If the person
does not care one way or the other about a consequence, it will not work
as a reinforcement. Example: A fresh plate of broccoli normally won't do
it for most people. Some examples of motivating reinforcers might
include a nice dinner in a special restaurant, time with a really
special friend, or downloading some new music after the completion of a
major project. Observing what happens when various consequences are
applied is the best strategy for figuring out what will work as a
consequence. Observing as a strategy, however, can be difficult, since
changing consequences can take a lot of time and effort, and it is not
always possible to start and stop. An alternative is to ask the person
what consequences he or she would work to get (reinforcement) or work to
avoid (punishment). b. The Context Counts

It is also important to assess the potency of consequences in different
situations. A reinforcer in one situation (hugging a teenager at home)
may be punishment in another (hugging a teenager in front of a group of
friends). Bringing chocolates to a person on a diet can be punishing,
but can be reinforcing when a person is not dieting. Money is a
reinforcer for working, but not for love given. c. The Quantity of a
Reinforcer Counts

Satiation, or having a desire for something satisfied completely, can
make people feel as though they have had too much. This can make
something unpleasant that would otherwise be reinforcing. Examples:
"Food is not a reinforcer after a really big meal; affection is not a
reinforcer if you receive plenty of that. Something is only a reinforcer
if it is given in appropriate doses. This is also true with praise."
(Elicit other examples from participants.) If people are deprived of
something they like, it is more likely to be an effective reinforcer
than something they can have whenever they want it. Examples: "Water may
not be a reinforcer if you have enough, but it is definitely a
reinforcer if you have been in the heat without liquids for a long time.
Food is a reinforcer when you have not had any for a long time. If
access to a cell phone or a computer has been taken away, getting it
back can be a reinforcer. An opportunity to spend time with a close
friend you have not seen in a long time is more reinforcing than time
with a friend you see every day." Discussion Point: Finding powerful
reinforcers can be a problem. Many people already have most of what they
want or need---or if they do not, they cannot afford to get it even as a
reinforcer. In these cases, an effective strategy is to take something
away (e.g., access to a cell phone) for a period of time and then
restore its use following the desired behavior. Something else can then
be taken away (e.g., coffee in the morning, shoes other than the pair
hated the most) and then restored following the desired behavior.
Participants can keep changing what they are depriving themselves (or
another person) of, or can rotate through two or three different things
over time. This approach works best if the participants know (or the
other person knows) the expected deprivation and reinforcement schedule.
The key idea is first to use deprivation to make an item highly
desirable, and then to use it as a reinforcer. Discuss with participants
how they might use this strategy on themselves or others.

316 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handouts 22--22a

d.  Natural Consequences Are More Effective in the Long Run Than
    Arbitrary Consequences

Natural consequences can be reinforcing or punishing. One type of
effective punishment is to let natural negative consequences happen. For
example, a nasty hangover is a natural consequence of drinking too much.
Staying up very late at night may cause a person to be too tired to
focus at work, and then to get in trouble for slacking off. If a
behavior doesn't have natural consequences or the natural consequences
are too dangerous, then arbitrary consequences may be necessary. A teen
who violates curfew one weekend may be grounded for the following
weekend. Although it is common for parents to ground children for
various infractions, staying at home on a weekend is not a natural
outcome of staying out late on a previous day or weekend. In these
cases, punishment should be specific, should be time-­ limited, and
should fit the "crime." Example: "If you're an employee who misses a
deadline, you might be punished by losing the chance to present a report
to your supervisor because you don't have it ready in time--- a natural
consequence of missing the deadline. In contrast, an ineffective
punishment is one that isn't specific, lasts too long, and/or doesn't
fit the behavior. For instance, if you miss a deadline, your boss may
give you a bad evaluation, move you to a new work group, and remind you
of the missed deadline constantly." In a similar manner, natural
positive consequences can be powerful. Preparing well for job interviews
at a law firm can result in a job offer; smiling at people on the street
can result in an immediate smile back; approaching people at parties can
lead to interesting conversations, cleaning up the kitchen can result in
a hug or thank-you; dieting can result in losing weight.

99

3.  Behavior Learned in One Situation May Not Happen in Other Situations
    New behaviors have to be learned in all relevant contexts. Learning
    is highly associated with situations. We learn, for example, that we
    might be punished for talking while in church, but are likely to be
    rewarded for talking in social situations. We learn that when a
    certain person is present, we might be punished for a specific
    behavior; when that person is absent and other people are present,
    we might be rewarded, or the behavior might be ignored. Behaviors
    reinforced at work may not be rewarded at home. Behaviors rewarded
    at home may be punished at work. Discussion Point: Elicit from
    participants behaviors of theirs that are rewarded in one situation
    and ignored or punished in other situations.

To change our own or another person's behavior, we need to pay attention
to the situation. It is very important when learning or teaching a new
behavior not to assume that if behavior is learned in one situation, it
will transfer to another situation. It is easy to be judgmental of
people who can do something in one context, but then can't do it in
another. For example, we might find it easy to strike up conversations
with people we know, but be completely stumped about doing it with
strangers. Playing the piano might be easy when we are alone, and very
difficult when others are listening. A person might be able to abstain
from drinking too much at home, but not when out with friends. Practice
Exercise: If you have extra time, distribute Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 22a: Identifying Effective Behavior Change Strategies. Explain
the task, and give participants time to check the more effective
response for each pair. Discuss answers. If time permits, ask
participants if they have other situations where it's not clear to them
what would be the more effective change strategy. Correct responses to
Handout 22a are as follows: 1B, 2B, 3A, 4A, 5B, 6B, 7B, 8A.

8. Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills • 317

References 1. Miller, A. L., Rathus, J. H., & Linehan, M. M. (2007).
Dialectical behavior therapy with suicidal adolescents. New York:
Guilford Press. 2. Merriam-­Webster. (2014). Definition of "skill." www.
merriam-­webster.com/dictionary/skill?show=0&t= 1393001274 3. Linehan, M.
M. (1997). Validation and psychotherapy. In A. Bohart & L. Greenberg
(Eds.), Empathy reconsidered: New directions in psychotherapy
(pp. 353--392). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 4.
Bower, S. A., & Bower, G. H. (2004). Asserting yourself: A practical
guide for positive change. New York: Da Capo Press. (Original work
published 1980) The idea for the four DEAR skills (Describe, Express,
Assert, Reinforce) was suggested by Bower and Bower's "DESC scripts"
(Describe, Express, Specify, Consequence). Their excellent self-help
book is very compatible with DBT and can be used by both skills trainers
and participants. 5. Hauser-Cram, P. (1998). I think I can, I think I
can: Understanding and encouraging mastery motivation in children. Young
Children, 53(4), 67--71. 6. Linehan, M. M., & Egan, K. J. (1985).
Asserting yourself. New York: Facts on File. 7. Festinger, L.,
Schachter, S., & Back, K. (1950). Social pressures in informal groups: A
study of human factors in housing. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press. 8. Back, M. D., Schmukle, S. C., & Egloff, B. (2008). Becoming
friends by chance. Psychological Science, 19(5), 439--440. 9. Segal, M.
(1974). Alphabet and attraction: An unobtrusive measure of the effect of
propinquity in a field setting. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 30(5), 654--657. 10. Newcomb, T. M. (1961). The acquaintance
process. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 11. Byrne, D. (1961).
Interpersonal attraction and attitude similarity. Journal of Abnormal
and Social Psychology, 62, 713--715. 12. Byrne, D. (1971). The
attraction paradigm. New York: Academic Press. 13. Byrne, D., &
Griffith, D. (1966). A developmental investigation of the law of
attraction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4, 699--702.
14. Condon, J. W., & Crano, W. D. (1988). Inferred evaluation and the
relation between attitude similarity

and interpersonal attraction. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 54, 789--797. 15. Heine, S. J., Foster, J.-A. B., & Spina,
R. (2009). Do birds of a feather universally flock together?: Cultural
variation in the similarity--­attraction effect. Asian Journal of Social
Psychology, 12(4), 247--258. 16. Fawcett, C., & Markson, L. (2010).
Similarity predicts liking in 3-year-old children. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 105, 345--358. 17. Novak, D., & Lerner,
M. J. (1968). Rejection as a consequence of perceived similarity.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 9(2, Pt. 1), 147--152. 18.
Cozby, P. C. (1972). Self-­disclosure, reciprocity, and liking.
Sociometry, 35, 151--160. 19. Spurr, J. M., & Stopa, L. (2002).
Self-­focused attention in social phobia and social anxiety. Clinical
Psychology Review, 22, 947--975. 20. Clark, D. M., & Wells, A. (1995). A
cognitive model of social phobia. In R. Heimberg, M. Liebowitz, D. A.
Hope, & F. R. Schneier (Eds.), Social phobia: Diagnosis, assessment, and
treatment (pp. 69--93). New York: Guilford Press. 21. Rapee, R. M., &
Heimberg, R. G. (1997). A cognitive-­behavioral model of anxiety in
social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35, 741--756. 22.
Axelrod, S. (2012). Personal communication. 23. Fruzzetti, A. (2006).
The high-­conflict couple: A dialectical behavior therapy guide to
finding peace, intimacy and validation. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger. 24.
Axelrod, S. (2012). Personal communication. 25. Pryor, K. (1985). Don't
shoot the dog: How to improve yourself and others through behavioral
training. New York: Bantam Books. 26. Lieberman, D. A., Sunnucks, W. L.,
& Kirk, J. D. J. (1998). Reinforcement without awareness: I. Voice
level. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 51B(4), 301--316.
27. Bizo, L. A., & Sweeney, N. (2005). Use of an ESP cover story
facilitates reinforcement without awareness. Psychological Record, 55,
115--123. 28. Marholin, D., Luiselli, J. K., & Townsend, N. M. (1980).
Overcorrection: An examination of its rationale and treatment
effectiveness. Progress in Behavior Modification, 9, 186--192. 29.
Azrin, N. H., & Wesolowski, M. D. (1974). Theft reversal: An
overcorrection procedure for eliminating stealing by retarded persons.
Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 73(4), 577--581.

Chapter 9

Emotion Regulation Skills

Difficulties in regulating painful emotions are central to the
behavioral difficulties of many individuals. From these individuals'
perspective, painful feelings are most often the "problems to be
solved." Dysfunctional behaviors, including suicidal behaviors,
substance use disorders, overeating, emotion suppression, overcontrol,
and interpersonal mayhem, are often behavioral solutions to intolerably
painful emotions. Individuals with high emotional sensitivity and/ or
intensity, or frequent emotional distress, can benefit from help in
learning to regulate their emotions. Emotion regulation skills, however,
can be extremely difficult to teach, because many individuals have been
overdosed with remarks to the effect that "If you would just change your
attitude, you could change your feelings." Some individuals come from
environments where everyone else exhibits almost perfect cognitive
control of their emotions. Moreover, these very same others have often
exhibited both intolerance and strong disapproval of the individuals'
inability to exhibit similar control. Some people will at times resist
any attempt to control their emotions, because such control would imply
that other people are right and they are wrong for feeling the way they
do. Thus emotion regulation skills can be taught only in a context of
emotional self-­validation. Like interpersonal effectiveness and distress
tolerance, emotion regulation requires application of mindfulness
skills---in this case, the nonjudgmental observation and description of
one's current emotional responses. The theoretical idea is that much
emotional distress is a result of secondary responses (e.g., intense
shame, anxiety, or rage) to primary emotions. Often the primary emotions
are adaptive and appropriate to the context. The reduction 318

of this secondary distress requires exposure to the primary emotion in a
nonjudgmental atmosphere. In this context, mindfulness to one's own
emotional responses can be thought of as an exposure technique. (See
Chapter 11 of the main DBT text for a fuller description of
exposure-based procedures.) As noted in Chapter 1, the DBT model of
emotion regulation is transdiagnostic, with data suggesting efficacy of
DBT across a range of emotional disorders. As such, it is highly
compatible with the similar transdiagnostic model underlying the Unified
Protocol,1, 2 developed by David Barlow and his colleagues. Similar to
DBT, the Unified Protocol addresses deficits in emotion regulation that
underlie emotional disorders by (1) increasing present-­ focused emotion
awareness, (2) increasing cognitive flexibility, (3) identifying and
preventing patterns of emotion avoidance and maladaptive emotion-­driven
behaviors, (4) increasing awareness and tolerance of emotion-­related
physical sensations, and (5) utilizing emotion-­focused exposure
procedures.1 The specific DBT emotion regulation skills taught in this
module are grouped into the following four segments: understanding and
naming emotions; changing unwanted emotions; reducing vulnerability to
emotion mind; and managing extreme emotions.

Understanding and Naming Emotions The first segment of the module
(Sections I--VI) focuses on understanding and naming emotions:
identifying the functions of emotions and their relationship to
difficulties in changing emotions; understanding the nature of emotions
by presenting

9. Emotion Regulation Skills • 319

a model of emotions; and learning how to identify and label emotions in
everyday life.

Understanding the Functions of Emotions Emotional behavior is functional
to the individual. Changing ineffective emotional behaviors can be
extremely difficult when they are followed by reinforcing consequences;
thus identifying the functions and reinforcers for particular emotional
behaviors can be useful. Generally, emotions function to communicate to
others and to motivate one's own behavior. Emotional behaviors can also
have two other important functions. The first, related to the
communication function, is to influence and control other people's
behaviors. The second communication function is alerting oneself. In
this latter case, emotions function like an alarm, alerting the person
to pay attention to events that may be important. Identifying these
functions of emotions, especially of unwanted emotions, is an important
first step toward change.

Identifying Obstacles to Changing Emotions Many factors can make it hard
to change emotions, even when a person desperately wants to. Biological
factors can increase emotion sensitivity, intensity, and time needed to
return to emotional baseline. All of us---even those with sunny
dispositions---at times have intense emotional reactions, however, and
when this happens we need adequate skills to modulate our emotions.
Inadequate skills can make this regulation very difficult. Emotion
regulation is even more difficult when others in the environment are
reinforcing dysfunctional emotions. This is particularly true when
concurrent emotion overload, low motivation, or myths about emotions get
in the way.

Identifying and Labeling Emotions An important step in regulating
emotions is learning to identify and label current emotions. Emotions,
however, are complex behavioral responses. Their identification often
requires the ability not only to observe one's own responses, but also
to describe accurately the context in which the emotion occurs. Thus
learning to identify an emotional response is aided enormously if one
can observe and describe

(1) the event prompting the emotion; (2) the interpretations of the
    event that prompted the emotion;
(2) the history prior to the prompting event that increases sensitivity
    to the event and vulnerability to responding emotionally; (4) the
    phenomenological experience, including the physical sensation, of
    the emotion; (5) the expressive behaviors associated with the
    emotion; and (6) the aftereffects of the emotion on other types of
    functioning.

Changing Unwanted Emotions The second segment of the module (Sections
VII-- XII) has to do with changing emotional responses by learning how
to check the facts, take opposite action when the emotion does not fit
the facts, and engage in problem solving when the facts of the situation
are the problem.

Check the Facts Emotions are often reactions to thoughts and
interpretations of an event, rather than to the actual facts of an
event. Checking the facts, and then changing appraisals and assumptions
to fit the facts, are basic strategies in cognitive therapy as well as
in many other forms of therapy.

Problem Solving DBT assumes that most people feel painful emotions for
good reasons. Although all people's perceptions tend to become distorted
when they are highly emotional, this does not mean that the emotions
themselves are the results of distorted perceptions. Thus an important
way to control emotions is to control the events that set off emotions.
Problem solving for emotional situations, particularly when the
problematic events are painful, unexpected, or unwanted, can be
extremely useful. Often an unwanted emotion is entirely justified by the
situation, but the situation can be changed if the person takes active
steps to solve the problem at hand. Solving problems also requires a
very thorough assessment of the facts, and checking the facts is often
the first step in problem solving.

Opposite Action Actions and expressive responses are important parts of
all emotions. Thus one strategy to change

9. Emotion Regulation Skills • 321

person, but for a well-fed rich person it may be inconsequential. Having
a friend move away can be devastating if it is a person's only
relationship. In addition to increasing positive events, it is also
useful to work on being mindful of pleasurable experiences when they
occur, as well as being unmindful of worries that the positive
experience will end.9

Building Mastery and Learning to Cope Ahead In building a sense of
mastery, there are two focal points: (1) engaging in activities that
build a sense of self-­efficacy, self-­control, and competence; and (2)
learning to cope ahead of time with difficult situations via imaginal
rehearsal. The goal of building mastery in DBT is very similar to
activity scheduling in both cognitive therapy and behavioral activation
for depression.10, 11

Taking Care of the Body (PLEASE Skills) To build a resilient biology,
the focus is on balancing nutrition and eating, getting sufficient but
not too much sleep (including treating insomnia and nightmares, if
needed), getting adequate exercise, treating physical illness, and
staying off nonprescribed mood-­altering drugs or misusing prescribed
medications. Poverty can interfere with balanced nutrition and medical
care, and can put many goals out of reach that individuals might wish to
work toward. Although these targets seem straightforward, making headway
on them can be exhausting for both clients and their therapists and
skills trainers. With respect to insomnia, many of our clients fight a
never-­ending battle. Nightmares, anxious rumination, and poor sleep
hygiene are often the culprits. Work on any of these targets requires an
active stance by clients, as well as persistence until positive effects
begin to accumulate. The typical problem-­solving passivity of many
clients can create substantial interference here.

Managing Extreme Emotions The fourth segment of the module (Sections
XVIII-- XX) deals with how to manage very difficult emotions. Decreasing
emotional suffering through mindfulness to the current emotion is an
important skill here, as well as learning how to identify one's

skills breakdown point and then turning to the distress tolerance skills
when that happens.

Mindfulness of Current Emotions Mindfulness of current emotions means
experiencing emotions without judging them or trying to inhibit them,
block them, distract from them, or hold on to them. The basic idea here
is that exposure to painful or distressing emotions, without association
to negative consequences, will extinguish their ability to stimulate
secondary negative emotions. The natural consequences of judging
negative emotions as "bad" are feelings of guilt, shame, anger, and/ or
anxiety whenever distressing feelings arise. The addition of these
secondary feelings to an already negative situation simply makes the
distress more intense and tolerance more difficult. Frequently, a
distressing situation or painful affect could be tolerated if only a
person could refrain from feeling guilty or anxious about feeling
painful emotions in the first place.

Identifying the Skills Breakdown Point When emotional arousal is so
extreme that complicated skills cannot be used, the person has reached
the skills breakdown point. It's important for participants to learn to
recognize when they have reached this point, and then to turn to the
crisis survival skills covered in Chapter 10 of this manual. I do not
discuss them here. The final segment of the module (Sections XXIXXII)
covers troubleshooting when emotion regulation skills aren't working,
and revisits the model of emotions described earlier with the addition
of DBT skills where relevant.

Selecting Material to Teach As with the other modules, there is a great
deal of material for each skill in the emotion regulation teaching notes
that follow. You will not cover all the content the first several times
you teach specific skills. The notes are provided to give you a deeper
understanding of each skill, so that you can answer questions and add
new teaching as you go. For each skill, I have put a checkmark () next
to material I almost always cover. If I am in a huge rush, I may skip
everything not checked. Similarly, on this manual's

322 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES

special website (www.guilford.com/skills-trainingmanual), I use stars
() for core handouts I almost always use. Also as in chapters on
earlier modules, I have summarized research in special "Research Point"
sections. The great value of research is that it can often be used to
sell the skills you are teaching. It is important that you have a basic
understanding of the specific skills you are teaching. The first several
times you teach, carefully study the notes,

handouts, and worksheets for each skill you plan to teach. Highlight the
points you want to make, and bring a copy of the relevant teaching note
pages with you to teach from. Be sure to practice each skill yourself,
to be sure you understand how to use it. Before long, you will solidify
your knowledge of each skill. At that point you will find your own
favorite teaching points, examples, and stories and can ignore most of
mine.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 1 • 323

Teaching Notes I.

Goals of This Module (Emotion Regulation Handout 1) Main Point: The
overall goal of emotion regulation is to reduce emotional suffering. The
goal is not to get rid of emotions. Some individuals will always be more
emotional than others. Emotion Regulation Handout 1: Goals of Emotion
Regulation. Briefly review the goals on this handout. Provide enough
information and discussion to orient participants to the module, link
the module to participants' goals, and generate some enthusiasm for
learning the emotion regulation skills. Emotion Regulation Worksheet 1:
Pros and Cons of Changing Emotions (Optional). This worksheet is
designed to help participants (1) decide whether they want to regulate a
current emotion, and (2) decide whether it is in their interest to learn
to regulate their own emotions or stay in emotion mind much of the time.
Its major use is to communicate that the goal of this module is to
regulate emotions they want to change, not to change their emotions just
because others want them to. This worksheet can also be used as an
exercise to improve the likelihood of being effective when a person is
overcome with emotions (e.g., when the person just wants to yell and
scream or completely avoid a situation or person). It can also be used
as a teaching tool for how to figure out goals. For instructions in
teaching pros and cons, see the teaching notes for the Distress
Tolerance module (Chapter 10, Section V) on reviewing pros and cons as a
way to make behavioral decisions. Assign this worksheet as optional if
you teach other handouts in the session that have associated worksheets.

Orient participants to what is meant by "emotion regulation," to the
skills to be learned in this module, and to the rationale for their
importance.

99A. What Is Emotion Regulation? Say to participants: "Emotion
regulation is the ability to control or influence which emotions you
have, when you have them, and how you experience and express them."12 Go
on to explain that regulating emotions can be automatic as well as
consciously controlled. Tell participants: "In this module, we will
focus first on increasing conscious awareness and control of emotions.
Second, we will provide so much practice regulating emotions that you
will overlearn the skills. Ultimately, the regulation should become
automatic." Continue: "Emotions are out of control or 'dysregulated'
when you are unable, despite your best efforts, to change which emotions
you have, when you have them, or how you experience or express them."

99

Discussion Point: Either before or after reviewing Emotion Regulation
Handout 1, ask participants to check off each goal that is important to
them in the boxes on the handout and then share their choices.

99

Discussion Point: At some point, ask each person to name the emotions
that he or she most wants to change. Write the list on a whiteboard (if
possible). Discuss similarities and differences.

Explain that the goals of emotion regulation are as follows.

99B. Understand Your Own Emotions Say to participants: "Before you can
regulate your own emotions, you need to understand them. You can do this
by learning to do two things."

324 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 1

99

1.  Identify Your Own Emotions "The simple act of naming your emotions
    can help you regulate your own emotions."

99 99

Discussion Point: Some people always know what emotion they are feeling.
Others have no idea most of the time. For some, trying to figure out how
they feel is like looking down into a fog. Elicit from each participant
which type of person he or she is.

2.  Understand What Emotions Do for You "It can be very hard to change
    emotions when you do not understand where they come from or why they
    are there."

99C. Decrease the Frequency of Unwanted Emotions Continue: "Once you
understand your own emotions, you can learn how to cut down on the
frequency of the ones you don't want. You can do this in several ways."

99

1.  Stop Unwanted Emotions from Starting "You can't stop all painful
    emotions---but you can make changes in your environment and in your
    life to reduce how often negative emotions occur." Discussion Point:
    Ask participants what kinds of emotional situations they have the
    most trouble solving or changing.

99

2.  Change Painful Emotions Once They Start People often believe myths
    about emotions---that changing emotions is inauthentic, on the one
    hand, or that all emotions should be suppressed, on the other hand.
    Discussion Point: Ask participants whether they are afraid of losing
    all their emotions, hoping to get rid of all their emotions, or
    both. Discuss. Note to Leaders: It is essential to highlight that
    the point is to change the emotions participants themselves want to
    change, not the emotions other people want them to change. Remind
    participants that emotion regulation skills will not be crammed down
    their throats. At each point and for each skill, it is up to the
    participants to consider the pros and cons of maintaining an emotion
    or a particular emotional intensity. When the emotion or the
    intensity of the emotion is ineffective or too painful to bear,
    change may be desirable, and emotion regulation skills will be
    useful. If the emotion is not one a participant wants to change, or
    if the intensity, even though painful, is effective, then changing
    the emotion or the intensity of the emotion may not be useful.

3.  Emotions Themselves Are Neither Good nor Bad In and of themselves,
    emotions are not good or bad. They just are. Evaluating our emotions
    as either good or bad is rarely helpful. Thinking that an emotion is
    "bad" does not get rid of it. It may lead us to try to suppress the
    emotion.

4.  Suppression of Emotions Makes Things Worse Suppressing emotions is a
    temporary solution that causes greater problems in the long run.13
    Emotions may be comfortable or uncomfortable, wanted or unwanted,
    excruciatingly painful or ecstatically pleasurable. Judging emotions
    as "bad" can make painful emotions even more painful.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handouts 1--2 • 325

5.  Emotion Regulation Is for Ineffective Emotions Only Say to
    participants: "Emotion regulation strategies are for emotions that
    are not effective in helping you achieve your own goals in life.
    Emotions are effective when certain things are true:  "Acting on the
    emotion is in your own self-­interest."  "Expressing the emotion will
    get you closer to your own goals."  "Expressing your emotion will
    influence others in ways that will help you."  "Your emotion is
    sending you a message you need to listen to."

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants when emotions have been
useful and when they have been destructive. Have participants discuss
the emotions that give them the most trouble.

99D. Decrease Vulnerability to Emotion Mind Explain to participants:
"Emotion regulation will help you decrease your vulnerability to emotion
mind. It won't take away your emotions, but it will help you balance
emotion mind with reasonable mind to get to wise mind. And it will also
increase emotional resilience---in other words, your ability to bounce
back and cope with difficult events and emotions."

99E. Decrease Emotional Suffering Say: "Finally, emotion regulation will
enable you to decrease your emotional suffering. Specifically, you'll
learn to do these things:  "Reduce suffering when painful emotions
overcome you."  "Manage extreme emotions so you don't make things
worse." Note to Leaders: Be sure to highlight that although it may take
a lot of work at the start for participants to regulate and control
their emotions, over time they will get better and better at it. If they
practice a lot, at some point regulating their emotions effectively will
become automatic and often easy.

II. 

Overview: Understanding and Naming Emotions (Emotion Regulation Handout
2) Main Point: It is difficult for people to manage their emotions when
they do not understand how emotions work. The point of this section is
that knowledge is power. Emotion Regulation Handout 2: Overview:
Understanding and Naming Emotions. When you are teaching this module for
the first time or when time is of the essence, you can use this handout
to teach the key points for What Emotions Do For You (Emotion Regulation
Handout 3) and What Makes it Hard to Regulate Your Emotions (Emotion
Regulation Handout 4). Handouts 3 and 4 can be skipped if it is easier
to teach the material without handouts. The information itself is
critical, but the handouts are not. Orient participants to the content
of the model for describing emotions (Emotion Regulation Handout 5), but
do not teach Handout 5 yet. Worksheet: There is no assigned worksheet
for this handout. Emotion Regulation Worksheets 2--4a cover the topics
in this section.

Orient participants to the skills taught in this part of the module and
the rationale for their importance.

99A. What Emotions Do for You There are reasons why humans (and other
mammals) have emotions. The purpose of regulating emotions is not to get
rid of them. We need them for survival!

326 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handouts 3--4

There are three major functions of emotions:  To motivate action.  To
communicate to others.  To communicate to ourselves. Note to Leaders: If
you skip Emotion Regulation Handout 3, pick up key points in the
teaching notes for this handout and provide them here.

Knowing what emotions do for us can help us figure out how to regulate
them, and also how to appreciate them even when they are painful or
difficult.

99B. Factors That Make Regulating Emotions Hard Regulating emotions is
like regulating temperature. We want to be able to raise the intensity
of emotions when needed (like making a room warmer), and to decrease the
intensity of emotions when needed (like making a room cooler). Factors
that can make it very difficult to get our emotions under control
include these:  Biology.  Lack of emotion regulation skills. 
Reinforcing consequences of emotional behaviors.  Moodiness that makes
the effort to manage emotions difficult.  Emotional overload.  Emotion
myths.

Understanding each of these factors can be critical for troubleshooting
emotions. Note to Leaders: If you skip Emotion Regulation Handout 4,
pick up key points in the teaching notes for this handout and provide
them here.

99C. A Model for Describing Emotions Emotions are complex, full-­system
responses. Changing any part of the system can change the entire
response. Assure participants: "Once you know all the parts of the
emotion system, you can decide where to try to change it first."

99D. Ways to Describe Emotions Conclude: "Learning to observe, describe,
and name your emotions can help you regulate your emotions."

III. What Emotions Do for You (Emotion Regulation Handout 3) Main Point:
     There are reasons why humans (and many other animals) have
     emotions. They have three important functions, and we need all of
     them! Emotion Regulation Handout 3: What Emotions Do for You. If
     you teach the content from this handout, it can be useful as you
     talk to write the three major functions of emotions on the
     board: (1) to motivate action, (2) to communicate to others,
     and (3) to communicate to ourselves. If time is short, skip this
     handout and summarize the information when introducing the module
     or this skills section with Handout 2. Emotion Regulation Worksheet
     2: Figuring Out What My Emotions Are Doing for Me; Emotion
     Regulation Worksheet 2b: Emotion Diary. Skip both of these
     worksheets (as well as Worksheets 2a

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 3 • 327 and 2c,
which are examples of how to fill these out) for participants starting
the Emotion Regulation module for the first time. Adding them will
almost always require extra time (which you may not have), and the
worksheets can be overwhelming to beginners. Use these worksheets with
individuals who have gone through the module at least once or have been
in skills training for a while. The worksheets can also be very useful
in individual therapy, together with individual coaching. Use Worksheet
2 first. If necessary, instruct participants in how to rate intensity of
emotions (0 = no emotion, no intensity to 100 = maximum intensity). When
participants become practiced at filling Worksheet 2 out, then move to
Worksheet 2b. Worksheet 2b is for participants who want to identify how
their emotions are functioning over time. Knowing the function of an
emotion can be extremely helpful in changing it. For example, this
worksheet can be very useful for assessing whether a participant's own
emotions are being reinforced by people in the environment. If they are
being reinforced, and the emotion is one the participant is trying to
reduce, then it may be very important to ask those others to change how
they react to the emotion's expression---or how they are not responding
when the emotion is not expressed. (The DEAR MAN, GIVE FAST skills
described in Chapter 8 and in Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills
Handouts 5, 6, and 7 should be used for such requests.)

Orient participants to the functions of emotions, and give a rationale
for their importance.

99A. Emotions Have Functions That Help Our Species to Survive Emotional
behaviors evolved as immediate, automatic, and efficient ways to solve
common problems that humans and other emotional animals must solve to
survive. There are three primary functions of emotions.

99B. Emotions Motivate (and Organize) Us for Action 1. Emotions Prepare
Us Physically for Action Emotions prepare our bodies to act. The action
urges connected to specific emotions are largely hard-wired in our
biology. 2. Emotions Save Time Emotions save time in getting us to act
in important situations. We don't have to think everything through. We
can react to situations extremely fast.

99

Example: "Imagine that there is a tsunami, and a huge wave of water 20
feet high is coming at you and your family on the beach. You, however,
are the only one who sees it coming. Ask yourself: How likely is it that
you and your family will survive if you walk up to them and calmly say,
'A tsunami is coming; let's all run up the hill to save our lives'? How
fast do you think each member of your family will run if there is no
emotion? To save yourself and your family, you will run and scream,
'TSUNAMI!! RUN! RUN! COME ON!' That is your only hope." Example: When
people are physically attacked, anger can energize them quickly to
attack back and protect themselves. Similarly, anger on a football field
can energize players to play harder. Example: Students often do not want
to reduce test anxiety, because they are afraid that if they do, they
will quit working so hard and then fail their tests. Example: People are
sometimes afraid to reduce guilt, because they are afraid that without
guilt, they may start doing dishonest and harmful things. Example: If
there were no emotions, one would not feel the need to comfort a crying
baby.

328 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 3

99

3.  Emotions Can Be Hard to Change Emotions can be very hard to change
    when the associated behavior is very important. This is because
    emotions are to an extent biologically "hard-wired" responses to
    important events.

99

Example: "If your house is on fire and you need to run for your life, it
would be very hard to stop being afraid before you get away from the
fire." Example: "If your child has been molested by a neighbor, and you
want him locked up in jail and away from your child, it will be very
hard to reduce contempt for the molester before you have reported it to
police and he is arrested and put in jail." Example: "If someone is
threatening to 'steal away' the person you want to take to the prom, and
he or she is interested in the other person, it will be hard to get
jealousy to go down before you have done what is needed to get your
intended date to say yes to going to the prom with you." Discussion
Point: Elicit from participants what they think would happen if people
could really shut down emotions. For example, who would survive if we
could actually eliminate fear or love?

4.  Functions of Specific Emotions in Our Lives Note to Leaders: If
    there is not enough time to review all of the emotions listed below,
    review several, selecting those most relevant to your participants.

<!-- -->

a.  Fear

Fear organizes our responses to threats to our life, health, or
well-being. It focuses us on escape from danger. b. Anger

Anger organizes our responses to the blocking of important goals or
activities or to an imminent attack on the self or to important
others.14 It focuses us on self-­defense, mastery, and control.
c. Disgust

Disgust organizes our responses to situations and things that are
offensive and contaminating.15 It focuses us on rejecting and distancing
ourselves from some object, event, or situation. d. Sadness

Sadness organizes our responses to losses of someone or something
important, and to goals lost or not attained.16 It focuses us on what is
valued and the pursuit of goals, as well as on communicating to others
that we need help. e. Shame

Shame organizes responses related to personal characteristics or our own
behaviors that are dishonoring or sanctioned by our own community.17 It
focuses us on hiding transgressions and, if these are already public,
engaging in appeasement-­related behaviors. f. Guilt

Guilt organizes responses related to specific actions that have led to
violation of values.17 It focuses us on actions and behaviors that are
likely to repair the violation.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 3 • 329

g.  Jealousy

Jealousy organizes responses to others who threaten to take away
relationships or things very important to us.18, 19 It focuses us on
protecting what we have. h. Envy

Envy organizes our responses to others' getting or having things we do
not have but want or need.19 It focuses us on working hard to obtain
what other people have. i. Love

Love organizes our responses related to reproduction and survival. 20 It
focuses us on union with and attachment to others. j. Happiness

Happiness organizes our responses to optimal functioning of ourselves,
others we care about, or the social group we are part of. 21 It focuses
us on continuing activities that enhance pleasure and personal and
social value. Note to Leaders: You can create more examples by reviewing
Emotion Regulation Handout 6: Ways to Describe Emotions, or Emotion
Regulation Handout 11: Figuring Out Opposite Actions.

Discussion Point: Elicit and discuss other examples, especially examples
having to do with anger. Suggest an emotion, and then go around the
group and ask participants what they have an urge to do when
experiencing the emotion. Do this with different emotions, and then
highlight the different action urges associated with different emotions.
Discussion Point: Suggest various actions, and then ask participants to
imagine engaging in the action with emotion and without emotion. Discuss
the differences. Here are some sample actions:  Soothing a baby or child
with and without affection.  Running away from or avoiding a dangerous
situation with and without fear.  Apologizing for one's own behavior
with and without a sense of guilt.  Lying about one's own behavior with
and without guilt (or with and without fear).

99C. Emotions Communicate to (and Influence) Others 99 1. Facial
Expressions Are Biologically Hard-Wired Aspects of Emotions Among both
humans and animals, facial expressions can communicate faster than
words. 22, 23 2. Some Emotional Expressions Have an Automatic Effect on
Others Several facial expressions of emotion have automatic effects on
other people. That is, these effects are not learned. For example, an
infant reacts spontaneously to an adult's smile or look of fright. 24
This automatic reaction serves infants well until they learn to use
words. Even after children can use words, facial expressions are still
very helpful. Having both verbal and nonverbal forms of emotional
expression means having two ways of communication for important
situations.

99

3.  Emotional Expressions Influence Others (Whether We Intend It or Not)
    Examples: Expressions of warmth and friendliness toward an
    acquaintance may result in a later favor; disappointment expressed
    by a supervisor may result in improved work by an

330 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 3

employee; anger may result in one person's giving another his or her
rightful due instead of withholding it. Example: Communicating agonizing
sadness and despair may influence a therapist or another person to
reassure, give help, or otherwise make efforts to take away the pain.
Example: Expressed anger may stop others' behavior. Discussion Point:
Ask participants for examples of their emotions' influencing others and
of their being influenced by others' emotions. Discuss these examples.
Also, elicit examples of times when this strategy boomeranged---that is,
when participants' expressions of emotion got them something they didn't
want. Discussion Point: The point that emotions can influence others
even when we don't consciously intend them to do so is extremely
important to make. This can happen even when we are not aware that our
emotions are having such effects on others. Discuss this point with
participants. Elicit examples of when their automatic emotional
expressions have had an impact on other people, even though they did not
consciously intend to have such an effect.

99

4.  Emotions Can Be Very Hard to Change When a Communication Is
    Important As noted earlier, emotions can be extremely hard to change
    when a communication is important. This is because emotions are to
    an extent "hard-wired" responses to important events. Example: John
    asks Kathy to stop behaviors that are really annoying to him, but
    she does not change unless he gets really angry. If this is almost
    always the case, and Kathy only responds to expression of anger,
    then it will be very hard for John to stop feeling and acting angry
    when Kathy does annoying things. Kathy is reinforcing John's
    expressions of anger. Example: Julie wants her son, Billy, to
    realize how dangerous a situation is. When Julie is trying to
    communicate this to Billy, it will be hard for her to stop being
    afraid. Otherwise, Billy may think the situation is not as dangerous
    as it is. Example: If Maria wants Terry to know what she likes, she
    may want to communicate happiness or joy when he does things that
    make her happy. In fact, it would be hard for her to stop being
    happy around someone who often does loving things that she likes. It
    also would not be in her best interest. This is one reason why
    communication of happiness or joy is often automatic (i.e., not
    under our immediate control). Note to Leaders: Be sure that you
    understand the examples above before you teach them. The point being
    made is that if we want to communicate our anger, fear, or joy to
    someone, it is difficult to do this if we have to consciously
    organize not only what we say, but our facial expressions, our voice
    tone, our posture, and so on. And because communication of emotional
    responses is so important, it is also not in our best interest (from
    an evolutionary point of view) to be able to shut off emotional
    communications easily.

Discussion Point: Elicit ideas about what different emotions
communicate.

99

5.  What Happens When Verbal and Nonverbal Expressions of Emotion Don't
    Match? Research Point: When nonverbal expressions of emotion (e.g.,
    actions, facial and body expressions, voice tone) don't go with what
    a person says, other people almost always will trust the nonverbal
    expressions over the verbal ones.25

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 3 • 331 Note to
Leaders: This point about verbal and nonverbal expressions is very
important. A major premise of DBT is that the nonverbal emotional
expressions of many individuals with emotion regulation difficulties do
not accurately indicate what they are experiencing; thus the individuals
are often misread. See the discussion of apparent competence in Chapter
3 of the main DBT text.

Discussion Point: Ask participants for examples of being misread or of
misreading others because of mismatched nonverbal communication.

99D. Emotions Communicate to Ourselves 99 1. Emotions Can Be Signals to
Check Things Out Emotions can be signals or alarms that something is
going on in a situation. This is what is 99

meant by the saying "Listen to your gut." Likewise, when we say that a
person has a "good feel for a situation," we are referring to emotions
as signals.

2.  Information about Situations, Based on Emotions, May or May Not Be
    Accurate Sometimes signals picked up from a situation are processed
    out of our awareness. 26 This processing sets off an emotional
    reaction, but we cannot identify what it is about the situation that
    set off the emotion. 27 Through trial and error---that is,
    experience---people learn when to trust these emotional responses
    and when to believe they do not provide accurate information.
    Discussion Point: Ask participants for examples of when their "feel"
    for a situation proved to be correct. Discuss how people often
    ignore their own "sense" or "feel" for a situation simply because
    they can't put into words their reasons for this "sense" or "feel,"
    or because once they say what they are sensing, other people
    disagree.

99

3.  Treating Emotions as Facts Leads to Difficulties When carried to
    extremes, emotions are treated as facts: "If I feel incompetent, I
    am," "If I get depressed when left alone, I shouldn't be left
    alone," "If I feel right about something, it is right." People use
    their emotions as evidence that what they believe is correct.
    Example: "If you had a needle phobia and treated the fear as fact,
    then you might try to get rid of all of the needles in the world."
    Discussion Point: Ask participants for examples of times when the
    intensity of their emotions seemed to validate their own view of
    events. Draw from them instances when emotions have been
    self-­validating and when changing negative emotions has been
    invalidating. Have them give personal examples if possible. Discuss.
    Note to Leaders: The points above---that emotions function to
    communicate to ourselves, and that these communications may not
    always be accurate---are crucial and very sensitive for many
    individuals. This is particularly true for individuals who have
    experienced pervasive invalidating environments. In the absence of
    validation from others, a primary function of negative emotions can
    sometimes be self-­ validation. The way this works is as follows:
    When feelings are minimized or invalidated, then it is difficult for
    individuals to get their concerns and needs taken seriously. One way
    they counteract this is to increase the intensity of their emotions.
    Sooner or later, highly emotional people will probably be attended
    to. If at a later point, these persons do not get very emotional
    under the same circumstances, this proves other people right: The
    original emotions weren't valid in the first place. If a situation
    is not as bad as a person said it was, then he or she feels shame
    for having caused so much trouble to others. After enough of these

332 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handouts 3, 4--4a

instances, the person begins to believe that his or her integrity is on
the line with emotions. Ergo, the function of negative emotions
gradually evolves to that of self-­validation. Getting these points
across to highly emotional individuals is fraught with difficulty,
because the very idea is invalidating. Care, patience, and skill are
needed here.

IV. What Makes It Hard to Regulate Emotions? (Emotion Regulation
    Handouts 4--4a) Main Point: Regulating emotions is very hard.
    Biology, lack of skills, reinforcing consequences, moodiness, mental
    overload, and emotion myths can each make regulating emotions very
    difficult. Emotion Regulation Handout 4: What Makes It Hard to
    Regulate Your Emotions. Review this handout reasonably fast,
    validating that emotion regulation is very difficult. You can
    revisit it later to troubleshoot difficulties in using skills
    successfully. Emotion Regulation Worksheet 16: Troubleshooting
    Problems in Emotion Regulation (Optional). This worksheet is
    designed to work with Emotion Regulation Handout 24: Troubleshooting
    Emotion Regulation Skills. However, it can be given to participants
    earlier if you do not think it will overwhelm them or interfere with
    practicing other skills. The worksheet can also be used individually
    in skills coaching. Emotion Regulation Handout 4a: Myths about
    Emotions (Optional). If this handout is used, the best way to work
    with it is simply to ask participants to read the myths and circle
    the ones they believe are true. It can be helpful and interesting to
    ask them to circle the statements they agree with in emotion mind
    only, and to put a checkmark by the ones they agree with when in
    wise mind. Once this is done, and before you move on to any teaching
    points, use the devil's advocate strategy described below under F,
    "Emotion Myths." (For a fuller description of this technique, see
    Chapter 9 of the main DBT text.) If you skip reviewing this handout,
    you can describe several myths about emotions when introducing the
    Emotion Regulation module. Emotion Regulation Worksheet 3: Myths
    about Emotions (Optional). You can assign this worksheet whether or
    not you review Handout 4a. The worksheet is very similar to the list
    of myths in Handout 4a, but each myth on the worksheet already has
    one challenge written in. The homework is to develop new challenges
    or rewrite the challenges already there in more personal language.
    It is not uncommon for participants to like the challenges as
    written. If these have personal value for them, this is fine. The
    important point is for the participants to "own" a challenge, not to
    necessarily think up a new one. There are also spaces for
    participants to write in and challenge their own myths.

Orient participants to the following factors that interfere with emotion
regulation.

99A. Biology Biological factors can make emotion regulation harder. Some
babies are born more emotionally sensitive than others, and they may
remain that way as children and adults. 28 Emotional intensity also
differs across people. 29 High emotional sensitivity and intensity can
get in the way of learning emotion regulation strategies and of using
already learned strategies. Discussion Point: One way to think about
biological differences in emotionality is to consider the children we
know or have known. Most parents with multiple children talk about the
amazing differences among their children in emotional
temperament---­differences that become evident shortly after birth.
Elicit such experiences in participants' own lives. Are they more or
less emotional than siblings? Have they always had difficulties in
emotion regulation, or have the difficulties only shown up recently?

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 4 • 333

99B. Lack of Skill 99

Say to participants: "When you have skill deficits, you actually don't
know how to change or regulate your emotions and emotion-­related
actions. You also may not know how to get yourself regulated enough to
even want to lower the intensity of your emotions." Not having a skill
is very different from not having motivation. People learn emotion
regulation starting in infancy.30 The back-and-forth exchange of
emotions between mother and baby is the start of emotion regulation
training. 31, 32 Child rearing is, in many ways, a task of teaching
children how to regulate their emotions. Some parents are very good at
this. Some try hard but do not have the necessary skills. Some don't
have the time or the desire to do it. Some parents can't regulate their
own emotions, and thus find it extremely difficult to teach their
children how to do it.33 Because of biological sensitivity, some
children have much more difficulty learning to regulate their emotions
than others. Example: Learning to regulate emotions is like learning to
play golf. Although everyone can learn the skill somewhat, it is much
easier for some people than for others to get really good at it.

99

Skills and their use are frequently context-­dependent. That is, a person
can have skills in one set of situations, but not in others; or in one
mood, but not in another; or in one frame of mind, but not in another.
Discussion Point: Elicit descriptions of participants' experiences in
learning emotion regulation.

99C. Reinforcement of Emotional Behaviors As discussed above, emotions
have functions. When the functions of certain emotions are reinforced in
a particular situation, it can be extremely difficult to change these
emotions. Example: "If every time you are angry, people give you what
you want, it will be very, very difficult for you to learn how to
regulate your anger. Getting what you want when you are angry can
reinforce angry outbursts." Example: "If people only listen and help you
when you get very sad and depressed and cry a lot, it will be very hard
for you to stop being sad." Example: "If you are afraid but walk down a
dark alley anyway, and then you are attacked, you will have a tough time
getting yourself not to be afraid the next time you are tempted to walk
down an alley." Explain: "Sometimes your emotions do you much good, even
when they are very painful or get you in trouble. When this is the case,
it can be very hard to change your emotions. You may not even realize
that you can't change your emotions, because they are doing too many
good things for you. When this happens, your emotions are being
reinforced even if you don't want them to be. Emotions are reinforced
when they do various things for you:  "They may communicate important
messages or cause people to do things for you."  "They may motivate your
own behavior, so that you do things that are important to you."  "They
may validate your beliefs about what is going on in a situation."  "Or
they may make you feel better than you would feel without them."

99D. Moodiness Regulating emotions takes a lot of effort and energy. 34,
35 It also takes willingness (a distress tolerance skill; see Distress
Tolerance Handout 13). Say to participants: "Moodiness and lack of
energy can interfere with your willingness to do the work emotion
regulation takes. You may have the capability, but it may be interfered
with by your current mood."

336 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 5

99

4.  Emotions Are Sudden, and They Rise and Fall Emotions ordinarily
    occur suddenly,45 although the intensity of a particular emotion may
    build up slowly over time. They are also like waves in the sea,
    because they rise and fall. Most emotions only last from seconds to
    minutes.

99

5.  Emotions Are Self-­Perpetuating Once an emotion starts, it keeps
    restarting itself. We might even say that "emotions love
    themselves." This is because emotions sensitize us to events
    associated with the emotions. Examples: When we are in a house at
    night alone and are afraid, every little sound seems like it may be
    someone breaking in. When we are in love, we see only the positive
    points of the person we love. Once we are jealous, every time our
    loved one looks at someone else, it is proof of betrayal.
6.  Emotions Have Components Emotions have components.42 These
    components are interrelated, and each component influences all
    others. Thus, although an emotion can be thought of as a complete
    and transactional systemic response to external and internal events,
    it can also be very helpful to examine each component separately. A
    very important take-home message here is that changing just one
    component can often change the entire emotional response.
7.  Some Emotions Are Universal There are probably about 10--12
    universal emotions (e.g., anger, disgust, fear, guilt, joy,
    jealousy, envy, sadness, shame, surprise, interest, love46). People
    are born with the potential, the biological readiness, for these.
    Others are learned and are usually some combination of the basic
    emotions.

99B. Components of Emotions Note to Leaders: As you review the
components of emotions, it is useful to start drawing the model for
describing emotions on the board, using Emotion Regulation Handout 5 as
your guide. (Take a copy of the handout with you to the board. I always
do.) This way, the model unfolds as you talk about it, and participants
don't get confused about where you are. The flow of teaching goes much
better if you go in the order listed below (points 1--10). You can
mention Prompting Event 2 when first presenting prompting events (saying
that an emotion just experienced can also be a prompting event), and
also as a final comment when completing the explanation of the model.
For each component, give a definition, an example, and one way you can
change your emotion by changing that component. (For names of skills
that fit each emotion component, see Emotion Regulation Handout 25:
Review of Skills for Emotion Regulation.)

99

1.  Prompting Events Prompting events are events or situations that
    occur right before an emotion starts. They are the cues that set off
    the emotion at that particular moment instead of at some other
    moment. (Prompting events are not the events that led up to the
    prompting event.) Prompting events can be external (outside the
    person, in the environment) or they can be internal (inside the
    person). Note to Leaders: You can help participants remember the
    meaning of the word "cue" by referring to cue cards in a play which
    are held up to prompt actors to say their lines. "Prompting event"
    is the term used here instead of the word "trigger." The word
    "trigger" implies an invariably automatic effect, as when a bullet
    comes speeding out of a gun when the trigger is pulled.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 5 • 337
"Prompting event" is a softer term, implying an easier route to change
and the possibility that the event does not always result in an
emotional response.

99

a.  Prompts Can Be Internal

A person's own thoughts, behaviors, and physical reactions can prompt
emotions. One emotion can prompt another secondary emotion.

99 99

Example: "When you feel sad, you can then feel angry that you feel sad."
b. Prompts Can Be External

Events in the environment, including things that people do, can prompt
an emotion. Examples: "Rain on your wedding day, or a friend's saying
something mean, can make you feel sad."

99

c.  Events Can Prompt Emotions Automatically

An external event can prompt an emotion automatically. That is, a person
can have an automatic reaction without any thoughts about the event.
Examples: "You may feel fear when looking down from a high place, or joy
when seeing a beautiful sunset." Discussion Point: Elicit other
examples. Get examples of both primary emotions and secondary emotions.
(Remember, a secondary emotion is an emotional response to a preceding
emotion.)

99

d.  When Prompting Events Change, Emotions Can Change

Say: "You can change emotions by changing prompting events. You can
avoid these events, or you can take action to change them through
problem solving." 2. Attention/Awareness Tell participants: "A prompting
event will not prompt an emotion if you are not aware that it actually
happened. The event has to grab at least part of your attention to have
an effect." Example: "Your mother says something mean, but your cell
phone has died and you do not hear it, and she does not say it again."
a. There Is No Emotion without Awareness

Say: "Even when an event is internal---for example, an emotion, an
infection, or tense muscles---it will not prompt an emotion if you are
not aware of it at some level. The attention grab can be very rapid, but
it has to be there at least a little."

99

b.  When Attention Is Distracted, Emotions Can Change

"You can change emotions by distracting your attention away from
prompting events." (See Distress Tolerance Handout 7: Distracting.)

99

3.  Interpretation of Events Can Be the Prompting Event Continue: "Often
    what really sets off your emotion is your interpretation of the
    prompting event, not the event itself. Interpretations are thoughts,
    beliefs, or assumptions about an event, or appraisals of the event."
    Note to Leaders: It is very important to get this point on
    interpretation across to participants. The more examples you give,
    the better. It can be particularly effective to tell a story in
    which at first a person would

338 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 5

misinterpret the situation because of inadequate information, and then
change the interpretation when more information is given.

Example: "Your best friend, Jacob, is walking down the mall across from
you with another friend of his. You wave and shout his name. He keeps on
walking without saying anything. You interpret this as meaning that he
likes his other friend more than you, and you feel hurt. If, however,
you interpreted it as meaning that the mall was crowded and Jacob did
not see or hear you, you would probably not feel hurt." Example: Mary
doesn't like Susan or Jenny. Susan gets very angry at Mary for not
liking her; Jenny gets very afraid. Why? Susan is thinking how much she
has done for Mary; Mary should appreciate it and like her. Jenny thinks
that if Mary doesn't like her, then maybe no one will ever like her. a.
Interpretations Can Contribute to Complex Emotions

Interpretations, as well as the beliefs and assumptions on which they
are based, may become part of very complex emotions. For example,
despair is sadness combined with a belief that things are terrible and
will not get better. b. Many Interpretations Are Based on Learned
Beliefs

Example: People would not be afraid of guns if they did not believe guns
can kill. Practice Exercise: Have participants think up events and
interpretations that set off different emotions. One way to do this is
to get one person to give a situation or event, have another give an
interpretation, and have a third give the emotion. Then, for the same
event, have a fourth person give another interpretation and a fifth
figure out the emotion that would go with that interpretation. This can
be repeated many times with the same event. Go through a number of
events. The important point to make is that often people are responding
to their own interpretations of an event, not to the event itself.

99

c.  When Interpretations Change, Emotions Can Change

Say: "You can change emotions by checking the facts and changing your
interpretations, beliefs, and assumptions accordingly. (Or you can put
on 'rose-­colored glasses.')" 4. Vulnerability Factors Vulnerability
factors are conditions or events that make an individual very sensitive
to a prompting event, more likely to make emotional interpretations, and
more biologically reactive to specific events. These can occur shortly
before the prompting event, or they can occur in the distant past.

99

a.  Events from the Near Past Can Make Us Vulnerable

If we have not had enough sleep, have not eaten, are sick or recently
disabled, have drunk alcohol or used mood-­altering drugs, or have just
been through very stressful events, we are likely to be more vulnerable
to emotions than at other times. In addition, sometimes a prompting
event is the "straw that breaks the camel's back." Example: We are more
likely to get angry at someone who is asking us for the tenth time for a
loan when we have no more money than we are the first time the person
asks. Example: If we are rejected by one person and then rejected by
another, we may have a much stronger reaction to the second rejection
than we had to the first.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 5 • 339

Example: If we go through a very stressful situation that we don't
handle very well and feel ashamed about it, we are more likely to say
yes if we are offered a drink, drugs, or another way of escaping from
ourselves. Example: If we are in a lot of physical pain or have had many
unfair demands placed on us lately, we are much more likely to get very
angry if anyone puts one more demand on us.

99

b.  Events from the Distant Past Can Make Us Vulnerable

Events from the distant past can make us more vulnerable to events in
the present. This is particularly true if we have not processed or
resolved the prior events. Example: A person who has had a traumatic
experience may respond to similar situations as if the traumatic event
is happening again, even when it is not. When a person is so traumatized
that he or she develops PTSD, for example, the person often responds to
even very small events that are associated with the traumatic event as
if the trauma is happening again. Thoughts of being shot at, raped, or
in a car wreck, or any reminder of such an event in the environment, can
evoke the very same reaction as the original experience of being shot
at, raped, or in a car wreck. Example: Many adults find that they
sometimes react emotionally to another person in the same way that they
reacted to one of their parents, even though the person is in most ways
not at all like their parent. Usually the other person has done or said
something similar to what a parent said or did. Something in the present
can evoke a response from the past, even when we are not consciously
aware that the current event is a reminder of the past event.

99

c.  When Vulnerability Factors Change, Emotions Can Change

Say: "You can reduce negative emotions by reducing your current
vulnerability factors. For instance, you can do this by getting more
sleep; by building a life with less stress; and by increasing resiliency
factors in other ways, such as using strategies to desensitize yourself
to cues linked to past events."

99

5.  Biological Changes When emotions fire, several complex biological
    changes occur so quickly as to be simultaneous.43

<!-- -->

a.  Emotions Involve Brain Changes

Emotions involve neurochemical changes in the brain.47, 48 Some parts of
the brain (e.g., the limbic system) appear to be very important in
regulating emotions. The brain changes can then have effects on the rest
of the body. Note to Leaders: It is important to note that brain
differences between people with a disorder and people without the
disorder are not necessarily permanent. It is also not true that the
only ways to change the brain are medications or direct stimulation of
some sort, such as electroconvulsive treatment (ECT). We now know that
the brain can also change when behavior changes!49 For example, one
study found that individuals with major depression treated with an
antidepressant or with interpersonal therapy showed the same regional
brain changes after 12 weeks of treatment.50 It is thought that
psychotherapy is a learning experience and produces change in synaptic
plasticity through a retraining of implicit memory systems.51--53

340 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 5

Research Points: •• Emotional brain circuits. There appear to be many
emotional brain circuits. Different circuits (or systems) appear to be
associated with different broad groups of emotions. Examples include the
rage/ anger system, the fear/anxiety system,54 the lust/sexuality
system,55 the care/nurturance system, the panic/separation system, and
the play/joy system. Different parts of the brain (e.g., the amygdala,
hypothalamus, and anterior cingulate) and different neurochemicals
(e.g., serotonin, norepinephrine, oxytocin, and prolactin) are
associated with the firing of emotions and the regulation of emotions.
Some people have difficulties regulating all of their emotional
circuits. Others have difficulties in only one or a few circuits.56 ••
Brain asymmetry. Differences in activation of left and right regions of
the brain are related to a predisposition for positive emotional states
(right activation low compared to left activation) and negative
emotional states (left activation low compared to right activation). For
example, some studies have shown that people with clinical depression,
compared to people without depression, had decreased left brain
activation. Differences in right-brain versus left-brain activation can
influence vulnerability to various emotional states. High or low
activation in various parts of the brain can make it easier or harder
for some individuals to regulate their emotions.57--61 •• Problems in
brain chemistry. Some researchers believe that one reason some people
have trouble regulating emotions is that they have a problem in their
brain chemistry.62

99

b.  Emotions Involve Nervous System Changes

The nerves that are peripheral to the brain and spinal cord send signals
to the muscles to contract or relax, and also control autonomic
activity---for example, the action of the heart and glands, breathing,
digestive processes, and reflex actions. All these responses are also
part of emotional responding. There are two nerve systems controlling
autonomic processes that act in opposite directions from each other: an
activating system and a deactivating or quieting system. When we are
under stress, the activating system kicks in. Called the "sympathetic
nervous system," it increases heart rate and blood pressure, cools the
skin, causes sweating, increases the rate of breathing, and activates
the production of sugar to give us energy. It prepares us for actions
now. The other system, called the "parasympathetic nervous system,"
counteracts these actions by slowing down the body. When we are relaxed,
this quieting aspect of the system takes over.

99

c.  When Biological Processes Change, Emotions Can Change

We can change our emotions by targeting biological processes with
medications, neurofeedback, ECT, behavioral skills aimed at evoking the
parasympathetic nervous system, yoga, and many other approaches or
techniques. Psychoactive drugs work to control emotions by changing
brain chemistry. Putting drugs into the brain system can have powerful
effects on our emotions. However, once the brain knows the drugs are
there, it often changes the chemistry again to compensate, and then the
drugs quit working. d. Dysfunctional Behaviors Can Also Regulate
Emotions through Biology

Many dysfunctional behaviors (such as using illicit drugs, overusing
alcohol, or self-­cutting) also regulate emotions by regulating biology.
In these cases, however, the behaviors take a great toll on us in other
ways.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 5 • 341

6.  Experiences Emotions are almost always associated with the
    experience of feeling sensations and with urges to do something.
    Both our feelings and our urges prompt us to act in some way.

99

a.  Sensations (Feelings)

When we have emotions, we are actually sensing our body and brain
changes. This is usually what is meant by an "emotional experience."
Sensations are an important part of emotions and are the reason we often
call emotions "feelings." Example: Sadness involves sensations of low
energy, heaviness, and emptiness. Example: Anger involves sensations of
high energy and agitation.

99

99

The experience of sensations cannot be changed directly. If sensations
we don't like could be changed directly, we would all get rid of
physical pain and of emotions we find painful. But what would happen
then? We would not avoid dangerous situations. If a child was lost, we
would not go out and try to find the child. We would not feel jealousy
and thus might not protect what we have. We might decide to give up on
anger and not defend ourselves or fight for the rights of others. This
would be a disaster. Without feeling emotions, how would we survive?
From an evolutionary point of view, the feelings and experiences of
emotions are critical for survival. The experience of sensations can
only be changed indirectly. For example, we can focus our attention on
something else through distraction, or we can change our biology to
block the sensations. Discussion Point: Say: "When people tell you to
quit feeling an emotion, it is like telling you to quit feeling the rain
come down on your head or the pain when someone hits you over the head
with a skillet. The only way to 'quit feeling' it is to divert your
attention or change some other aspect of your emotion. Although that is
sometimes easy to do, it is sometimes next to impossible. Telling a
person to divert attention when his or her foot is in a fire, for
example, would not be effective." Discuss this idea. Note to Leaders: If
participants have been through the Distress Tolerance module already,
they may believe that this point contradicts the distraction skills they
learned as part of crisis survival. The point to be made is that no
skill works for every situation. Problem solving ("getting your hand out
of the fire") and radical acceptance ("when you can't get your hand out
of the fire") may sometimes be more effective than distraction.

99

Practice Exercise: If you have not done this previously, lead
participants in a series of exercises where they try to quit
feeling/sensing something without diverting their attention (e.g., their
hands on the table, their arms on their chair arms). Then instruct them
to try to stop feeling something by diverting their attention.
Discussion Point: Say: "Sometimes the problem with emotion is that you
cannot sense your body and its changes. To regulate emotions, you have
to be skilled in sensing your body. If you have been practicing shutting
off all sensations for years, this can be difficult." Get feedback from
clients: Which participants have difficulty sensing their bodies? Which
have difficulty pinpointing exactly what part of their bodies they are
sensing? Discuss the notion that for some people, emotions are like a
fog; they can't see (sense) what exactly an emotion is.

342 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 5

99

b.  Action Urges

An important function of emotions is to prompt behavior (e.g., fight in
anger, flight in fear). Many of the nervous system changes described
above are designed to activate the body to be ready for action. As the
body gets ready for action, very strong urges to act can arise.
Discussion Point: Discuss the action urges of several emotions. Elicit
feedback from participants. For ideas on actions that go with various
emotions, see Emotion Regulation Handout 6: Ways to Describe Emotions.

7.  Expressions One of the most important functions of emotions is to
    communicate.63 If it is to do that, an emotion has to be expressed.

99

a.  Facial Expressions Communicate Emotions

The facial expression of primary or basic emotions is "hard-wired" into
human beings.64, 65 Research Point: Research shows that in all cultures,
there are some facial expressions that are linked to the same basic
emotions. (Many actions that express emotions are also hard-wired.) A
change in facial muscles when emotions are activated is universal.
People are extremely sensitive to facial expressions from early
childhood onward.66, 67 During infancy, emotional expressions are
especially important social signals at a time when verbal communication
is not possible.68--71 Researchers now think that changes in the facial
muscles play a very important role in actually causing emotions. We
humans have more nerves in the face than anywhere else in the body.
Facial expressions for many of our basic emotions are the same across
cultures. The importance of facial expressions in communicating with
others is likely very important to our survival.

99

b.  Body Language Communicates Emotions

Even when our faces cannot be seen, our bodies can communicate emotions.
Our posture can be relaxed, tense, drooping, or shoulders back. Our
hands can be clenched and tight, or open and relaxed. Each different
posture sends a message to others about how and what we are feeling.
People can learn to inhibit emotional expressions or to express them
differently. For complex emotions that are learned, the expressions are
also learned. Some facial expressions and behaviors may express
different emotions, depending on one's overall culture;72 one's regional
culture (e.g., the South vs. the Northwest in the United States); and
one's family culture, school culture, and individual differences.73
Discussion Point: Discuss the fact that each family, town, state, and so
on is a "miniculture." Expressiveness that is OK in one miniculture may
not be OK in another. Get examples from participants' own experience.
Discussion Point: Discuss the point that what an expression means can
vary from time to time and person to person. Thus reading emotions is
easy in some ways, but very difficult in others. People often misread
other people's emotions. The same behavior can express many different
emotions, and the same emotion can be expressed by many different
behaviors. Discuss how one behavior can mean many things and how
different behaviors can mean the same thing. Get examples from
participants' own lives. Discussion Point: Many individuals have learned
to hide their emotions by controlling the facial muscles and body
language that express emotions. This is a natural result of social
learning in an emotionally invalidating environment. The hiding is
usually automatic; that is, the individuals do

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 5 • 343

not intend it, or are not aware of it. This is a major reason why others
often do not know that these persons are as upset as they are---they
don't look it! Discuss how participants have learned to conceal their
emotions in this way. Discussion Point: It is also possible that some
individuals are born with emotional systems that are less obviously
expressive than the systems of others. It may be that this initial
tendency to underexpress emotions (e.g., through facial expressions)
sets up a situation where others do not get the feedback they need to
interact with these persons appropriately. Thus the environment becomes
less responsive to the emotional expressions of these individuals,
setting up an invalidating pattern. Discuss this hypothesis with
participants. Practice Exercise: Go around the room and have
participants try to express a particular emotion nonverbally with their
facial expressions or just with their bodies. Ask other participants to
try and guess what emotion they are expressing.

99

c.  Words Communicate Emotions

Telling other people how we feel about them, ourselves, or a particular
event, or how we feel in general, can be very powerful (e.g., "I love
you," "I hate you," "I am sad," "I'm sorry"). It can improve others'
understanding of us and also elicit reactions in others. Discussion
Point: Some people have learned never, or hardly ever, to tell other
people how they really feel. This can be an advantage in situations
where others will punish them for their feelings, or where their true
feelings will unnecessarily hurt others. However, this can create a lot
of problems with trustworthy people. Discuss when telling the truth
about participants' emotions has been hurtful and when it has been
helpful. When has concealing emotions been helpful or hurtful?

99

d.  When Facial and Body Expressions Change, Emotions Can Change

We can change emotions by changing our facial and body expressions. In
particular, the connection among our bodies, faces, and emotions is so
tight that we can change our emotions simply by changing our facial
expressions. This is called the "facial feedback hypothesis."74 We can
also change our emotions by changing our posture, how we hold our hands,
and the tightness of our muscles. Example: If we are very afraid or
anxious, we can feel calmer by relaxing our muscles. Research Point: In
a study examining the facial feedback hypothesis,75 each participant was
asked to hold a pencil in the mouth to either facilitate or inhibit
smiles. Those participants in the "facilitate smile" condition reported
more positive experiences when pleasant scenes and humorous cartoons
were presented to them. These results support the theory that our
emotions change to match our facial expressions.

Emphasize that changing emotional expressions is different from
suppressing emotion. Explain to participants: "When you suppress an
emotion, you are working hard to restrain, stifle, or hold back a
natural expression. It is like trying to smother the expressive part of
your emotion. Suppressing emotions can actually lead to more extreme
emotions. In contrast, when you change an emotional expression, you are
replacing one expression with another. You are actively altering your
muscles to modify your expression. Generally, this is very hard to do if
your face and body are very tense, as they usually are when you are
trying to suppress an emotion." Discussion Point: The relationship among
facial expression, body language, and each individual's actual emotional
experience is not an exact correspondence. This is particularly so when
what we

344 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 5

say does not match our voice tone, our facial expression, and/or our
body posture. When this happens, almost everyone will pay attention to
the nonverbal communication and ignore the words. This, of course, is a
real problem for those of us whose words are more accurate than our
nonverbal expressions. Go around the group and have participants discuss
ways in which their emotions have been misread, as well as ways in which
they have misread others' emotions.

8.  Actions

99

a.  Emotions Prepare the Body for Action

One of the primary functions of emotions is to prepare the body for
action (e.g., kissing, hitting, running toward someone, withdrawing
passively, avoiding, doing cartwheels). Thus an action itself can be
thought of as a part of an entire emotional response. Emotions in
general can be thought of as a rapid response system. Tell participants:
"Remember, emotions evolved in order to prompt actions necessary for
survival. Later in this module, we will review how particular types of
action typically go with specific emotions." Discussion Point: One of
the most important tasks in development is to learn when to inhibit
emotional actions and when not to. People who are very impulsive often
have great difficulty here: When they act in accord with their emotions,
and this is viewed by others as inappropriate, it is often called
"acting out." Other individuals may be so inhibited that they rarely
engage in emotional actions. Discuss who is overly impulsive and who is
overly inhibited. Often the same person is impulsive in some situations
and inhibited in others. Again, discuss.

99

b.  When Actions Change, Emotions Can Change

Say to participants: "You can change emotions by acting opposite to the
emotion's action urge. Again, this is something we will work on later in
this module." 9. Emotion Names a. Naming Emotions Is Universal and
Helpful

Every culture gives names to emotions. To name an emotion also requires
awareness of the emotion. When we are communicating to others how we
feel, it is important to be able to identify what emotion we are
actually feeling, so that our communication will be accurate. There is
also some evidence that people who can give an emotion a name experience
less negative emotion.76 How to name emotions is learned.77 Obviously,
it is easier to name simple emotions than complex ones.

99

b.  Through Awareness and Naming, Emotions Can Change

Tell participants: "You can change emotions by learning to be aware of
and to name your emotions. Again, we will work on this later in this
module." 10. Aftereffects Intense emotions have powerful aftereffects on
memory, thoughts, the ability to think, physical functioning, and
behavior.

99

a.  "Emotions Love Themselves"

One of the most important aftereffects of emotions is that we become
hypervigilant to cues and events that could set off the same emotions
and attention is narrowed to information that is incompatible with our
emotion. In this way, emotions organize us in such a way as to continue
(or keep "refiring"). An emotion that feels as if it has gone on for a
very long time is one that is refiring over and over again. Example:
When we are afraid, we often become hypersensitive to any threat to our
safety.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handouts 5--6 • 345

Example: When we are angry, we often become hypersensitive to any
insulting behavior of others or to behaviors that threaten to interfere
with our goals. Example: When we are in love we ordinarily see all the
positives in the person we love and do not see the negative. b.
Monitoring Aftereffects of Intense Emotions Can Help Us Change
Subsequent Emotions

Tell participants: "Once you know that intense emotions narrow attention
and increase sensitivity to cues for the same emotion, you can remind
yourself to check the facts. Knowing you may be seeing things through
the lenses of the emotion you are trying to change rather than the
lenses of present reality can be helpful at this point.

C. Primary and Secondary Emotions (Optional) Note to Leaders: This
section on the differences between primary and secondary emotions is
likely to overload people taking this module for the first time. It can
be useful new information for people going through the module a second
time.

1.  Primary Emotions Are Our Immediate, First Reactions Our spontaneous
    emotional reactions to events outside of ourselves are examples of
    primary emotions.
2.  Secondary Emotions Are Usually Reactions to Our Primary Emotions
    Sometimes secondary emotions follow primary emotions so quickly that
    we do not even notice the primary emotions. Sometimes we have spent
    so many years suppressing our primary emotions that we automatically
    "jump over" the primary emotions and never even experience them.
    That is, we develop a habitual secondary emotional response.
    Example: Anger is often a secondary emotion to fear. In fact, for
    some people, anger is a secondary emotion to many primary emotions.
    Fear can also be a secondary emotion---for example, when a person is
    very fearful of anger.

99

3.  Secondary Emotions Can Make Identification of Primary Emotions
    Difficult If we cannot identify and describe a primary emotion, we
    will have trouble changing it. Thus problem solving in regard to the
    primary emotions is difficult. This topic will come up again and
    again in working with emotions. Discussion Point: Elicit examples
    from participants of occasions when they have a secondary emotional
    reaction to a primary emotion (e.g., getting depressed about being
    depressed, getting angry or feeling ashamed for getting angry). Ask
    which usually causes them more trouble and pain---the primary or the
    secondary emotion?

<!-- -->

VI. Observing, Describing, and Naming Emotions (Emotion Regulation
    Handout 6) Main Point: Learning to observe, describe, and name
    emotions can help with regulating emotions. Emotion Regulation
    Handout 6: Ways to Describe Emotions. This handout gives
    participants ideas when they have trouble describing characteristics
    of their own emotions. It does not have to be gone over in detail.
    It is essential to convey that the features listed on the handout
    are not necessary to each emotion. These are typical features, but
    because of culture and individual learning, features may differ from
    person to person.

346 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 6

Emotion Regulation Worksheets 4 and 4a: Observing and Describing
Emotions. These two worksheets differ in format, but ask for exactly the
same information and have the same instructions. Let participants choose
which one they want to use, and then review them with participants.
Common problems and errors on these worksheets include the following: ••
Prompting Event: Participants often want to write an entire story for
"Prompting Event." However, this section should just describe the few
moments immediately before the emotion fired. The "story" goes in the
"Vulnerability Factors" section. •• Vulnerability Factors: The history
preceding the prompting event can be communicated under "Vulnerability
Factors." This section is here so participants can tell the story that
explains their reaction to the prompting event. Here participants can
list events from the distant past (to explain their learning history),
as well as events in the immediate past that may have increased their
vulnerability to emotion mind. Participants often forget to put in
physical illness or pain, alcohol or drug use, lack of sleep, over- or
undereating, and stressful events in the 24 hours before the prompting
events; it is often important to remind them to do this. •• Biological
Changes and Expressions: It is easy to confuse "Face and Body Changes
and Experiences" as part of "Biological Changes" with "Face and Body
Language" as part of "Expressions." Biological body changes refer to
physical changes (blushing, muscles tensing, sweating, hair follicles
standing up, etc.). These are the automatic physiological changes that
take place with emotions. Describing the experience of body sensations
(feelings) sounds similar to describing biological changes (e.g.,
feeling muscles tensing, feeling hairs standing up). The point to make
to participants here is this: "These very same things can also happen
without your feeling them, so it is important to note whether you do
feel these changes. Face and body language is expression visible to
others. It is sometimes the result of face and body changes, as when
blushing makes your face visibly red. It can also include such things as
frowning, grimacing, smiling, slumping, clenching hands, slinking back,
looking down, staring, and crossing arms."

A. Why Observe and Describe Emotions?

99

1.  To Improve the Ability to Regulate Emotions Research Point: Research
    shows that in processing an emotional experience, it is more
    effective to be very specific about the emotion and emotional events
    than to try to regulate the emotion in overly general or nonspecific
    ways.78, 79 For example, anxiety is reduced by observing and
    describing the specific fear-­producing cues, in contrast to general
    impressions regarding cues prompting fear and anxiety.80

2.  To Learn to Be Separate from Emotions Explain to participants: "By
    learning to observe your emotions, you learn to be separate from
    them and not to be identified with them. In order to control your
    emotional responses, you must be separate from your emotions so that
    you can think and use coping strategies."

3.  To Learn to Be at One with Emotions Continue: "Nevertheless, you
    also need to be one with your emotions, in the sense that you
    identify them as part of yourself and not something outside of
    yourself." Example: To the extent that a rider is "one" with a
    horse, he or she can control the horse. If the rider is separate,
    fighting the horse, the horse will fight back, and the rider cannot
    control it smoothly. On the other hand, if the rider is mindless, so
    to speak, and has no identity separate from the horse, he or she
    will just cling to the horse for dear life, and the horse will
    assume all control.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 6 • 347

99B. Steps in Observing and Describing Emotions Review the organization
of Emotion Regulation Handout 6: Ways to Describe Emotions with
participants. The emotions on this handout are grouped in families, and
each emotion family has one page describing its characteristics. The
sequence of emotions is alphabetical except for guilt, which is put
after shame because they are often confused. (Shame is a response to
evaluating one's entire self as bad or unworthy; guilt is a response to
evaluating one's specific behaviors as bad or immoral.) Although the
word "jealousy" is commonly used to mean both jealousy and envy, they
are separated here, because instructions for changing these emotions are
different from each other. Explain to participants: "Jealousy is when
you have something of value and someone else is threatening to take it
away; envy is when someone else has something you want but don't have."
The key idea to convey to participants is this: "You can figure out what
your emotion is by matching events and your responses to sets of events
and responses on Handout 6. If you can't identify your own
emotion---either a current emotion or a past emotion---you can figure it
out by systematically reviewing each emotion component and writing it
down if necessary. When the components are put all together and you can
see your responses in their totality, it can be much easier to figure
out your emotion. If necessary, you can review Handout 6 to see which
group of emotion components matches your emotion the best." Note to
Leaders: Depending on the group you are teaching, it may be important to
provide some discussion of each of the emotions on Emotion Regulation
Handout 6 as you review how to describe and name emotions. Some are very
easy to understand; others may be more difficult. Many of the
descriptions in this handout were made up by ordinary people in response
to questions about their emotional experiences. Identify each of the
following components when reviewing a specific emotion from Handout 6.
In my groups, I usually review two or three emotions and assign reading
the entire handout as homework.

In reviewing one or several of the emotions on Handout 6, use the
outline below to highlight each of the characteristics of these
emotions. Note that each of these characteristics map onto the model of
emotions previously described.

99

1.  Prompting Events Tell participants: "For each specific emotion,
    these are typical prompting events that set off the emotion---events
    that occurred right before the emotion started." Here is a place to
    remind participants that the story of what led up to the event goes
    under vulnerability factors, which are unique to each person and are
    not on Handout 6.

99

2.  Interpretations of Events That Prompt Emotion Say: "For each
    specific emotion these are typical interpretations, thoughts, and
    assumptions about the event that prompt the emotion."
3.  Biological Changes and Experiences Continue: "For each specific
    emotion these are typical biological changes and experiences,
    feelings, body sensations, and action urges. Focus here on body
    changes that you sense (or that you can sense if you pay attention).
    Note that changes and experiences are similar across some emotions
    and very different for others."
4.  Expressions and Actions Continue: "Expressions and actions are
    typical facial expressions, body language, verbal communications,
    and actions associated with specific emotions. Remember that a
    primary function of emotions is to elicit actions to solve specific
    problems. Attend to the actions associated with each emotion."

348 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 6

5.  Aftereffects of Emotion Say: "Aftereffects are what happened to your
    mind, your body, and your emotions just after your first emotion
    started."
6.  Name of the Emotion As you review various emotions described on
    Handout 6, check in with participants at the end of each review to
    be sure that they are correctly identifying and naming this emotion
    in themselves. Note to Leaders: Remind participants to use the
    "Other:" blanks to write in idiosyncratic prompting events,
    interpretations, biological changes, experiences, expressions and
    actions that are typical for them for the various emotions. But
    check the items to be sure that they really do go with the emotion
    listed. Some participants may not understand their primary emotion,
    or may not realize that what they are experiencing is a secondary
    emotion occurring so quickly they do not even realize they have
    skipped over (or simply avoided experiencing) the primary emotion
    associated with the prompting event.

Discussion Point: As you go through Emotion Regulation Handout 6, ask
participants to give their own ideas about characteristics of emotions.
Suggest that all write down new ideas on their handouts. Practice
Exercise: First, ask each person to think of an emotional situation to
role-play, or use one of the following situations.  "Interacting with a
friend who gets very angry at you during the interaction."  "Being
afraid of a very shady-­looking person who moves in very close to you at
a bus stop."  "Meeting a loved one at the airport."  "Sitting next to a
person you find disgusting."  "Talking with a friend about something
very sad."

Second, give instructions on how to do a role play. Have two clients
role-play the situation, or you can role-play it with one client. The
client who chose the emotional situation needs to communicate as much as
possible his or her emotions during the role play. Third, have everyone
observe the role play and describe the nonverbal expressive behavior of
the role players. Guide clients to pay special attention to faces.
Fourth, have the role players describe how they actually felt and what
they were expressing in the role play. Note to Leaders: For further
suggestions regarding role-play techniques, see Chapter 8, Section V
(the Practice Exercises for the DEAR MAN skills).

C. Factors That Interfere with Observing and Describing Emotions Note to
Leaders: The points in the section below are usually best made during
homework sharing. Participants should fill out as many homework sheets
(Emotion Regulation Worksheets 4 or 4a) as there are prompting events.
Thus, if a person has a secondary emotional reaction prompted by the
original emotion or set of emotions, he or she should fill out a second
worksheet. You need to be particularly vigilant about this during
homework sharing; it can be very difficult to sort out.

1.  Secondary Emotions (Emotional Reactions to Emotions) As noted
    earlier, when a secondary emotion comes on the scene, it can cover
    up or confuse the primary emotional reaction. Sometimes the only way
    to sort this out is to pay significant atten-

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handouts 6--7 • 349

tion to the prompting event and the interpretations of the event. You
might ask participants: "What emotion would most people have following
that emotion?" or "If you were not afraid \[guilty, ashamed\] of your
own emotions, what emotion would you have experienced after that
prompting event?" or "Is there any emotional response you were probably
avoiding?" 2. Ambivalence (More Than One Emotional Reaction to the Same
Event) Explain to participants: "People often experience two or more
emotions at almost exactly the same moment. This can confuse the
situation. For example, you might love your parents, and at the same
time be furious with them and want to get as far away from them as
possible. When moving to a new town, you might be excited and afraid at
the same time. To sort this out, complete a worksheet for each emotion
experienced, and don't worry about which is primary and secondary before
completing the worksheet. It will probably be less confusing to figure
this out after completing the worksheet, even if it is difficult to
separate the primary and secondary emotions."

VII. Overview: Changing Emotional Responses (Emotion Regulation
     Handout 7) Main Points: To change unwanted emotions, we must first
     check the facts. Sometimes this is all that is needed. When the
     emotion does not fit the facts, we need to practice acting opposite
     to our emotion. When the emotion fits the facts and the situation
     is the problem, we need to do problem solving. Emotion Regulation
     Handout 7: Changing Emotional Responses. Review this handout even
     if only briefly, so that participants know that besides checking
     the facts (covered next in Section VIII), there are two other
     skills for changing emotional responses: opposite action (covered
     in Section X) and problem solving (covered in Section XI). Section
     IX covers how to decide which of the two latter skills to use after
     checking the facts. This overview, then, orients participants to
     the three emotion change strategies and prepares them for Section
     IX and the flow chart in Emotion Regulation Handout 9. Teach the
     individual skills in Sections VIII--XII, using the handouts
     described there.

99A. Check the Facts Say to participants: "Changing beliefs and
assumptions about a situation to fit the facts can help you change your
emotional reactions to it. This requires that you first check out the
facts. Checking the facts is a basic strategy in cognitive therapy as
well as in many other forms of therapy."

99B. Opposite Action Continue: "When emotions do not fit the facts, and
knowing the facts does not change your emotion, then acting opposite to
your emotions---all the way, repeatedly---will change your emotional
reactions. This is similar to the old adage 'If you fall off a horse,
get right back on.' "

99C. Problem Solving Go on: "When your emotions fit the facts of the
situation and you want to change your emotions, then the situation is
the problem. Solving problems will reduce the frequency of negative
emotions."

99D. The "Yes, But" Barrier to Changing Emotions Doing what is needed to
change emotional responses can be very difficult. It requires effort,
willingness, and an ability to determine what is in one's own best
interest. "Yes, but" is a typical response to efforts to help a person
change emotions, particularly when emotional intensity is high and
changing emotions is experienced as admitting that the person's own
feelings are invalid. The problem is that "yes, but" does not lead to
feeling better or to solving emotional problems. When

350 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handouts 7, 8--8a

"yes, but" rears its head, it can be useful to remind participants that
there are only four possible responses to any problem: 1. "Solve the
problem by changing the situation or by leaving the situation." 2.
"Change your emotional reaction to the situation, so that painful
emotions are reduced even though the problem remains." 3. "Radically
accept the situation. That is, acknowledge that the situation can't be
helped and you can't change how you feel either, but that completely and
willingly accepting this state of affairs can give you a sense of
freedom and reduce your suffering." 4. "Stay miserable. (Or you can make
things worse.\*)" Note to Leaders: The four options above are presented
in the orientation to DBT skills (see Chapter 6). If you have reviewed
these steps, remind participants. If this is the first time you are
covering these points, see Chapter 6 for a fuller description. If time
permits, you might also want to give out General Handout 1a: Options for
Solving Any Problem.

VIII. Check the Facts (Emotion Regulation Handouts 8--8a) Main Point: We
      often react to our thoughts and interpretations of an event rather
      than to the facts of the event.81 Changing our beliefs,
      assumptions, and interpretations of events to fit the facts can
      change our emotional reactions.82 Emotion Regulation Handout 8:
      Check the Facts. If you have a lot of time, this handout may be
      easier to teach if you have participants pull out Emotion
      Regulation Handout 6: Ways to Describe Emotions and look at the
      sections on prompting events and interpretations of events that
      prompt feelings of specific emotions. If time allows, it can also
      be helpful to have participants take out copies of Worksheet 5;
      then, using situations from participants' own experiences as
      examples, you can have people fill in a worksheet as you go. The
      principal strategies used and taught here are those of cognitive
      modification (see Chapter 11 of the main DBT text). Emotion
      Regulation Handout 8a: Examples of Emotions That Fit the Facts
      (Optional). This handout can be skipped if you are not going to
      teach opposite action after checking the facts. The same
      information is also included in Emotion Regulation Handout 13:
      Reviewing Opposite Action and Problem Solving. However, for many
      participants, understanding opposite action is much easier if you
      have first reviewed how emotions fit with facts. Emotion
      Regulation Worksheet 5: Checking the Facts. It is important to
      review this worksheet with participants. It can be particularly
      useful to fill out one of these worksheets while teaching Check
      the Facts to both demonstrate what is meant by each instruction
      and to demonstrate how to do it. If necessary, instruct in how to
      rate intensity of emotions (0 = no emotion, no intensity; 100 =
      maximum emotion intensity). The "Before" and "After" spaces are
      for rating emotions before and after checking the facts. If
      participants have trouble figuring out what emotion they are
      feeling, instruct them to review Handout 6 and/or fill out
      Worksheet 4 or 4a. Notice that each step in checking the facts has
      two sections: one for writing down the descriptions of the
      situation and of thoughts and interpretations that are probably
      setting off the emotional response; and one section for
      considering alternative thoughts, interpretations, and
      descriptions of the facts.

\*Again, the fabulous idea of adding on "you can make things worse" was
sent to me in an e-mail from a person who had gone through DBT skills
training. Unfortunately, I cannot find the e-mail to give proper credit
to this person. I hope to hear from her for a correction in the future.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 8 • 351

99A. Why Check the Facts? Note to Leaders: Review only a few of the
points in Section 1 below, using examples where needed. This section
gives the theory behind checking the facts, and you will have many
opportunities to teach this material when reviewing homework and when
teaching subsequent skills where checking the facts is an integral
component.

1.  Thoughts and Interpretations of Situations and Events (Instead of
    the Facts) Can Set Off Painful Emotions83

<!-- -->

a.  Beliefs about Reality Can Cause Powerful Emotions

Example: A person who believes that a loved one has died in a car
accident will feel deep sadness and grief, even if the information the
person was given was incorrect and the loved one did not in fact die.
Example: A person who believes that someone is trying to hurt him or her
may feel very afraid, even if the facts are completely different and the
other person is trying to help, not hurt. b. Faulty Beliefs about What
We Think We Need Can Lead to Emotional Misery

Example: "I need illicit drugs to control my pain," instead of "I need
to find an effective, nondestructive way to deal with my pain." Example:
"I must be in control!" instead of "I like being in control better than
being out of control." Example: "You should be different \[e.g., nicer,
on time, more understanding, willing to give me more pay\]," instead of
"You are who you are. Something caused you to be this way. But I want
you to be different." c. Faulty Beliefs about Events Can Cause New
Problems

Example: "I can pass a test without studying for it beforehand," when
the person has a low grade point average. Example: "I have enough gas in
the car to get where I am going," when the fuel gauge is on empty.
Example: "Your spending time with your friends means that you do not
love me and I should move out of the house." Example: "Your not inviting
me to the party means that you do not like me." d. Thinking in Absolutes
Can Set Off Extreme Emotions

"Thinking in absolutes" means extreme thinking, black-and-white
thinking, all-or-none thinking, and either--or thinking. Example: "He
hates me," instead of "He is pretty annoyed with me." Example: "This job
is terrible! I can't stand it!" instead of "Some parts of this job are
difficult, but other parts are not so bad. I can tolerate this."
Example: "If I don't make straight A's in this course, I am a failure,"
instead of "I may want an A, but less than an A is not a failure."
Example: "You are either vulnerable or invulnerable," instead of "A
person can be tough at times and vulnerable at times."

352 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 8

99

Practice Exercise: Ask participants to imagine the following scene:
"Your car has had a flat tire on the expressway. You are parked on the
side of the road right after a ramp. You are standing by your car and
hoping someone will stop. You see your best friend \[mother, father,
sister, teacher\] coming up the ramp onto the expressway, in the car
alone. You wave and jump up and down. Your friend \[or whoever it is\]
looks right at you, but then speeds up and goes by. How would you feel?
Would you feel angry? Hurt? Disappointed?" Ordinarily participants will
say one of these emotions. Elicit their thoughts about the situation,
suggesting interpretations (such as "What a mean thing to do!"),
unrealistic demands on reality ("Friends always stop for a friend in
need"), absolute thinking ("He hates me"), and so on. Then continue the
story: "You discover later that a small child was in the car that you
didn't see, and the child was seriously hurt and your friend was
desperately trying to get to the hospital to save the life of the child.
Knowing this new fact, how would you feel?" Ordinarily, feelings will
change. Point out to participants that the only thing that really
changed was their interpretation of the event. Discussion Point: Elicit
examples of times when participants' interpretation of an event or
thoughts running through their minds have influenced how and what
emotion they feel. Check for examples of thinking and interpretations
that did not fit the facts, unrealistic demands on reality, and thinking
in absolutes.

99

2.  Our Emotions Can Affect What We Think about Events and How We React
    to Thoughts Temporary moods, for example, can influence ideas,
    memories, perceptions,84 and interpretations of important events,
    particularly when the events are complex and ambiguous.85 The very
    same information can take on very different coloring, depending on
    our current emotional state.86 Example: When we are angry or
    annoyed, the cheery friend who calls us up seems more like a pest
    than a loyal friend. Example: When we are anxious or afraid, the
    sound of the wind rattling our bedroom window sounds like someone
    breaking in. Example: When we are in a happy mood, even a sour
    friend can seem like a great person to get together with. Example:
    When we are ashamed of making a mistake at work, we may interpret
    two co-­ workers laughing in the hall as making fun of our job
    performance. Example: When we are sad, we may think a bad grade
    means we'll never graduate from college. Discussion Point: Elicit
    examples of times when participants' mood or current emotions have
    colored how they interpreted events. Note to Leaders: Relate the
    fact that emotions can influence thoughts to the concept that
    "emotions love themselves" and thus perpetuate themselves, discussed
    both earlier and below.

99

3.  Believing That Our Thoughts Are Absolute Truths Can Be a Recipe for
    Disaster It is important to keep these things in mind:  No one has
    the absolute truth.  Believing that "I have a hold on the absolute
    truth" ordinarily leads to conflict and can even

precipitate wars.  Different opinions on the facts can be valid even if
we don't agree with them.  There is always more than one way to see a
situation, and more than one way to solve a

problem.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 8 • 353  Two
things that seem like (or are) opposites can both be true.  Meaning and
truth evolve over time. Note to Leaders: The points listed above are
also covered in Chapter 8, Section XV, in the discussion of dialectics
as part of the skills for walking the middle path.

99

4.  Knowing the Facts Is Essential for Solving Problems Incomplete
    knowledge of the facts, or faulty beliefs about them, can interfere
    with problem solving. Example: Believing that my roof is not leaking
    when it is leaking means that I will not get the roof fixed.
    Example: Believing that I failed my exam because the grading was
    unfair, when in reality it was because I did not study, means that I
    may not study for the next exam.

99

5.  Examining Our Thoughts and Checking the Facts Can Change Our
    Emotions When we respond to incorrect facts, learning the correct
    facts can change our emotions. In addition, knowing the actual facts
    of a situation can help us problem-solve emotional situations. That
    is, knowing the facts can help us change the facts. Note to Leaders:
    It may be useful to point out that several effective mental health
    treatments are based on helping people change cognitions (i.e.,
    thoughts, beliefs, interpretations). One of the major treatments for
    depression is cognitive therapy. Various forms of CBT (which focuses
    on changing both cognitions and behaviors) have been developed for
    treating anxiety disorders, eating disorders, substance use
    disorders, and many others.87 Two of the major treatments for
    personality disorders---­Schema Therapy88 and Mentalization-Based
    Therapy89 ---also target changing cognitions.

99B. How to Check the Facts 99 1. Ask: What Is the Emotion I Want to
Change? Tell participants: "It is much more difficult to change an
emotion when you don't know what emotion or set of emotions you are
actually feeling. Facts about a situation might fit one emotion but not
another. Reviewing Emotion Regulation Handout 6 can be very helpful to
you here. Pay careful attention to current thoughts, physical
sensations, posture, action urges, actions, and verbal statements when
you are reviewing ways to describe emotions."

99

2.  Ask: What Is the Event Prompting My Emotion? Say to participants:
    "Describe the facts observed through the senses. Just the facts!
    Challenge judgments, extremes, and absolute black-and-white
    descriptions. A more balanced view of the facts may change your
    emotions." Explain that a prompting event can be an event outside of
    ourselves or an internal event such as a previous emotion, series of
    thoughts, or an ability or inability to do a task. A prompting event
    can be a secondary reaction to a previous emotion (e.g., anger at
    ourselves for feeling afraid), thought (e.g., feeling guilty at
    judgmental thoughts about someone), or lack of ability (e.g.,
    feeling ashamed at our inability to remember someone's name). Our
    emotions can also be elicited by our own actions (e.g., joy at
    playing well in a piano recital). One problem in figuring out
    emotions is that we often describe situations and our own emotions,
    thoughts, and actions in judgmental language, with absolute
    black-and-white statements. Usually this is not an effective way to
    describe an event, because it can evoke strong negative

354 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 8

emotional reactions. Indeed, our mental description of the event, rather
than the event itself, may be the actual prompting event.

99

3.  Ask: What Are My Interpretations, Thoughts, and Assumptions about
    the Event? Often we add to what we observe and then react to what we
    have added, rather than to what we observed. We jump to a conclusion
    and then act on that. Say to participants: "Think about some
    erroneous interpretations you might make (and then act on) when
    feeling particular emotions." Or use these illustrations:  Anger:
    "Listening to a person express disappointment in something you do
    (fact) and think-

ing the person is trying to control you (interpretation)."  Disgust:
"Seeing a man looking in your window from the street (fact) and thinking
he is a

sexual predator (interpretation)."  Envy: "Observing someone receiving a
hug (fact) and thinking that this person gets a lot

more love than you do (interpretation)."  Fear: "Hearing a creaking
sound in the night (fact) and thinking someone is breaking into

your house (interpretation)."  Happiness: "Seeing no clouds in the
morning sky (fact) and believing it won't rain on your

way home (interpretation)."  Jealousy: "Watching the person you love
sitting close to someone else (fact) and believing

he or she is now in love with that person (interpretation)."  Love:
"Realizing a person wants to have sex with you (fact) and assuming the
person is in

love with you (interpretation)."  Sadness: "Finding out that a person
made plans without you (fact) and deciding the person

does not love you (interpretation)."  Shame: "Dropping the ball in a
game (fact) and then thinking of yourself as being a loser

(interpretation)."  Guilt: "Not wanting to share your food with someone
(fact) and deciding that you are being

selfish (interpretation)."

99 99

"Consider all the other possible interpretations. Other reasonable
interpretations, particularly if they are more benign, can be an
effective way to regulate your emotions. Practice looking at all sides
of a situation and all the various points of view." 4. Ask: Am I
Assuming a Threat? Say to participants: "Ask yourself whether you are
imagining a threatening event or outcome. Painful emotions are almost
always related to some type of threat. What negative outcomes might you
be anticipating from the event?" Explain that often we are not even
aware that we are assuming some sort of threat. The threat is implicit
in our minds. It can be important to really search for the threat we are
associating with the prompting event. This is particularly important
when we have checked all the facts and still are having very intense
emotions. This is a clue that our current emotion may be a secondary
emotion, and that it may be very important to figure out what implicit
(i.e., nonverbal) threat we are actually reacting to.

99

a.  Label the Threat

The first thing to do is to label the threat, which involves labeling
the emotion. Here are the types of threat we may sense when we are
feeling particular emotions:  Anger: Being attacked or important goals
being blocked.  Disgust: Being contaminated.  Fear: Encountering danger
to life, health, well-being.  Sadness: Losing something permanently or
not attaining goals.  Shame: Being kicked out of the community.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 8 • 355  Guilt:
Violating one's own values.  Jealousy: Someone else's taking away a
valued person and/or thing.  Envy: Not attaining what is wanted or
needed because others have substantially more

power, influence, and belongings.

99

b.  Evaluate the Chances That the Threatening Event Will Really Occur

It is important to be in wise mind when considering the likelihood that
a threatening event will occur. Often what seems threatening at first
glance is not so threatening once we think about it. Example: "You
think, 'I'm going to be robbed,' when seeing two men walking towards you
on a street at night. Evaluate the chances that the threatening event
will really occur by observing if there are other people around, if the
men are carrying weapons, and so on." Now present the following points
to participants, and give the examples that follow:  "Consider: What was
the outcome previous times you had a similar thought?"

Example: "When having a headache, you think, 'I probably have some
terrible disease.' Remind yourself that you have had many headaches in
the past that were not serious and went away before long."  "Ask
questions; seek more information; check and review the known facts of
the situa-

tion." Example: "When a co-­worker walks by you at the mall without
saying hi, you think, 'She doesn't like me.' Seek information: Ask the
co-­worker whether she saw you at the mall."  "Observe the problem
situation, after first calming yourself down so as to see clearly."

Example: When your son tells you he had an accident while driving your
car, you think, 'My car is destroyed.' Observe by checking out the car
yourself."  "Perform experiments in the real world to see if your
predictions come true. How fac-

tual are your worries and predictions about events?" Example: "You
think, 'I can't get a job.' Conduct this experiment: Apply for lots of
jobs that you qualify for, and see what happens."

99

c.  Think of Other Possible Outcomes

Tell participants: "Now imagine as many other possible outcomes as you
can. The simple act of generating alternative outcomes can itself
increase your belief that other outcomes are possible." Example: "When
told by your boss that he would like to meet with you, you think, 'I'm
going to be fired.' Generate alternative outcomes: 'He's going to ask me
for the status of the project I'm working on,' 'He's going to ask me if
I can stay late to help him with the project that's due tomorrow,' 'He's
going to give me a bonus for all the overtime I put in this year.' "

99

5.  Ask: What Is the Catastrophe? What if the threatening event actually
    does occur?

<!-- -->

a.  If the Worst Outcome Does Occur, What Are the Realistic
    Consequences?

Sometimes the facts are every bit as bad as we think they are. However,
we often make a bad situation even worse when we catastrophize the
facts. "Catastrophizing" is exaggerating the negative characteristics of
the facts, and focusing on the worst possible outcome (e.g., "It's
terrible and it's never going to get any better," "I'm going to die").
Panic induced by the

356 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 8

thought "Oh my God, I'm dying" can constrict the blood vessels and
actually increase the probability of having a heart attack.34
Catastrophizing can increase both physical pain and emotional
pain.90--92 Note to Leaders: Help participants see that catastrophizing
thoughts are just that: thoughts and images arising and falling within
the mind. This can be a difficult concept for them to grasp at first.
Refer to the skill of mindfulness of current thoughts (Distress
Tolerance Handout 15).

Discussion Point: Ask: "Can anything really be a catastrophe?"
Dr. Albert Ellis, a famous therapist who was well known for telling
people to stop catastrophizing, was once in a debate with someone who
tried to get him to admit that some things really are catastrophes. The
person said to Ellis: "What if you are in a plane, and all of a sudden
it goes into a nose dive, and it is falling to the earth with you in it?
What about that? What would you say then?" Ellis replied very calmly:
"Hmm, if you die, you die." Discuss this with participants. Is there
really any fact that one could not accept with equanimity? Even if real
catastrophes occur, does catastrophizing (i.e., focusing on the most
distressing or hopeless parts of the catastrophe) help anything?

99

b.  Imagine Coping Well with Catastrophes

Encourage clients to imagine that they are coping well with catastrophes
in various ways:  Problem solving (see Emotion Regulation Handout 12) 
Cope ahead (see Emotion Regulation Handout 19)  Radical acceptance (see
Distress Tolerance Handouts 11--11b) Note to Leaders: At times,
participants may find it difficult if not impossible to stop
catastrophizing. They may begin fighting you, resisting any attempts on
your part to help them move to alternative responses to very painful
facts. At these times, it can be very helpful to move to the next point
below.

99

6.  Ask: Does My Emotion and/or Its Intensity Fit the Facts? Encourage
    clients to check out whether the emotion they are trying to change
    fits the actual facts of the situation. As noted earlier, emotions
    evolved as a way for individuals to respond effectively to common
    problems. There are common situations likely to elicit each of the
    basic emotions. When such a situation occurs, the corresponding
    emotion is likely to be useful in the situation---it is likely to
    fit the facts. Examples of situations that fit the facts of
    particular basic emotions are listed in Emotion Regulation Handout
    8a. Be sure to note that these are not the only valid prompting
    events for the emotions in question. Often the problem is not with
    the specific emotion; it is with the intensity of the emotion. You
    can also give these examples: Example: "You get laid off from work
    and react as if you have been sent into a lifetime of poverty."
    Example: "A person cuts ahead of you into a grocery line, and you
    react as if the person had physically attacked you and your child in
    line with you." Note to Leaders: It can be very difficult for
    intensely emotional persons to see through irrational, nonfactual
    descriptions, faulty interpretations, unrealistic worries, and
    catastrophic versions of the facts. Once again, it is important to
    remember that "emotions love themselves." The aftereffects of
    emotions include narrowing of attention and sensitivity to threat,
    which can also make it very difficult to change thoughts and images.
    At these points, participants might be better advised to first use
    crisis survival skills (e.g., actively working to change body
    chemistry, using TIP skills, distracting, self-­soothing, and doing
    pros and cons of remaining so emotional \[see Distress Tolerance
    Skills Handouts 5--8\]).

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handouts 8--8a • 357

Discussion Point: It can be helpful to discuss with participants the
concept of "middle-of-thenight thinking." This is the type of thinking
that occurs when we wake up at night with worries and catastrophizing
thoughts about our lives. When we wake up in the morning, we often
wonder how we could worry so much and believe such catastrophic
thoughts. In the middle of the night, it can be helpful simply to say to
ourselves: "These are middle-of-the-night thoughts. I am going to ignore
them until morning." Elicit from participants times when they have had
"middleof-the-night thinking" that in the morning did not seem nearly as
distressing. Elicit and provide ideas on skills that might be helpful in
the middle of the night: "For example, it can be helpful to splash very
cold water on your face, and then use paced breathing to distract from
your thoughts for a time." (See Distress Tolerance Handout 6a for a
description of how cold water works.)

99C. Examples of Emotions That Fit the Facts (Optional) Review Emotion
Regulation Handout 8a with participants. Note to Leaders: Handout 8a can
be a helpful review of prompting events for various emotions. It also is
good for clarifying what emotions fit what facts. Review one or two of
the items on this handout, and suggest that participants review the rest
of the handout between sessions.

99

Handout 8a gives examples of basic emotions that fit the facts. In
general, the situations listed fit the emotions they are linked to. They
are not the only valid prompting events, however. Most important in
deciding whether or not to try to change an emotion is to ask wise mind
whether specific emotional responses are effective in the specific
situation for advancing important personal goals. Explain to
participants that emotions function to solve problems of common
situations we encounter. 1. Fear Fear functions to keep us safe by
urging us to escape danger through avoiding, running away, or hiding
from anything that threatens us. 2. Anger Anger functions to protect us
from assault or loss of important people, things, or goals by urging us
to threaten and attack those who might hurt us. 3. Disgust Disgust
functions to keep contamination away from us. It urges us to get rid of
or away from whatever we find disgusting. Emphasize that disgust is
related to people (including the self), as well as to things such as
foods, bodily fluids, or excrement. Consider the words we use sometimes
to describe such people or things ("slimy," "greasy," "smarmy,"
"scumbag," etc.). Example: Disgust keeps us from eating foods that will
poison us, getting into water that is so polluted it will kill us, and
picking up or touching things that might cause a disease. 4. Envy Envy
functions to motivate us to work hard to obtain what others have, in
order to improve our lives and those of people important to us. It can
also mobilize us to try to reduce what others have (when they have a lot
more than we do), in order to equalize the distribution of resources. In
this way, envy can be thought of as the emotion that redistributes
wealth and power. Envy often fits the facts when others may have a lot
more than we do in areas that are very important to us, and it is
ultimately unfair that we have less. The problem is that envy is so
often corrosive of the mind and spirit that it does us little good.
Bitterness is a common outcome of envy. Thus, because it does us little
good, it can be ineffective.

358 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 8a

Research Point: Research suggests that happiness is not determined by
the absolute value of an event or a person's situation, but by its value
in relation to other events or situations both interpersonally (among
those in the person's environment) and intrapersonally (compared to the
person's experience in the past).93 When others have more than we do,
not only does this generate envy, but it also adds to our unhappiness.
This is why envy is often ineffective, and why we might want to bring it
down even when it is justified.

5.  Jealousy Jealousy is justified when someone is threatening to take
    away relationships or things very important to us. Jealousy is the
    emotion that ensures we do everything possible to protect these
    relationships or things. We often do this by trying to control the
    actions of people we want close to us, or by refusing to share what
    we have with others. Note to Leaders: It can be very difficult to
    know when a relationship is threatened and when it is not. Many
    people can give examples of situations where they felt very safe
    within a relationship, only to have the person they loved suddenly
    leave for another person, without apparent warning signs. Checking
    the facts (Emotion Regulation Handout 8) can itself be a form of
    jealous behavior. The important question to ask here is this: "Is it
    effective to act jealous?"

6.  Love Love functions to motivate us to find, be with, and attach
    ourselves to other people and things. It is justified when those we
    love enhance our survival and well-being. Although one can argue
    that everyone and everything are lovable (and therefore love is
    always justified by the facts), one can also easily argue that
    sometimes we love the "wrong" people or things. This can be the case
    when we are in love with a person who does not love or care for
    us---or when the person we love actively harms us (such as in
    violent or otherwise abusive relationships, in friendships with
    individuals who require co-­dependence on addictive behaviors to
    sustain the relationship, or in friendship groups that threaten to
    abandon us if we improve our lives more than they do or want to).

7.  Sadness Sadness functions to pull us into ourselves so that we can
    figure out what is really important to us and what to do when we
    have lost important things. It also signals to others that help is
    needed.

8.  Shame Shame has two important functions. First, it prompts us to
    hide behaviors that would elicit rejection from others and lead to
    our being rejected from the community. Second, if our behavior
    somehow becomes public, shame prompts us to grovel and appease those
    we have offended so that we are not rejected. Shame is a
    community-based emotion. It is easy to conclude that if behaviors or
    personal characteristics are not immoral or wrong, then shame is
    never justified. This is not the case, however. Shame's evolutionary
    advantage is that if behaviors sanctioned by one's community elicit
    shame, then shame-based expressions and actions can keep one in the
    community. Although staying in a community that elicits shame may
    not be beneficial in many instances, it is not completely useless.
    It could have made the difference between life and death in earlier
    times, and may even do so now in some cultures or groups.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handouts 8a--9 • 359
Note to Leaders: If participants in skills training have a mental
disorder, the discussion of shame can be critical. It is important for
these participants to see that identifying themselves as having a mental
disorder, especially when this is done before others get to know them,
can not only result in rejection but can also increase a sense of shame.
In most cultures, shame is a justified emotion with respect to having a
mental disorder. Validate that this is not fair.

9.  Guilt Guilt functions by urging us to repair behaviors that violate
    our moral values, and to prevent future violations.

<!-- -->

IX. Preparing for Opposite Action and Problem Solving (Emotion
    Regulation Handout 9) Main Point: If checking the facts does not
    reduce unwanted emotions, we then have to decide which skill to try
    next: opposite action or problem solving. A flow chart can help us
    decide what skills to use for changing emotional reactions to
    situations. Emotion Regulation Handout 9: Opposite Action and
    Problem Solving: Deciding Which to Use. This handout is a flow chart
    to help participants figure out what skill to use to change frequent
    but unwanted emotions. It can be reviewed here to highlight that
    sometimes a participant has the facts straight and what has to
    change is the situation. Alternatively, you can make that point
    while reviewing opposite action, and then teach this handout as a
    review after teaching problem solving. The key to teaching and
    understanding this handout is in the examples, so be sure to give at
    least one example for each situation. Also, it can be useful to
    elicit examples at each point from participants. Emotion Regulation
    Worksheet 6: Figuring Out How to Change Unwanted Emotions
    (Optional). This worksheet mimics Handout 9, but has instructions
    for using the flow chart to decide what skills to use for changing
    emotions. Although this worksheet is optional, it can be extremely
    useful. You can use it for teaching instead of using Handout 9. If
    you do so, however, give out an extra copy. If it is given to
    participants, go over the instructions, and be sure participants
    understand how to use the flow chart.

99A. Three Ways to Change Unwanted Emotions Remind participants: "In
this module, we are focusing on three ways to change unwanted emotions."

99 99

 "Checking the facts has already been covered. Sometimes just knowing
the true facts can

change how you feel."  "Problem solving is changing your emotions by
avoiding, modifying, or solving the event

prompting the emotion." (This skill is covered in Section XI, after
opposite action.)  "Opposite action is changing your emotions by acting
opposite to your emotional urge to do

something." (This skill is covered next, in Section X.)

99B. When to Use Opposite Action versus Problem Solving Say to
participants: "The flow chart in Emotion Regulation Handout 9 is
designed to help you figure out when to practice opposite action and
when to practice problem solving. For both, you have to check the facts
first." Note to Leaders: It is important to reassure participants that
you are not telling them that the way to change all emotions is opposite
action. This can seem invalidating when the problem is a serious, ongo-

360 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 9

ing negative event in their lives. Point out that problem solving is
also important and that you will teach it after opposite action.

99

Now present the following instructions for following the Handout 9 flow
chart to participants. As you go through them, ask each of the questions
on the flow chart and then give a good example for that particular
situation (your own or from below). Start by asking: "Does this emotion
(and its intensity) fit the facts?" 1. If yes (the emotion fits the
facts), ask: "Is acting on this emotion effective?" a. If yes (the
emotion fits the facts) and yes (acting on the emotion is effective): 
"Be mindful of the current emotion. Suppressing or avoiding emotions you
do not want

is rarely useful, and positive emotions are to be enjoyed." Example:
"When you are afraid your 3-year-old daughter may be hit by a car as she
runs into a street with traffic, experience the fear. Don't try to
suppress it, or you may not run out and bring your child back to the
curb." Example: "When you are in love with a truly wonderful person,
enjoy and revel in it."

99

 "Act on the emotion. Follow your urges."

Example: "When you are afraid of walking down a very dangerous alley,
avoid it." Example: "When you are in love with a truly wonderful person,
be with the person." Example: "When you are ashamed about events in your
past that would likely result in social rejection if others knew about
them, keep them private."

99

 "Engage in problem solving."

Example: "When anxiety about money fits the facts because you are having
trouble paying your bills, create a budget and work on ways to cut
spending or bring in more money." Example: "When you are frequently
apart from the partner you love, find a way to get together more often."
Example: "When you are angry at being denied your apartment deposit
unjustly, use interpersonal effectiveness skills to fight to get it
back."

99 99

b.  If yes (the emotion fits the facts) but no (acting on the emotion is
    not effective):  "Do not act on the emotion. Consider opposite
    action."

Example: "You are on a mountain near the top. There was an avalanche
behind you, which blocks your ability to go back. There is a crevasse in
front of you, which is not impossible to jump over. You are terrified of
jumping but have no way to get help. You have waited a long while for
help but are now beginning to freeze. Acting on your fear and not
jumping will lead to your freezing to death. Opposite action is to
summon all your courage and jump." Example: "When a car cuts in front of
you, you're angry and have an urge to speed up and cut it off. Anger
fits the facts, but cutting off the other car is unlikely to be
effective; opposite action is to slow down and accept that some drivers
cut people off." Example: "Your mother is dying, and you are very sad,
but your mother cannot tolerate people being sad around her. Give her
cheerful news and focus on positive events." Example: "You have applied
for a lot of jobs, but haven't gotten any offers. You find a job opening
you could apply for that is just the job you are hoping for, but you are
afraid to apply for it because you think you might not get it. Acting on
your fear and not applying will not be effective. Opposite action is to
get your courage up and apply for the job."

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handouts 10--11 • 361

99 99 99

2.  If no (the emotion does not fit the facts) and no (acting on the
    emotion is not effective):

<!-- -->

a.  "Do not act on the emotion."
b.  "Change your thoughts to fit the facts. This is the easiest way to
    change emotions. When it works, nothing else is needed."
c.  "Do opposite action. At times, even knowing the facts does not
    change emotions. In these instances, changing your behavior to
    change your emotions will be more effective." Example: "If you fall
    off a horse that is not dangerous and are afraid to get back on, get
    back on." Example: "You are afraid to apply for jobs, because you
    think you will never get a job. Extremes, like 'I will never get a
    job,' are unlikely to fit the facts, and acting on your fear and not
    applying will not be effective. Opposite action is to get your
    courage up and start applying for jobs."

99 99

3.  If no (the emotion does not fit the facts) but yes (acting on the
    emotion is effective):

<!-- -->

a.  "Be mindful of current emotions. Effectiveness depends on your
    goals. At times an emotion is viewed as effective simply because it
    makes you feel good to experience the emotions."
b.  "Gracefully accept the consequences of acting on the emotion. Once
    you decide that an emotion that does not fit the facts is effective
    for your own goals, then it is important to remember that you may
    not like the consequences of acting on the emotion." Example: "If
    acting on anger is effective because it makes you feel good, then
    you may need to accept the consequence that it may put a strain on a
    relationship you value."

<!-- -->

X.  

Acting Opposite to the Current Emotion (Emotion Regulation Handouts
10--11) Main Point: When emotions do not fit the facts of a situation,
or do not lead to effective behavior, acting opposite to these emotions
will change the emotions if this is done repeatedly and all the way.
Emotion Regulation Handout 10: Opposite Action; Emotion Regulation
Handout 11: Figuring Out Opposite Action. Make every effort to review
Handouts 10 and 11 in the same session. Without examples, it can be hard
for participants to understand what an opposite action would look like.
Handout 11 is a multipage guide for identifying opposite actions for
nine specific emotions. Although the handout gives suggestions for
effective opposite actions, it is important to teach participants how to
identify their own action urges and how to figure out effective actions
opposite to those urges. Brief versions of the critical points are
summarized on Emotion Regulation Handout 13: Reviewing Opposite Action
and Problem Solving. It is not necessary to go over every line of every
emotion on Handout 10. You should, however, review several emotions so
that participants see how to use the handout. In our experience, helping
participants differentiate between jealousy and envy and between shame
and guilt can be very important. Because the situation that justifies
shame is not intuitively obvious (i.e., the threat of being kicked out
of the group if shameful behavior or personal characteristics are made
public), it is essential that you review this emotion at least briefly.
You can also go over each emotion, make one or two highlighting
comments, and then ask for questions. Or you can ask participants which
emotions they have questions about. I often assign reading through this
handout as homework. Emotion Regulation Worksheet 7: Opposite Action to
Change Emotions. The homework is to practice opposite action. Filling
out the worksheet is used to record the homework so that it can be
discussed. Review the worksheet with participants. If necessary,
instruct participants in how to rate intensity of emotions (0 = no
emotion, no discomfort; 100 = maximum emotion intensity, maximum
discomfort).

362 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 10

The "Before" and "After" spaces are for rating the intensity of an
emotion before and after practicing opposite action. If participants
have trouble figuring out what emotion they are feeling, instruct them
to review Emotion Regulation Handout 6, and/or to fill out Worksheet 4
or 4a. When analyzing whether the emotion is justified, participants
should focus on the prompting event. Thus it is important to remind
participants to be very specific in describing the facts surrounding the
prompting event. If necessary, review the mindfulness "what" skill of
describing.

99A. What Is Opposite Action? Opposite action is acting opposite to the
emotional urge to do or say something.

99B. Why Act Opposite?

Opposite action is an effective way to change or reduce unwanted
emotions when your emotion does not fit the facts. The old adage "If you
fall off a horse, get back on it," is an example of acting opposite to
fear's urge to avoid the horse. Most effective treatments for emotional
disorders ask clients to reverse the expression and action components of
problem emotions. Some psychotherapists believe this is why these
treatments work. Here are some of these treatments:  Behavioral
activation---that is, doing the opposite of avoidance behaviors, such as
isolating,

inactivity, and rumination---is an effective treatment for depression.94
Exposure-based treatments, which involve doing the opposite of avoiding
and escaping feared events, are effective treatments for anxiety
disorders.95  Effective treatments for anger stress learning to identify
the cues to frustration and/or anger, and then leaving the situation to
cool down rather than going on the attack.96 Note to Leaders: It is
essential to get across to participants the rationale for this technique
and to elicit their cooperation. See the section on exposure-based
procedures in Chapter 11 of the main DBT text for a more extensive
discussion.

C. When Opposite Action Works Best

99

1.  When Knowing the Facts about a Situation Does Not Work Say to
    participants: "When knowing the facts about a situation does not
    work to change your emotional responses, then opposite action can be
    effective." Example: "Knowing something is not dangerous, but still
    being very afraid of it. This is very common." Examples: "Finding
    out a person did not intend to hurt you, but still feeling angry;
    knowing your husband loves you and will never leave you, but
    reacting with jealousy when he looks at beautiful women." Example:
    "Being loved and completely accepted by your friends, but still
    hiding your body out of shame when you are in the locker room with
    them." Example: "Knowing that asking your boss for a raise is not a
    threat to your well-being or safety, but still not getting yourself
    to ask." Example: "Knowing intellectually that your behavior in a
    specific situation was not immoral, but still feeling guilty."

99

2.  When the Emotion (or Its Intensity or Duration) Is Not Justified by
    the Situation Tell participants: "When your emotion---or its
    strength, or the length of time it lasts---is not justified by the
    situation, opposite action can be effective. Problem solving is
    needed when an emotion is justified by the situation."

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 10 • 363

Emphasize that emotions are not justified when they do not fit the facts
of the actual situation. Note to Leaders: Evaluating whether an emotion
is justified by the facts is similar to determining whether a person has
an anxiety disorder or not. For example, a diagnosis of specific phobia
requires that the fear or its intensity is irrational, given the facts;
in social phobia, fear or anxiety must be out of proportion in frequency
and/or duration to the actual situation.97 The term "unjustified by the
facts" is used here to avoid using the term "irrational."

Example: "You are told a person said mean and untrue things about you
(prompting anger) when in fact he did not." Example: "When your boss is
introducing a new manager to your work group, she praises two of your
co-­workers, but not you (prompting fear and hurt). Then you find out she
didn't say anything about you because she had praised you excessively to
the manager just an hour previously." Example: "The person you love
actively harms you, such as in a violent or otherwise abusive
relationship, or friends that you love require you to share their
dependence on addictive behaviors to sustain the relationship."
Discussion Point: Elicit examples of situations where participants have
experienced emotions that they then discovered did not fit the facts.
Note to Leaders: You can say that if an emotion does not fit the facts,
the emotion is not justified, and that this means it is not justified by
the facts. Asking whether an emotion is justified is a shorthand way of
asking if the emotion fits the facts. Some therapists or skills trainers
(more clinicians than participants, in my experience) find it difficult
to say to a person that the person's emotion is not justified. Generally
this is because the clinicians believe that this invalidates the emotion
and the person. It is important to remember that a behavior or emotional
response can be understandable, while at the same time not being valid.
If you or your participants have a lot of trouble with the term
"justified," you can substitute "fits the facts" or another term. When
you are changing a term, however, it is important not to "fragilize" the
participants. "Fragilize" is a word I invented for DBT; it means
treating participants as if they are fragile and unable to tolerate,
learn, or do what is needed. The idea is that treating a person as
fragile can have the unintended effect of increasing fragility.

99

Practice Exercise: Tell the following story: "You are going into your
office, and when you open your office door you see a poisonous snake
hissing and moving near you. You slam the door and are afraid to open it
again." Then ask: "Is fear in that situation justified?" ( The answer is
yes. Fear fits the facts and is justified.) Now continue the story.
"Overnight, your office manager gets someone to come in and get rid of
the poisonous snake. It is no longer in your office, and there are no
snakes in your building. You get to the office, but no one tells you
that the snake has been removed from your office. You are afraid to open
the door to your office." Then ask: "Is fear justified now?" (The answer
is no.) Most likely, however, almost all participants will say yes. The
reason is that they think if fear is understandable (there is no way of
knowing that the snake is no longer in the office), it is also
justified. Discuss how an emotion can be understandable but still not
justified by the facts. Note to Leaders: The point that emotions can be
understandable and at the same time not justified by the facts can be
very difficult for participants (and often for skills trainers also) to
grasp. The main problem is that people often think that if a response is
reasonable (such as grieving for a son one has been told is dead when he
is in fact alive), then it must be justified. Your task here is to
disentangle these two ideas. An emotional response can be both
reasonable and unjustified. Give extreme examples to make

364 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 10

your point. Use examples both where someone is told the wrong facts and
where a misinterpretation of the facts is reasonable.

Discussion Point: Solicit from participants and discuss other times when
information appears to fit the facts but does not.

99

3.  When the Emotion (or Its Intensity or Duration) Is Not Effective for
    Meeting Goals in the Situation Continue: "When your emotion---or its
    strength, or the length of time it lasts---is not effective for
    meeting your goals in the situation, opposite action works.
    Sometimes your emotions may fit the facts very well, but
    experiencing and expressing the emotion may do you little good and
    may even cause you harm. In considering opposite action, it is
    important to think through whether your emotional responses are
    effective." Example: "Your boss criticizes you in front of people
    you are trying to impress, and then asks for your opinion on an
    important point. If you want to impress your boss and others at the
    meeting with your competence, responding with anger may not be in
    your best interest, even though anger would be justified." Example:
    "You are in the middle of driving on the cliff side of a high,
    two-lane, winding mountain road. You look down; there is no guard
    rail, and the road is very narrow. You are suddenly overcome with
    intense fear; however, panic may actually cause you to go over the
    cliff rather than keep you safe. Freezing by stopping your car and
    refusing to go forward is also not an effective option." Example:
    "Just before you go for your driver's test, you get news that you
    did not get into the school you applied to. Intense disappointment
    and perhaps anxiety fit the facts, but these emotions might also
    interfere with doing well on the driver's test." Example: "A car
    wreck creates a long backup when you are in a hurry to get
    somewhere, and you get angry. Being angry does not help you safely
    get to your destination faster." Note to Leaders: When evaluating
    whether emotions are effective, participants can use Emotion
    Regulation Worksheet 1 or 2. If they are unsure of goals, you might
    introduce Emotion Regulation Worksheet 11 or 11a: Getting from
    Values to Specific Action Steps.

Discussion Point: Elicit examples where an emotional reaction has been
well justified by the situation, but experiencing and/or expressing the
emotion has been ineffective.

4.  When You Are Avoiding What Needs to Be Done Go on: "Sometimes the
    issue is not really whether an emotion fits the facts, but rather
    whether acting on your urges has the outcome of avoiding doing
    things that you need to do. If you find that you are avoiding doing
    something for this reason, opposite action can be effective."
    Example: "You are depressed and want to stay in bed all day; you
    want to isolate yourself and avoid everyone and everything. Getting
    up and active, and engaging with people rather than avoiding them,
    however, are necessary to reduce the depression." Example: "You are
    so anxious that you don't want to engage in a treatment that will
    reduce your anxiety. Acting on your urge to avoid, however, will
    lead to more anxiety." Example: "You borrowed a friend's book with
    an inscription from a famous person, and you promised to return it.
    You have lost it on a camping trip, however, and are avoiding going
    anywhere near where your friend might be, because you don't want to
    let your friend find out

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 10 • 365

that you lost the book. Unless you want to stop being friends, you will
have to tell your friend what happened sooner or later. This calls for
opposite action." Example: "After looking for a job for 2 years, you get
a fabulous job offer at a nursing home for elderly people. A small part
of your job will be to manage the bodies of people when they die. You
are terrified of dead bodies. This calls for opposite action if you want
the job."

99D. How to Do Opposite Action, Step by Step Note to Leaders: Do not
skip any of the steps 1--7, as it is important that participants have a
good grasp of how and when to use opposite action.

99

1.  Identify and Name the Emotion You Want to Change Instruct
    participants: "Use Emotion Regulation Handout 6 or Emotion
    Regulation Worksheets 4 or 4a, if necessary. Then fill in the
    emotion's name and rate its intensity (0--100) on Worksheet 7:
    Opposite Action to Change Emotions."

99

2.  Check the Facts Tell participants: "The second step can be difficult
    to figure out. Is there any chance you have misinterpreted a
    situation or missed important facts about the situation? Check the
    facts to be sure."

<!-- -->

a.  Ask: Does the Emotion Fit the Facts of the Situation?

Continue: "Ask yourself: 'Is the emotion a reasonable response, given
the situation? Is it justified by the facts?' If your answer is no, move
to Steps 3 and 4. If you need to, use Emotion Regulation Handouts 8, 8a,
or 11. The last two list the major events (or sets of facts) that
ordinarily justify specific emotions. You can also use Emotion
Regulation Worksheet 5 to check the facts if necessary."

99

3.  Identify and Describe Your Action Urges Say: "Pay attention to your
    impulses, desires, and cravings. Focus on what you feel like doing
    or saying. Ask yourself: 'What do I feel like doing? What do I want
    to say?' Review Emotion Regulation Handout 6 for some ideas if you
    can't figure it out."

99

4.  Ask Wise Mind: Is Expressing or Acting on This Emotion Effective in
    This Situation? Go on: "Ask wise mind: 'If I act on my urge, will it
    make things better or worse? Will acting on my emotion solve the
    problem I am faced with? Is expressing my emotion a wise thing to
    do?' If the answer is no, move to Step 5."

99

5.  Act Opposite to the Emotion's Urges Say to participants: "If you
    have gotten this far in the process, you have decided that your
    emotion is not justified by the facts or not effective for your
    goals. So you should do the opposite of your action urges. Look over
    Emotion Regulation Handouts 11 and 13 for ideas on possible opposite
    actions for various emotions."

<!-- -->

a.  Do the Opposite of Your Actual Action Urges

Instruct participants: "Do the opposite of what your own, actual action
urges are. Do not blindly follow the actions in Handouts 11 and 13." The
reason for this instruction is this: The opposite actions17 in these
handouts assume that emotions are relatively straightforward and have
universal and identifiable common action urges. Emotions, however, are
often much more complex and may be a blend of several emotions occurring
all at the same time. The

366 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 10

expression and action urges may be unique to that blended emotion. Even
when an emotion is simple and easy to identify, its action urges may be
unique to an individual or to the individual's cultural or ethnic group.
Practice Exercise: Ask participants to close their eyes and imagine a
situation during the past week when they felt angry. Instruct them to
imagine the situation and the interaction as if it were happening in the
present moment. Then ask them to notice how they feel. Now, as they
continue to imagine, instruct them to relax their fingers and their arms
and turn the palms of their hands upward on their thighs (if they are
sitting) or at their sides (if they are standing). Suggest that they
relax their faces from forehead to chin, smoothing them out as much as
possible, and then turn the corners of their mouths slightly up. Ask
them to notice their emotions again. It is common for people to report a
lowering in anger. Explain: "This is opposite action with the hands and
face." Note to Leaders: In this exercise, you are teaching "willing
hands" and "half-­smiling" as opposite actions. Both are actions opposite
of anger. See Distress Tolerance Handout 14 for a fuller set of
instructions and rationale for half-­smiling and willing hands.

b.  Let Opposite Actions Do the Work; Do Not Suppress Emotions

Go on: "Let your opposite action do the work for you. Don't try to
suppress your emotional experiences or feelings. If you try to suppress
an emotion while doing opposite action, then you are not letting the
strategy work---and it may not work. If you experience your emotion, all
the while keeping your eyes, ears, and senses open, then you will learn
in a fundamental way that, indeed, the emotion is not justified. Once
your brain gets that information encoded, you will find your emotional
reaction going down, down, down over time. Opposite action is a strategy
that works over time to reduce your unwanted emotional reactions. If it
does not seem to be working, give it time." Practice Exercise: Have
participants close their eyes and pay attention to sensations in their
faces. Guide them in noting any areas of tension. Now instruct
participants to imagine a situation during the past week when they felt
sad or worried. While thinking about it, they should again notice
sensations in their faces. Instruct participants to raise a hand
slightly to signal to you when they have the situation in mind. Now, as
they continue to imagine, instruct them to try to mask the feelings so
that no one else in the room (if anyone was looking) would know what
they were feeling. Have them notice the sensations in their faces; have
them notice what happens to their emotions. Next, instruct each person
to relax the muscles in the face, smoothing them out as much as
possible. Have participants notice how their emotions change (or don't
change); have them notice how different their faces feel. It is common
for people to report that when they relax their faces, they feel much
more vulnerable. Explain: "This means you are allowing feelings to come
and go. You are not holding them in or pushing them out."

99

6.  Do Opposite Action All the Way Emphasize to participants: "When you
    do opposite action, do it all the way. This means opposite posture,
    facial expression, thinking, what you say, and how you say it.
    'Halfway' opposite action does not work. It is important to work on
    every part of your response to make sure your opposite action is
    done all the way. See Emotion Regulation Handouts 11 and 13 for
    ideas."

<!-- -->

a.  Examples of Halfway Opposite Words and Opposite Thinking

Example: "Going to a party to try to reduce your social phobia, but
spending all your time looking down and standing in corners, is halfway
opposite action."

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 10 • 367

Example: "Getting on a plane to reduce your fear of flying, but
thinking, 'It's going to crash,' is halfway opposite action." Example:
"Acting kind and sweet to reduce anger or disgust, but thinking, 'You
jerk! How disgusting!', is halfway opposite action." Example: "Answering
a question in a group to reduce feeling humiliated when you are talking
in these settings, and then saying, 'Oh, that was so stupid!', is
halfway opposite action." b. Examples of Halfway Opposite Facial
Expression, Opposite Voice Tone, and Opposite Posture

Example: "Saying, 'I understand your point,' to reduce irritation, but
saying it with a sarcastic voice tone, is halfway opposite action."
Example: "Going to the park with your children to reduce sadness, but
doing this with a very sad facial expression and slumped posture, is
halfway opposite action." Example: "Slumping and looking like you are
trying to hide when you reveal actions you are ashamed of is halfway
opposite action." c. Halfway Opposite Actions Don't Work

Say: "As you can see from these examples, changing your thinking and
your emotional expressions without changing your emotional actions very
rarely works. The central aspects of this skill are figuring out what
your emotional action urge is, figuring out what the opposite action
would be, and then doing it." Discussion Point: Elicit from participants
examples of times when they or others have done halfway opposite
actions. What effect did it have? Check how people felt during and after
doing halfway opposite actions. Practice Exercise: Elicit from
participants times they have tried to change their own emotions by
acting opposite to the emotion urge---for example, by going to a party
they are afraid to go to, or letting a boyfriend or girlfriend out of
their sight to get over jealousy. Then have participants role-play or
demonstrate acting opposite all the way and then acting opposite
halfway. If participants do not want to act scenes out, get them to
describe situations where they did opposite actions only halfway. Note
to Leaders: It is important to note again that you are not suggesting
suppressing emotions, which many participants may have learned to do
quite effectively already. Opposite action, in some ways, is even the
opposite action of suppressing emotions.97, 98

99

7.  Continue Acting Opposite until the Emotion Goes Down Tell
    participants: "Act opposite in a situation long enough for it to
    work. That is, keep doing it until you notice your emotion coming
    down in intensity even just a little bit." Also, emphasize the need
    for practice: "Repeat opposite action over and over every chance you
    have. Sometimes opposite action works immediately. Most of the time,
    however, you have to practice a lot to get over habitual unjustified
    emotions. You also sometimes have to practice a lot to get over an
    emotion that was justified by a situation for years, but now is
    not." Example: "If you are anxious when talking in groups, it may
    take a lot of times talking in friendly groups to reduce anxiety
    about it. This is also true of people who do public speaking. It is
    usual to feel very anxious at first, and then, over time and many
    practices, to feel much more comfortable."

368 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handouts 10--11

Example: "If you are ashamed of something you have done, even though you
will not be rejected by your friends if they find out, you may have to
talk about it multiple times in your group before you stop feeling
ashamed." Discussion Point: Elicit from participants examples of times
when they have done the opposite of their emotional urges and found that
over time their emotional reactions changed. Fear is generally the
easiest emotion to work with, so you may want to start with that first.
Then ask for other emotions where opposite action has worked.

99E. Figuring Out Opposite Actions Review Emotion Regulation Handout 11
with participants. Note to Leaders: The justification for each emotion
listed in Emotion Regulation Handout 11 and below is related to the
evolutionary function of the emotion. Examples of situations that
ordinarily elicit the primary emotions are very similar to those listed
in Emotion Regulation Handout 8a. (Review this handout with
participants, if necessary.) Fear is placed first below, because
opposite action when there is no actual danger makes sense to just about
everyone. You need to give many examples, starting with the proverbial
example of getting back on a horse after falling off. Anger is placed
after fear, because people so frequently confuse anger with fear. Note
that for each emotion in Handout 11, there is a line for participants to
put in a personal example that may justify the emotion. Although there
is much commonality across cultures in eliciting events for basic
emotions, there may be variations on the relationship of situations to
emotions across cultures, and it is important to be open to these. This
can be a good place to ask participants to put down such information, if
appropriate. Do not let participants drift too far off course. Be sure
that the situation itself elicits an emotion, not an individual's
interpretation of the situation. New facts that justify an emotion
should be common or normative in the person's culture, not idiosyncratic
to a person or family. Finally, the suggestions for opposite action are
just that---­suggestions.

1.  Fear Tell participants: "When fear is not justified, approach what
    you fear rather than avoid it. Do what you are afraid to do rather
    than avoid it." Practice Exercise: The very best practice exercises
    for opposite action to fear, or to any emotion, are those in which
    you can get participants to act differently from how they feel right
    in the group. Over and over across modules, look for opportunities
    to instruct members to do their best not to act in accord with their
    emotions of the moment. For example, when people want to leave a
    session out of anxiety, anger, hurt feelings, or panic, instruct
    them to stay, orienting them to how staying is practicing acting
    opposite to their emotions. Periodically ask, "What do you do when
    you are afraid?" Coach participants until they can always chime out,
    "Do what you are afraid of!" "What do you do when you're depressed?"
    "Get active!" "What do you do when you feel guilty?" "Figure out if
    it is justified, and either repair it (if it is) or do it over and
    over and over (if not)!" And so on. Drill members until they have
    this cold.

2.  Anger Say to participants: "When anger is not justified, gently
    avoid the person you are angry with, rather than attacking. Also
    avoid thinking about him or her, rather than ruminating about all
    the terrible things the person has done. Distract yourself. Do
    something kind rather than mean. Try to see the other person's point
    of view rather than blaming them. Practice half-­smiling and/ or
    willing hands."

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handouts 10--11 • 369
Note to Leaders: As mentioned in an earlier note, see Distress Tolerance
Handouts 14 and 14a for instructions on how to teach half-­smiling and
willing (open) hands. Half-­smiling here replaces anger's scowling or
hostile grinning, so it is particularly important that the face is
completely relaxed before a person engages in a half smile.

Practice Exercise: Briefly teach participants how to half-smile if you
have not covered it already. Have participants close their eyes and
imagine the person they are angry with. Instruct them: "Bring to mind
what the person has done that has caused so much anger. Notice your
emotions." After a few minutes, instruct participants: "While you
continue to think about the person and what he or she has done, relax
your whole face. Relax your forehead, relax your eyes, relax your
cheeks, and let your jaw relax (teeth slightly apart). Then half-smile
ever so slightly. Continue half-­ smiling, and notice your emotions."
Discuss any changes that occurred. Practice Exercise: Repeat the
exercise above. But instead of half-­smiling, instruct participants in
willing hands if you have not covered it already. Substitute willing
hands for half-­smiling in the exercise above. Discuss any changes that
occur. Practice Exercise: Repeat the exercise with either half-­smiling
or willing hands. But now add: "Attempt in your mind to consider the
feelings, thoughts, and wishes of the person you are angry with. Try to
validate aspects of the other person's behavior, if only in terms of the
behavior being caused. Notice your emotions. Discuss any changes that
occur. Discuss experiences." Note to Leaders: No matter which of these
three practice exercises you use, it is important to tell participants
to choose a person they have been angry with recently, but not to choose
a person who has abused or traumatized them unless they are very sure
they are ready to handle their emotions. This is particularly important
if participants have PTSD that has not yet been treated.

3.  Disgust Instruct participants: "When disgust is not justified---that
    is, there is no danger of contamination or harm---bring the food or
    item that you find disgusting very close to you, and keep it close
    while distracting yourself from irrelevant disgusting thoughts. Or
    embrace a person you find disgusting, once you find out that your
    perception was inaccurate." Note that increased exposure to a person
    results in increased liking for that person.100, 102 But add: "The
    exception here is that this is true primarily for people who are
    similar to you. If it becomes clear after spending more time with a
    person that this person is dissimilar to you, liking may
    decrease."101 Discussion Point: Elicit examples of things people
    have found disgusting in the past that they no longer find
    disgusting. Discuss what made their disgust go down over time.
    Examples may include foods participants found disgusting in
    childhood, changing diapers the first few times, or taking care of a
    sick relative or another patient. Practice Exercise: Bring in
    something very safe (such as durian fruit or fish sauce) that has a
    terrible odor. Have each person keep smelling the odor until
    participants acclimate to the smell.

4.  Envy Say: "When envy is not justified, the opposite action is to
    count your blessings and inhibit urges to diminish what others
    have."

370 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 11

5.  Jealousy Say: "When jealousy is not justified---in other words,
    there is no threat at all to what you have or possess---­opposite
    action is to let go of controlling others or the situation and to
    share what you have with others."

6.  Love Say: "When love is not justified---that is, you love an
    inappropriate or wrong person or thing---­ opposite action is to
    avoid and distract from the person or thing that is loved and all
    reminders, including loving thoughts, and to remind yourself
    constantly of why love is unjustified." Example: "The person you
    love does not love you." Example: "Friends require you to share
    their dependence on addictive behaviors to sustain the
    relationship." Example: "Friendship groups threaten to abandon you
    if you improve your life more than the other members do or want to."
    Example: "You have difficulties moving away from home, changing
    schools, jobs, or residences, ending relationships (such as therapy,
    teacher--­student, or boss--­employee relationships), or tolerating
    friends moving away." Example: "You are overly attached to
    possessions, rituals, or habits." Discussion Point: Elicit examples
    of situations where participants have "loved too much" or been too
    attached to persons, places, or things. How did they "recover"?

7.  Sadness Say: "When sadness is not justified, and particularly when
    you are also depressed, get active. Do things that make you feel
    competent and self-­confident, rather than being passive. Increase
    rewarding activities and pleasant events. Approach, don't avoid."
    Example: "When you lose a credit card, you have to call and get it
    canceled to move forward, not sit around being sad that you lost
    it." Note to Leaders: Sadness and disappointment are normal emotions
    and are often justified by the facts. They become problematic when
    they outlive their usefulness. The behaviors of sadness (e.g.,
    slowing down, isolation, ruminating about what is lost) can by
    themselves create a situation in which it is very difficult to stop
    feeling sad. This can lead to a vicious cycle of depression, which
    also slows us down, often includes isolation, and so can keep
    regenerating over and over the very depression we are trying to get
    out of.

8.  Shame Say: "When shame is not justified, there is no threat of being
    rejected by others. The opposite action for shame is to stop hiding
    your behavior with people who you know won't reject you. If your
    behavior violates your own moral values, but you will not be
    rejected by others if they know about your behavior, act on the
    emotion of guilt \[see next page\]---but do not act on the emotion
    of shame. For example, instead of avoiding a person when you lost
    something you borrowed from him or her, meet with the person,
    apologize, and offer to replace the borrowed item. If, in contrast,
    your behavior does not violate your own moral values, reduce shame
    by repeating the behavior over and over in a group that will not
    reject you."

99

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants examples of behaviors and
personal characteristics that can get people devalued and ejected from
groups. Behaviors might include criminal behaviors; personal
characteristics might include race, sexual orientation, weight/other
physical character-

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 11 • 371

istics, mental disorder, criminal convictions, family origins, and
personal history. Discuss how cultural values change, and how with these
changes what is "shameful" also changes. Ask about cultural values when
participants were children as opposed to now. Note to Leaders: Remember,
behavior and personal characteristics can be moral and valued by the
individual, and yet shame can still be justified if others the person
cares about will ostracize him or her for that behavior or those
personal characteristics. In these situations, it can be important to
fight the social norms of the group and advocate to change its values.

9.  Guilt Say: "When guilt is not justified---that is, your behavior
    does not violate your own values or moral code---­several opposite
    actions might be called for. The main opposite action is to continue
    with the behavior and stop apologizing for it. If your behavior
    violates other people's values but not your own (so shame is
    justified but guilt is not), you can either hide the behavior (this
    might be important if the community is one you want to stay in and
    the community might kick you out if they know about your behavior);
    leave and join a different community; or try to change your
    community's values. In the third case, social action to change
    community values would also be a form of opposite action to shame."
    Note to Leaders: If participants don't know what their own values or
    moral codes are, it can be hard for them to know whether they have
    actually violated them. See Emotion Regulation Handout 18 for a list
    of possible values that may be helpful in figuring this out. You can
    also suggest readings from the commandments and precepts of the
    world's major religions as a starting point. Remember to be
    respectful of participants from various religious traditions, as
    well as of those without a religion. If you are treating a person or
    group from a single religion, you might want to present only the
    commandments/precepts of that religion.

<!-- -->

a.  Differentiating "Values" and "Moral Codes"

Although values and moral codes are very similar, they can be
differentiated. As the term is used here, a "moral code" is a set of
beliefs about what behaviors are wrong or immoral (or, in some
vocabularies, sinful). "Values," in contrast, are what is viewed as
important and valuable in one's life. Although there may be an overlap
between behaviors that are important to avoid and behaviors that violate
one's moral code, they are not identical ideas. Values usually refer to
what one wants to do in life. Morals usually refer to what one wants to
avoid doing. This, again, is not an absolute truth, but it is useful for
teaching these concepts. People and cultures may have different views
about what behaviors are moral and immoral. Morality can be learned by
observation, by consequences while being raised, or by indirect
teaching. Our personal moral codes may have been learned in school or in
attending religious activities. Some people can articulate their own
moral codes very clearly. Others who may be just as moral would have
difficulties describing their moral codes. Note to Leaders: Summarize
opposite action before going on. Make sure that participants understand
the concept clearly and know how to use the skill effectively.

F. Troubleshooting Note to Leaders: If participants say that opposite
action is not working, it is important that you do troubleshooting to
figure out the problem. Review all the steps of opposite action above
and in Emotion Regulation Handout 10, to be sure the procedures are
being carried out according to the directions.

372 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handouts 11--12

1.  Is the Emotion Actually Unjustified by the Facts of the Situation?
    If the emotion is really justified by the facts, problem solving
    could be a better way to reduce the emotion.
2.  Are Participants' Actions Really Opposite to Their Action Urges?
    Perhaps participants are following Emotion Regulation Handout 11 too
    closely, rather than paying attention to their own individual action
    urges.
3.  Was Opposite Action Done All the Way? Check out participants'
    automatic thoughts during opposite action. You might want to ask
    them to demonstrate how they did it. Often you will find that voice
    tone, eye gaze, and posture were really not carried out all the way,
    even though the participants thought they were.
4.  Review "Before" and "After" Emotion Intensity Ratings Was a person's
    opposite action so brief that the individual did not learn anything
    new? Check the person's emotion intensity ratings before and after
    the opposite action, and discuss whether the person was actually
    processing the information in the situation.
5.  Remind Participants That Opposite Action Can Take Time Children do
    not get over their fears of ghosts under the bed by looking under
    the bed one time. Similarly, opposite action does not work if it is
    only carried out once or a few times.

<!-- -->

XI. Problem Solving (Emotion Regulation Handout 12) Main Point: When an
    emotion is justified by the situation, avoiding or changing the
    situation may be the best way to change one's emotion. Problem
    solving is the first step in changing difficult situations. Emotion
    Regulation Handout 12: Problem Solving. The steps in problem solving
    are clearly laid out in this handout. Consider starting with one or
    two sample problems from participants. Put them up on a whiteboard,
    and then review each step for each problem. If you start by
    eliciting more than one problem to work on, be sure you have
    sufficient time to complete all the steps for all problems. Emotion
    Regulation Worksheet 8: Problem Solving to Change Emotions. The
    homework for this skill is to practice solving problems that elicit
    unwanted emotions. Filling out the worksheet can be helpful in
    figuring out the problem and how to solve it. But actually solving
    the problem (i.e., taking Steps 5 and 6) is most important for
    changing emotions. It is useful to review both pages of this
    worksheet with participants, to be sure they understand what to
    write where. As with reviewing previous worksheets, tell
    participants to begin by writing down the emotion name and the
    starting ("Before") intensity of the emotion. If necessary, remind
    participants of how to rate the intensity of emotions (0 = no
    emotion; 100 = maximum intensity). The "After" space is for the
    intensity rating after implementing a solution. For problems you
    have worked on in the group, you might want to demonstrate how the
    worksheet would be filled out.

99A. Why Learn Problem Solving? Say to participants: "When an unwanted
emotion fits the facts, the facts are the problem, and you need problem
solving. In addition, the ability to solve problems is a basic skill
that everyone needs in order to build a life worth living. It is one of
the core skills necessary for improving emotion regulation or solving
emotional problems."

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 12 • 373

1.  Solving Problem Situations Can Change Difficult Emotions The
    specific type of problem solving covered here focuses on solving
    problem situations that elicit unwanted emotions. When the situation
    is the problem, the problem-­solving skills described here are called
    for. Most importantly, when the emotion that one wants to change is
    justified by the situation, changing the situation may be the best
    way to change one's emotions. Problem solving is the first step in
    changing difficult situations.

99

2.  Problem Solving Is Needed When Acting on an Emotion Is Not Likely to
    Be Effective Problem solving as a coping strategy increases the
    probability of effective coping with a wide range of problematic
    situations. In contrast to skills that are automatic and effortless
    (at least after a lot of practice), problem solving ordinarily
    requires a conscious and focused effort aimed at developing and
    applying new solutions to the problems one encounters in everyday
    life.

B. Acknowledge When There Is a Problem to Be Solved Tell participants:
"Before starting problem solving, you have to recognize that there is
indeed a problem to be solved." 1. Types of Problem Situations a.
Situations or People That Elicit Painful or Destructive Emotions

Situations or persons that bring out painful or destructive emotions
call for problem solving, even if we do not immediately see what could
be done to change a situation or to deal differently with a person. b.
Situations or People That Are Habitually Avoided Because They Cause
Painful Emotions

Situations or persons that we tend to avoid because they bring out
painful emotions definitely call for problem solving---­particularly if
our avoidance interferes with getting what we want in life. c. One-Time
Problem Situations

One-time problem situations---for example, not having a ride to an
important appointment, or having an acute illness---call for problem
solving. d. Repeated Problem Situations

When problem situations tend to occur over and over---such as repeatedly
being misinterpreted by a friend, or repeatedly failing important
exams---­problem solving can break the cycle. e. Repeated Failures to
Inhibit Destructive or Ineffective Behavior

A special type of repeated problem situation involves repeatedly failing
to keep from engaging in behaviors that are destructive or ineffective.
Such behaviors include self-harm, substance abuse, angry outbursts,
missing work or therapy, or not doing therapy or school assignments.
f. Chronic Problem Situations

Ongoing situations that create continual misery in life---such as living
with a partner who is abusive, or working in a job one hates---may call
for problem solving most strongly of all.

99

2.  Defining Problems: Let Go of Judgmentalness

<!-- -->

a.  Problems Are Specific to Persons and Situations

Situations that are a problem for one person may not be a problem for
another. Also, the very same painful emotion may be caused by very
different situations depending on the person.

374 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 12

b.  Problems Are Specific to Time and Circumstances

The same situation may be a problem at one time, but not at another
time, depending on changing circumstances within the same person. Note
to Leaders: Problem solving is easiest to teach if you try to solve a
problem you have (or think up), or a problem offered by one of the
participants, assuming that the problem is not too complex. When solving
the problem be sure to review and model steps 1--7 below.

99C. Seven Basic Steps in Problem Solving102 99 1. Observe and Describe
the Problem Situation a. Describe the Situation

Tell participants: "First, use the mindfulness 'what' skill of
describing to give just the facts of the situation." (Refer them to
Mindfulness Handout 4, if necessary.) b. Describe What Is Problematic
about the Situation

Say: "Next, describe just what about the situation is problematic.
Include the consequences of the situation that make it a problem for
you." Example 1: "Not having a ride to an important appointment means I
can't get to my appointment; I am afraid I will miss it." Example 2:
"Being ill is not only distressing, but makes it hard for me to do a
good job at work; I am worried about the quality of my work." Example 3:
"Repeatedly being misinterpreted by my friend creates conflict; it makes
me irritated; it makes me want to stop talking with my friend." Example
4: "Failing important exams might lead to my failing the course; I need
the course to graduate; I am afraid I may not graduate." Example 5:
"Destructive and ineffective behavior ensures that I will not be able to
build a life I want to live." Example 6: "Living with a partner who is
abusive is very painful and feels threatening; I feel ashamed that I
have not done anything about this." Example 7: "Working in a job I hate
is a big factor in my not having a life I want to live; I hate my job
more each day." c. Describe the Obstacles to Solving the Problem

Continue: "Now describe the conflicts or other obstacles making it hard
for you to solve this problem." Example 1: "By the time I find another
way to get to my appointment, it will be too late, and I will miss it."
Example 2: "I don't have enough money to get the medicine I need to feel
better." Example 3: "This is just about my only friend, and I am afraid
of alienating her and losing her friendship." Example 4: "I don't know
what to do to get better grades. I study, but I can't seem to understand
the material." Example 5: "I don't know what sets off my problem
behaviors." Example 6: "If I leave my abusive partner, I will have no
one who loves me." Example 7: "I don't have another job to go to. I
can't afford not to have a job."

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 12 • 375

Practice Exercise: Elicit examples of current problems from
participants. Write them on a board. Include a description, the
participants' emotions, the problematic consequences of the situation,
and any conflicts or other obstacles evident in the situation. When you
are doing this in large groups, you can "fill in the blanks" as needed
to move the process along.

99

2.  Check the Facts If necessary, refer participants to Emotion
    Regulation Handouts 8 and 8a.

<!-- -->

a.  Ask: Are My Facts Correct?

Often we respond to our interpretations of situations, rather than to
the situations themselves. Our interpretations may be correct; they may
also be incorrect. It is important to check the facts. b. Ask: How
Distressing Is the Situation?

It is easy to catastrophize a situation and make it into a much bigger
problem than it really is. Radical acceptance and other distress
tolerance skills are ways to help us reduce emotion, stop
catastrophizing, and see the problem situation more clearly. c. Ask: Do
the Conflicts or Other Obstacles I've Described Reflect the Facts of the
Situation?

It is also important to check the facts about conflicts or other
obstacles. In periods of emotional distress, it is easy to see many more
obstacles than are really there. Interpersonal situations that feel like
conflicts in one emotional state may feel like minor disagreements in
another emotional state. Note to Leaders: At times it can be extremely
difficult for participants to pinpoint what has set off problem
behaviors or what is getting in the way of change. When this is the
case, it can be useful for participants to do a chain analysis on
themselves to trace the events that led up to a problem behavior or
painful emotion. If you have not reviewed the section on analyzing
behavior in Chapter 6 and have time, review it here. It may be useful to
teach here General Handout 7: Chain Analysis and General Handout 8:
Missing-Links Analysis. If so, be sure to include a procedure for giving
feedback on participants' use of General Worksheets 2 and 3.

Practice Exercise: Check the facts for the problem descriptions written
on the board in Step 1. If the descriptions are clearly factual, move to
the next step. It may also be useful to elicit from participants times
when they responded to a situation as if it were a major problem when it
really wasn't. Modeling examples of this can be useful as well.

99

3.  Identify Your Goal in Solving the Problem Go on: "The third step is
    to identify your goal in solving the problem. Keep it simple and
    something you can really achieve. Naturally, the ultimate goal is to
    reduce painful emotions. The major task for this step is to identify
    what has to happen for you to feel better." Example 1: "Finding a
    way to get to the important appointment." Example 2: "Finding a way
    to get the treatment needed to feel better---or, if that can't be
    done, finding a way to improve the quality of my work." Example 3:
    "Getting my friend to understand me better, or at least stop
    misinterpreting me." Example 4: "Finding a way not to fail my
    exams." Example 5: "Getting help for understanding my behavior and a
    strategy for changing it." Example 6: "Living without a partner who
    abuses me." Example 7: "Finding a way to work and like my job, or at
    least not hate it."

376 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 12

99

4.  Brainstorm Lots of Solutions Continue: "The next step is to come up
    with as many novel ideas as possible for solving the problem."

<!-- -->

a.  Solutions Can Be Thought of as One or More Actions That Lead to the
    Goal

Example: To avoid getting harmed by a boss who is mean, solutions may
include leaving the job, writing a letter of resignation, or making an
appointment with the human resources manager at work. Example: "Your
parents have moved in with you and are driving you crazy. Solutions
might include putting a lock on your bedroom door, accepting them for
who they are, or getting cable television to distract them." Example:
"You are afraid of failing a hair-­coloring exam in your cosmetology
course because the instructor said you cannot take home the mannequin to
practice. Solutions might include practicing on a friend, doing
visualizations of the procedure, buying a large doll to practice on, or
arranging to use the mannequin at the school on the weekend." Example: A
first step to managing a drinking problem might be to join Alcoholics
Anonymous and get a sponsor as quickly as possible. b. All Ideas Are
Welcome; Don't Evaluate While Brainstorming

It is imperative that ideas not be judged during the brainstorming
process. The aim is to generate as many ideas as possible, without
censuring any ideas that come to mind---to let thoughts run free and
wild. Brainstorming requires an atmosphere of psychological safety. It
can take time, but it is important to get every idea anyone can think of
down in writing. Note to Leaders: When demonstrating problem solving it
is also important for you as the leader to generate some ideas,
particularly if the group's ideas are rigid or noncreative. In these
cases, it would be a good idea for you to generate clearly outrageous
ideas. You can suggest clearly antisocial ideas (burn the house down) or
clearly ineffective ideas (go to bed and ignore the problem). However,
if the group is generating primarily impulsive, ineffective solutions,
then you can generate a number of possibly effective ideas. The idea is
to get the participants to open up their minds to new possibilities.
Continue generating ideas until there are no new ideas or until it is
clear that all potentially effective ideas have been generated. Remember
that it is never too late to add new ideas to the pool.

Some people almost immediately start to evaluate suggestions, analyze
the practicality of each solution, or point out problems rather than
continuing to generate new ideas. It can be difficult to leave an idea
alone and wait until a later time to evaluate it. But this is a
necessary condition of brainstorming. Distress tolerance and impulse
control are often necessary to achieve this. Practice Exercise: In a
group setting, there are two ways to do brainstorming. One is to have
individuals first generate ideas on their own, either by writing them
down or by simply thinking about different options. You can then go
around the group and have each person share one idea. Keep going around
until the ideas run out. Alternatively, you can elicit ideas from the
group as a whole. That way, those who cannot think of any ideas are not
put on the spot. Interesting research suggests that you will get more
and more creative ideas if you let folks think them up on their own and
then share them with the group.102, 103

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 12 • 377

99

5.  Choose a Solution That Fits the Goal and Is Likely to Work Although
    brainstorming can be fun, it is not an end in itself. The point is
    to generate an effective solution to a problem where no solution was
    immediately evident. Thus, once many ideas have been generated, it
    is time to identify which one or two are the best to implement.

<!-- -->

a.  Prioritize the Suggested Solutions

The potential solutions can be prioritized by organizing them in order
of likelihood to work and feasibility of implementation. A solution that
might work is useless if it is impossible to put it into action. b. Do
Pros and Cons, and Consult Wise Mind

One or two of the best solutions from the priority list should be
chosen. These should be evaluated with wise mind, and a formal
pros-and-cons exercise should also be conducted on each. Practice
Exercise: Select solutions generated for one or more of participants'
problems. Use the Figure 9.1 schematic to practice pros and cons.

6.  Put the Solution into Action The entire enterprise of problem
    solving is aimed at putting into action an effective solution to the
    problem at hand. As the tire commercials say, this is where "the
    rubber meets the road." The chief problems here are as follows: 
    Inertia ("This is too hard!" "I am too tired," "I don't have time,"
    etc.).  Fear-­generating thoughts ("If this doesn't work I will look
    like a fool," "This won't work

and I will be a failure," "People will get mad at me," etc.). 
Willfulness ("I shouldn't have to solve this; they caused it," "If I do
something to solve this,

I'll look weak," etc.); and  Impulsiveness (i.e., running head first
into the problem with an impulsive, ineffective solu-

tion, rather than the one initially thought through). Discussion Point:
Elicit from participants examples of times when they have known a
solution that might work, but then did not follow through with
implementing it. Remind them that this is just

Solution 2

Solution 1

Solution 2

Pros

Solution 1

Cons

99

FIGURE 9.1. Chart for figuring out pros and cons of potential solutions
to problems.

378 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handouts 12--13

a new problem to solve. Ask whether the main problem was inertia, fear,
willfulness, impulsiveness, or something else. Troubleshoot how to
overcome such problems in implementing solutions.

99

7.  Evaluate the Results of Implementing the Solution Instruct
    participants to ask themselves: "Am I satisfied with the results of
    my problem solving? Do I feel better about my situation than before?
    Were there any negative outcomes for myself or for others?" The
    bottom line is that the best-laid plans can go awry. Even when a
    solution is carried out exactly as planned, it can fail.
    Unanticipated obstacles can arise, or others can respond in
    unexpected ways. Thus a critical step in problem solving is to
    examine how well one's actions work in solving a problem. Explain to
    participants: "Once you realize that you have to evaluate your
    problem solving, you may be more open to the idea that effective
    problem solving can take multiple efforts with different solutions
    before you find the one solution or set of solutions that actually
    solves the problem. Often if a first effort does not solve a problem
    completely, it will at least improve the situation somewhat. Then
    applying other solutions to the problem may reduce all or most of
    the factors that made the situation distressing." Note to Leaders:
    It is critical to present problem solving as a process that takes
    time and patience. The idea that there are simple, one-shot
    solutions can present a tremendous barrier to the focused,
    difficult, and time-­consuming process that solving some problems can
    require. The more examples you provide of successful problem solving
    following extended effort, the better---­whether these are from your
    own life or from the lives of others you know.

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants examples from their own lives
of problems that have been solved with the first solution they tried,
and problems that required multiple attempts before getting solved.

XII. Reviewing Opposite Action and Problem Solving (Emotion Regulation
     Handout 13) Main Point: It is important not only to know when to
     use opposite action and when to use problem solving, but also to
     have a clear idea of how these two skills differ in actual
     practice. Emotion Regulation Handout 13: Reviewing Opposite Action
     and Problem Solving. This handout summarizes justifying events for
     each basic emotion, and then lists sets of opposite actions (for
     unjustified emotions that don't fit the facts, or for justified
     emotions that are ineffective) and problem solutions (for justified
     emotions). It is reviewed after problem solving is taught, to
     clarify the relationship of opposite action to problem solving. If
     time is short, review only the problem-­solving column, as this is
     information that has not been presented before. When you are
     reviewing the problem solutions, it is helpful if you link the
     solutions to the justifying events. (You can also point out that in
     these cases, justifying events are the same as prompting events in
     Emotion Regulation Handout 6, and that both justifying events and
     opposite actions in this handout are shorthand versions of what is
     presented in Emotion Regulation Handout 11.) Worksheet: None.

Highlight to participants that the information in the first two columns
of Emotion Regulation Handout 13 (justifying events and opposite
actions) constitutes a review of what has already been presented in
previous handouts (or in previous classes if this is being used in an
advanced skills class). Then review different types of problem
solutions.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 13 • 379

99A. Review Problem Solutions Point out that for each emotion, the first
solution is acting on the emotion if that is reasonable. This is
followed by solutions aimed at changing the situations, followed by
avoiding the situation, and then (when reasonable) changing thoughts
about the situation. Be careful not to suggest that this is an
exhaustive list of problem solutions. Instead, present it as a starting
list of ideas. Describe the four types of solutions for justified
emotion to participants as follows.

99

1.  Acting on the Emotion A major function of emotion is to motivate
    action. Often the action urges associated with the emotion are the
    same as actions that represent solutions. The actions associated
    with basic emotions generally function to solve common types of
    problems.

99

Examples: "If a tsunami is coming in from the ocean, run for high
ground; if you love someone, spend time with this person; and so on." 2.
Changing the Situation Say: "At other times, simply acting on an emotion
urge may give you only temporary relief when permanent relief is needed.
In these situations, you will need to use your problem-­solving skills to
come up with a strategy for actually changing or solving the situation."

99

Example: "Running away from a rat in your kitchen and jumping up on a
chair will temporarily reduce fear and panic, but sooner or later you
have to get down from the chair. If you don't get the rat out of the
kitchen, you are likely to have a lot more fear. Problem solving in this
case might involve getting a rat trap, baiting it, and putting it in
your kitchen, or getting a friend or exterminator to come and get the
rat out." 3. Avoiding or Leaving the Situation Go on: "Sometimes you
can't change the situation, because other people or situations are more
powerful than you are. In these cases, you might choose to avoid the
situation altogether." Example: "If you are a student in a school where
you are being bullied, and no amount of complaining to the school or
others seems to stop it, you can change schools---or, if possible, avoid
walking anywhere near the bullies or block their messages on Facebook."

99

Example: "If you discover that you are really not good in a particular
area of school or work and want to stop doing poor work in that area,
you can change classes or find a new job in an area you are good at." 4.
Changing Thoughts and Interpretations of the Situation Continue:
"Sometimes you can't really change the problem situation, and you can't
avoid it either. In these cases, you might try changing how you are
thinking about the situation." Example: "Cheerlead yourself ('I can do
this; I am going to be OK') in scary situations where you have to act
opposite to your fear, even when there is real danger." Example: "If you
are envious of someone who has a lot more money than you, you can try
putting on a pair of rose-­colored glasses about your own status, or
placing less value on what others have. An example of this might be to
join a group advocating simple living, in hopes it will change your
attitude." Example: "If someone breaks up with you, you can remind
yourself that it is better to have loved and lost than to never have
loved at all." Note to Leaders: Although many of the problem solutions
provided are very clear and easy to understand, some are not so easy and
will need clarification and discussion. It is important to note that the

380 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 13

solutions provided are for use when the person actually wants to change
an emotion by using one of the problem-­solving strategies: acting on
emotions, changing the situation, avoiding or leaving the situation, or
changing how one views the situation. Some of the points that have been
difficult for participants are outlined below. Review as many as you
can. Knowing these possible solutions for each of these emotions can
also be very helpful when you are coaching clients.

B. Review Typical Solutions for Each Emotion Review the list of steps
covered in Section XI and in Emotion Regulation Handout 12 for solving
problem situations. In addition, briefly highlight the following: 1.
Fear Many people do not think of solving fear by doing things that give
them a sense of control and mastery. However, this can be very useful
over the long run in learning how to respond effectively to events that
initially are frightening. (See Emotion Regulation Handout 19: Build
Mastery and Cope Ahead.) 2. Anger It is very important to note here that
one should only fight back when that is likely to be an effective
response. Say: "An example when fighting back might be needed could be
being grabbed from behind when getting into your car at night. If
someone only grabs for your handbag or wallet, on the other hand, it
might be more effective to give it to the person." 3. Disgust Imagining
understanding a disgusting person, or imagining really good reasons for
something disgusting that has happened (problem solving by changing
thoughts about it), might not at first glance appear to be a very good
idea. As some participants might say, it seems disgusting in itself. You
can point out: "However, if you have no choice except to be around
people who do disgusting things on occasion---say, on a bus ride or in a
school or work group---this might be an alternative to never-­ending
feelings of disgust. It is also useful if you yourself have done
something truly disgusting in your lifetime. It beats hating yourself
for life." 4. Envy Say: "Although many people do avoid others who have
more than them, many also believe that you should be able to stop
wanting what others have. From their perspective, the problem is that
you want things you don't have, not that others have a lot more than
you. What is important here is to focus on what is effective problem
solving and give up a judgmental attitude." 5. Jealousy People who are
locked into intimate relationships with others whom they depend on for
sustenance and therefore cannot leave have become outraged at the
thought that they should work at being more desirable to the persons
they depend on. As one participant yelled at me, "You mean I should make
myself more desirable to my pimp?" The only response one can give to
this critique is this: "Becoming more desirable should only be used if
the person you depend on is threatening to leave, and you absolutely
want to keep the person from leaving you. Note also that I did not put
in the option of changing your thought or interpretation of the person
leaving you, because if you actually delude yourself that the person
will not leave you, you might lose him or her."

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handouts 13--14 • 381

6.  Love What is important to make clear here is this: "You only fight
    to find or get back your beloved when loving the person actually
    fits the facts---that is, the person has all the qualities that
    justify love."
7.  Sadness Grieving does not sound at first like a strategy to reduce
    sadness, but it is. Tell participants: "Grief is necessary to
    process and comes to terms with loss. If you avoid it, you may end
    up with long-­lasting grief that makes things worse, not better."
    There is a large overlap between acting opposite to sadness and
    problem-­solving sadness. This is because acting opposite, once grief
    has subsided, actually reduces sadness through building back a life
    that is experienced as worth living. See the ABC skills for reducing
    vulnerability and building a life worth living (Emotion Regulation
    Handouts 15--19) for more on these topics.
8.  Shame Many participants will be distressed at the suggestions that
    they hide or change what will get them rejected, avoid a group, or
    find a new group to be part of, even when they do not agree that
    they should be rejected in the first place. It is important to
    remind participants that the only reason to hide behaviors or
    characteristics or avoid or find new groups in these situations is
    if they don't want to be rejected. Remind them that they can skip
    these solutions, and instead become activists and work to change the
    group's and society's values and beliefs.
9.  Guilt The important point to be made about guilt when it is
    justified is this: "To repair what you have done or said, you first
    have to figure out what you have harmed. If out of anger you kick in
    a wall, figuring out the repair is easy: Fix or replace the wall. If
    you have told a mean lie about someone, repair by telling everyone
    the truth in a manner that gets people to believe you now, not the
    lie you told. It can be much more difficult to repair, however, when
    you have done something that loses another's trust or destroys or
    takes something away that you cannot replace or give back. In these
    cases repair may take a long time. It can also be difficult to
    repair something when it is important that you keep anyone from
    knowing that you are the person who has done the damage. In these
    cases, you may need to repair by helping others, rather than the
    person you have harmed."

99

Discussion Point: Be sure to take questions about problem solving for
each of these emotions as they arise. For emotions that create a
discussion, elicit examples of problem-­solving strategies for those
emotions from participants, and share any of your own that will clarify
the material.

XIII. Overview: Reducing Vulnerability to Emotion Mind (Emotion
      Regulation Handout 14) Main Point: Emotional distress and anguish
      can be reduced by decreasing factors that make us vulnerable to
      negative emotions and moods. Emotion Regulation Handout 14:
      Overview: Reducing Vulnerability to Emotion Mind---­Building a Live
      Worth Living. This handout is an overview to orient participants
      to what is coming next. It can be reviewed very quickly, or
      skipped (with the information written on the board). Emotion
      Regulation Worksheet 9: Steps for Reducing Vulnerability to
      Emotion Mind. This is a summary worksheet for all the ABC PLEASE
      skills. If time is short, or you have a group whose members do not
      like to write, this is a good worksheet to use. Review each
      section, and point out that participants

382 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handouts 14--16

can use it to record their pleasant events, as well as their work on
developing long-term goals and values, building mastery activities,
coping ahead, and using PLEASE skills.

A. Becoming Less Vulnerable to Painful Emotions Say to participants:
"The skills here are about how to build your life so that you become
less sensitive and vulnerable to painful emotions. All of us have times
when we are more vulnerable to painful emotions than at other times.
When we are vulnerable, we can be much more sensitive to events that
prompt painful emotions. Some people lead lives that make them
vulnerable to painful emotions almost all the time. Accumulating
positive events in your life, and practicing the other skills you will
learn here, will help increase your resilience."

99B. The ABC PLEASE Skills

Tell participants: "You can remember this set of skills with the term
ABC PLEASE."  "A is for Accumulate positive emotions. When you
accumulate positive experiences, events, and

valued behavior patterns, you build a wall between you and the sea of
emotional dyscontrol."  "B is for Build mastery, which means doing
things that make you feel competent and effective.

This is a line of defense against helplessness and hopelessness."  "C is
for Cope ahead of time with emotional situations. Before you get into an
emotional situ-

ation, rehearse a plan so that you are prepared to cope with the
situation skillfully."  "PLEASE stands for a set of skills that will
help you take care of your mind by taking care

of your body." Note to Leaders: As noted earlier, DBT assumes that it is
often (but not always) the events in life that cause unhappiness, not
faulty appraisals of events. This is the opposite of what many
therapists assume. However, a reconciliation between the two points of
view is possible. A person who gets emotional often begins
distorting;104 thus vigilance for distorting is useful, and reappraisal
can be helpful. However, overfocusing on cognitive distortions as the
source of difficulty simply further invalidates the behavior, emotions,
and thinking processes of the suffering individual. Instead, the goal is
to validate the individual's responses.

XIV. Accumulating Positive Emotions: Short Term (Emotion Regulation
     Handouts 15--16) Main Point: Most people who feel painful emotions
     do so for good reasons. It is usually (but not always) the events
     in life that cause unhappiness. Increasing positive events now can
     accumulate into a happier life. Emotion Regulation Handout 15:
     Accumulating Positive Emotions: Short Term; Emotion Regulation
     Handout 16: Pleasant Events List. Handout 15 is an overview of
     building positive experiences now by increasing pleasant events.
     Move from Handout 15 to Handout 16 in the same session. If there is
     not a lot of time, ask participants to skim Handout 16 quickly for
     events that they would find pleasant, and to review the complete
     schedule during the week. Encourage participants to do as many
     events as possible that would make them feel happy or joyful, even
     if only a little bit at first. Emotion Regulation Worksheet 10:
     Pleasant Events Diary. This worksheet is designed to be filled out
     daily. It can be useful to have participants write out their plans
     for pleasant events during the session. During the week,
     participants should write out what they actually did, and then rate
     how mindful they were to each event (i.e., how focused and in the
     moment they were, and how much they participated), how unmindful
     they were to worries (with no worries = 0), and how pleasant the
     experience was. Emo-

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 15 • 383 tion
Regulation Worksheets 9 and 13 also have brief sections for tracking
pleasant events, along with the other ABC PLEASE skills.

A. Why Add Positive Events to Your Life?

99

1.  Positive Events Increase Positive Emotions/Decrease Negative
    Emotions First, positive events not only increase positive emotions,
    but decrease sadness and other negative emotions. In fact, they are
    so important that they are important components of two of the most
    effective behavioral interventions for major depression, cognitive
    therapy105 and behavioral activation.10

99

2.  All People Need Positive Events in Their Lives to Be Happy We all
    need positive events in our lives. However, each person needs
    different things to be happy, and the same person can have different
    needs at different times.

99

3.  The Absence of Positive Experiences Has Negative Effects The absence
    of positive experiences in life reduces happiness, increases
    sadness, and creates vulnerability to events prompting painful
    emotions.106 Example: "Positive events are like food: Food does you
    no good if you don't eat it, and positive events do you no good if
    you don't experience any."

4.  Negative/Aversive Events Have Negative Effects Too many negative or
    painful events in life make it very difficult to feel happy and
    content,107 particularly when a person is living a life deprived of
    positive events. Example: When people diet, they are often in a
    state of deprivation, which then results in negative emotional
    states. Too much work and no play can have the same effect.
    Discussion Point: Elicit examples from participants when a sense of
    deprivation has had a negative impact on their emotions and moods.
    Discuss.

5.  Both Short-Term and Long-Term Positive Events Are Needed Building a
    life worth living requires attention to both short-term and
    long-term positive events.  Short-term positive events are those
    that make us feel better now---right this minute.  Long-term
    positive events are those parts of our lives that give a lasting
    sense of happiness

or contentment. 6. Pleasant Events Are Possible Even in Deprivation Even
in a very deprived life, a person can find or develop pleasant events
that will lift the spirits, at least momentarily, and increase positive
emotions, even if only slightly. 7. Avoiding Negative Events Can Result
in Avoiding Positive Events People sometimes accidentally avoid pleasant
events because they spend so much energy avoiding painful events. This
is a recipe for unhappiness. 8. Developing Pleasant Events Is Worth the
Effort People sometimes don't bother to develop pleasant events, or they
are too depressed, tired, overworked, or overwhelmed to make the effort.
Often people don't realize how important it is to add "little positives"
into their daily routines. The saying "All work and no play makes Jack a
dull boy" could be changed to "All blah and no pleasure makes Jack an
unhappy boy."

384 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handouts 15--16

99B. How to Build Positive Experiences Now 99 1. Do at Least One
Pleasant Thing a Day Tell participants: "To start with, do at least one
thing each day that prompts positive emotions, such as enjoyment,
pleasure, serenity, calmness, love, joy, pride, or self-­confidence."
Note to Leaders: It can be very important to stress to participants that
getting themselves to engage in positive events and to avoid avoiding
(see below) often requires a concerted effort to use the skill of
opposite action. Problem solving may also be required. I have found it
very useful to have everyone check off possible pleasant events on
Emotion Regulation Handout 16 and then plan a week of pleasant events on
Emotion Regulation Worksheet 10 before the session is over.

2.  Use Problem-­Solving Skills Say: "Use problem-­solving skills to
    figure out how to increase the positive events in your life. This is
    particularly important when you have very little money, an
    inflexible schedule, or many demands. It can be difficult, but it is
    possible."
3.  Plan Pleasant Events Ahead of Time Go on: "Plan pleasant events
    ahead of time when they are hard to do. Also, try to agree on the
    plan with someone else. This can help mobilize you, even when your
    mood says no to doing anything."

99

4.  Practice Opposite Action When Necessary Continue: "Practice opposite
    action when you need to activate yourself. (For ideas, see Emotion
    Regulation Handout 10.) Once you are unhappy, it can be extremely
    difficult to activate yourself to increase the pleasant events in
    your life."
5.  Don't Think in Terms of "Deserving" and "Not Deserving" Say: "Don't
    think in terms of 'deserving' and 'not deserving.' It is not
    effective. It is also judgmental thinking. If you are a person who
    thinks this way, you may have to do opposite action by engaging in
    pleasant events when feeling you don't deserve them. You may also
    have to practice nonjudgmentalness, one of the mindfulness 'how'
    skills in Mindfulness Handout 5."
6.  Positive Events Are Reinforcers Go on: "Keep in mind that positive
    events are reinforcers. That is, they make you want to activate
    yourself and keep having positive experiences."108

99

7.  Avoid Avoiding Continue: "A special case of taking opposite action
    is to avoid avoiding events that are pleasant or that will lead to
    pleasant events. People often avoid pleasant events or taking the
    sometimes difficult steps that will lead to pleasant events when
    they are in a bad mood. They say, 'Why bother?' and sometimes just
    give up. This, of course, does not work in the long run, even though
    at times it does work for the short term. When this is happening to
    you, the best strategy is to look at the pros and cons of avoiding,
    and also consult wise mind." Discussion Point: Ask participants to
    find three to seven pleasant events listed in Emotion Regulation
    Handout 16 that they can do in the next week. Ask them to circle
    these items and write them down on Emotion Regulation Worksheet 10.
    Ask participants to share what they circle and/ or write down.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 15 • 385

Discussion Point: Elicit little things that participants find pleasant.
Be creative. Get new ideas from Distress Tolerance Handout 2: Overview:
Crisis Survival Skills (see also Chapter 10 of this manual).

99C. Be Mindful of Positive Experiences A pleasant event that is not
attended to will have little effect on our emotions. Often when we think
that a pleasant event isn't pleasant, the reality is that we did not pay
attention to it. 1. Focus Your Attention on Positive Events As They
Happen Paying attention to positive events can sometimes take a lot of
effort. We may be too absorbed with something else to notice the event,
or we may have trouble focusing on one thing because there are many
distractions. We can also be in the habit of avoiding our own
experiences so that we try to suppress even pleasant emotions. Example:
"When you are absorbed in reading a book, it is hard to appreciate that
your children are playing right beside you." 2. Refocus on the Positive
When Your Mind Wanders to the Negative When the number of positive
events in our lives is much smaller than the number of painful events,
it can be hard to tear our minds away from what is painful. This can be
particularly difficult when we are angry or bitter and think that
feeling better will mean we have "given in." In these situations,
refocusing on positive parts of events is an example of opposite action.
Completing a pros-and-cons worksheet can motivate doing opposite action
and building positive experience (see Emotion Regulation Worksheet 1).
Example: "When you are angry at someone and ruminating about how
terribly the person has treated you, it is hard to pay attention to the
wonderful meal you are eating with a very good friend." 3. Participate
and Engage Fully in the Experience Boredom is a common problem in trying
to increase pleasant events. Boredom, however, is often the result of
watching events rather than participating in events. Watching the world
go by is nowhere as interesting as participating fully in the flow of
life's events. Mindfulness is the practice of being present to our
lives. It is difficult to benefit from events we are not present to.
Example: "You go to a party you were once looking forward to, but now
sit back and just watch others have fun. This is unlikely to boost your
morale as much as it would if you threw yourself into the party and
engaged with others." Note to Leaders: Note that each of the core
mindfulness skills is essential to benefit from adding pleasant events
to one's life. Observing or noticing the event in the present,
describing it as it really is without distortion, participating, and
engaging nonjudgmentally, one-­mindfully, and effectively are all
important to experiencing and integrating the pleasant moment.

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when they have been
completely mindless or "zoned out" when positive events occurred, and
times they have been very attentive to positive events. Discuss the
differences in experiences.

99D. Be Unmindful of Worries 99 1. Don't Destroy Positive Experiences by
Worrying It is common for some people to worry about various aspects of
a positive experience:  When the experience will end.

386 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handouts 15, 17--18

Whether they deserve the experience or not.  How the experience might
cause others to expect more of them.

Worrying about these things, however, only detracts from the positive
experience as it is happening.

99

2.  Refocus on the Positive When Necessary Encourage participants:
    "Refocus your mind on the positive parts of ongoing events when
    worries come up." Discussion Point: Discuss factors that make it
    hard to focus attention on positive events when they are happening.
    Note to Leaders: Many people have to work hard to get positive
    emotions to linger. The skills described above are extremely
    important. Many emotionally dysregulated individuals can experience
    positive emotions, but these evaporate in a second; they do not
    last. Often they are afraid that if they feel good, bad things will
    happen---that is, they have a phobia of positive emotions109 ---or a
    negative thought intrudes so quickly it erases the positive. These
    points should be stressed.

99E. Be Patient Tell participants: "Adding one or two small pleasant
events is unlikely to make a dramatic difference in the quality of your
life. But adding them is helpful in changing emotions a little at a
time. For pleasant events to be effective, you have to practice them
often and try many different activities. Over time, the small changes
they make in mood will add up to a noticeable difference. Be patient, be
patient!" Example: Even a pleasant event as small as noticing enjoyable
things while walking from place to place can make a small difference.
These small differences add up over time.

XV. Accumulating Positive Emotions: Long Term (Emotion Regulation
    Handouts 17--18) Main Point: It is hard to be happy without a life
    experienced as "worth living." Building such a life requires
    attention to one's own values and life priorities over the long
    term. This can take time, patience, and persistence. Emotion
    Regulation Handout 17: Accumulating Positive Emotions: Long Term;
    Emotion Regulation Handout 18: Values and Priorities List. These two
    handouts should be discussed in the same session. Handout 17 breaks
    down the process of building a life worth living into seven steps.
    Handout 18 helps with Step 2 ("Identify values that are important to
    you"). Remember that the goal of reviewing values is for
    participants to get to Steps 5 ("Choose one goal to work on now"), 6
    ("Identify small action steps toward your goal"), and 7 ("Commit to
    taking one action step now"). If you wish to accomplish each of
    these steps in one session, you cannot linger too long on
    identifying values. Some individuals know what values are and have a
    clear sense of their own values. However, many people don't know
    what you are talking about when you mention values, and they are
    unable to articulate their own values. Rather than spending much
    time trying to define what a value is, just give them Handout 18's
    listing of values. Ordinarily this is sufficient to get the point
    across. Values on Handout 18 are grouped into 14 general categories,
    A through N. Under each general value are more specific values for a
    total of 58 specific values. Let participants know that they can
    choose the more general values, the more specific values, a
    combination of both, or values not on the list (in which case they
    should write them down on the lines provided under O for "other").

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 17 • 387
Emotion Regulation Worksheets 11 and 11a: Getting from Values to
Specific Action Steps. Both these worksheets are designed for working
out what steps are needed to build a life worth living. Worksheet 11 is
linear, provides more space, and also emphasizes attending to
relationships as a value. Worksheet 11a is much briefer and works well
with adolescents. It can also be reviewed at the same time you are
teaching Handout 17. Having participants fill out Worksheet 11 or 11a
during a group session is a good way to teach this skill if you have
time. Alternatively, select one or two group members to guide others
through the worksheet on the board. Note that doing the homework on this
skill is not designed to have an immediate effect on the quality of
participants' lives. Such work may improve a sense of mastery (see
Emotion Regulation Handout 19: Build Mastery and Cope Ahead), but major
shifts in the quality of life take time. Emotion Regulation Worksheet
11b: Diary of Daily Actions on Values and Priorities. Worksheet 11b is
an advanced worksheet for keeping track of actions taken across
different life goals and values. This sheet is ordinarily too advanced
for most participants at the beginning of skills training, but can be
useful for experienced participants who are working on several different
goals at once. This worksheet is often very useful in individual
therapy. Working on values is also tracked on Emotion Regulation
Worksheet 9, which covers all of the other ABC PLEASE skills.

99A. Long-Term Happiness Means Experiencing Life as Worth Living 99 Tell
participants: "It is hard to be happy without a life worth living. This
is a fundamental tenet of DBT. Of course, all lives are worth living in
reality. No life is not worth living. But what is important is that you
experience your life as worth living---one that is satisfying, and one
that brings happiness." 1. Accumulating Positive Events May Require
Changing Your Life

99

Say: "If positive events do not occur in your life very often, you may
need to make changes in your life so that positive events will occur
more often. Accumulating events that build a life worth living is like
saving pennies in a piggy bank." 2. A Life Worth Living Is a Life That
You Value and That Contains Things You Value Go on: "Two things are
important here. First, you need to go into Wise Mind to find and
describe your most important values. Second, you may need to push
yourself to overcome fear, regret, shame, guilt, and hopelessness in
identifying the values you want to pursue in your life."

99

3.  Building a Life Worth Living Takes Time and Patience

<!-- -->

a.  Short-Term Pleasures versus Long-Term Happiness

Short-term pleasures can sometimes interfere with building a life of
stable happiness and contentment. Always seeking things that make us
feel different or better right this minute can at times get in the way
of building permanent positive events into our lives. Sometimes we seek
a pleasant event to avoid working on long-term goals that will make
permanent changes in our lives. If there are not permanent positive
events in our lives, pleasant feelings will probably be temporary rather
than lasting. b. Permanent Positive Events

Permanent positive events are related to the following:  Living our
lives according to our own personal values.  Achieving goals that are
important to us.  Developing lasting and loving interpersonal
relationships.

388 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handouts 17--18

99B. Building a Life Worth Living, Step by Step 99 1. Avoid Avoiding The
central problem for many people in building a life worth living is that
they avoid doing what is needed to build such a life. Factors that can
interfere include not knowing what they want in life; moodiness;
emotional overload; and inability to accept that life is often unfair.
Although these factors and others may be very understandable reasons for
avoiding the hard work necessary to build a life worth living, getting
to work on the task is what is needed now. Ultimately, each of us has to
build our own lives worth living.

99

2.  Identify Values That Are Important to You

<!-- -->

a.  What Are Values?  Values are things that really matter. Say: "Values
    are the things that are important to you,

what you cherish about life. They are your highest priorities in life." 
Values are not goals; they are not outcomes, and they are not in the
future. "Values are

ways of living; they are about engaging in activities that you value. It
is keeping priorities straight when you make life decisions---big ones
and little ones. Values are like a 'pathless path.' They give your life
direction and meaning, but they do not have an endpoint. Values are like
guideposts that remind you of what you care about. Values may tell you
that a specific goal is important to work on, but achieving the goal
does not mean you can forget that value in your life." Example: "You can
work on relationships, achieving things in life, and having integrity.
But there is no date in the future when you can say, 'I have achieved
that value and don't need to keep it a priority in my life any longer.'
"  Values change over time and often are not simple to figure out.
"Values can change during

your lifetime and as a result of major life events. Values can also be
in conflict with each other. Figuring out which values are most
important at any given point in your life can be very important."
Example: "Having a good time, seeking fun and things that give pleasure,
and having free time may be very important when you are young and
fancy-free, with few obligations. But, once you are married and have a
baby, having a family, staying close, and spending time with your spouse
and child may be far more important." Good questions to ask participants
(and to have them ask themselves) in figuring out values include the
following:  "What in life are your highest priorities? What in life
really matters to you?"  "What is the direction you want your life to go
in?"  "What is in your life now that you do not want to lose?"  "What
things of value are not in your life right now?"

And add: "Simply affirming your own values in this way has been found to
buffer psychological stress responses."110

99

Practice Exercise: Ask participants to review Emotion Regulation Handout
18, and to check off values that are important to them. Be sure to
remind them that they can also write down any important values not
included in this handout. Then have each person count up the number of
values he or she checked. Share the number of values checked and some of
the most important ones with the group. Ask, "How many checked 1--10
values?" How many checked 11--20? How many 21--35? 36--45? Over 45?" My
experience is that almost always there is a typical curve, with few at
the extremes and most in the middle. Give participants a chance to share
one or two values, as well as any new values they wrote out.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handouts 17--18 • 389
Note to Leaders: Be prepared for some distress when participants are
looking at the list of values. The list will make many people aware of
how far their own lives are from their values. To head this off, you
might want to ask participants first to identify one or two important
values that are already present in their lives. These might include
things that they already have (such as having people to do things with
or secure and safe surroundings) or things that they are already doing
in their lives (such as working toward goals or treating people
equally). Note to Leaders: If you ask participants to check off only
values they believe are really important, or if you suggest an arbitrary
number of values to check, you may be waiting a very long time for them
to finish the task. It takes a lot of thought to figure out which values
are most important. When you are responding to participants' values,
remember, it is not to suggest or recommend values. It is your task to
help participants find their own values. Research Point: This emphasis
on values and their role in building a life worth living is similar to
the emphasis on values in Acceptance and Commitment Therapy,42 a form of
CBT that is very similar to DBT. Most of the values in Handout 18 were
adapted from research done in Europe comparing values across different
countries.111 Thus these values are very general and are widely shared,
at least in Western cultures. Similar lists of general values, however,
come up in many different research studies on values.

b.  Decide Whether Values Are Really Your Own

Often we have made other people's values our own values without really
thinking about them. Sometimes we speak and act as if we value things
that, in fact, we don't value. We value others' opinions of us, and so
we live according to their values to get their approval. Most of us do
this some of the time. Some of us do this all of the time. It can be
hard to live according to our own values when what we really want is to
fit in with others. This is especially difficult if the group we want to
fit in with has values different from our own. To have a life worth
living, however, we have to live according to our own values. Of course,
if we also highly value having others love and approve of us, we may
also have to live at least some of our life according to others' values.
It's important to know when our highest value is getting love and
approval from others and when it's living according to other wise mind
values. This can take a lot of thought---and a lot of checking the
facts. Good questions to ask participants (and to have them ask
themselves) to see whether a value is really their own value include the
following:  "If you could act according to a particular value but could
not tell anyone about it,

would you do it? For example, if being an educated person is an
important value, but you could not tell anyone that you are taking
courses to further your education, would you still take the courses?" 
"If anything were possible, what direction would you want your life to
go toward? (This is not about what you think is realistic or what others
may think you deserve.)" Discussion Point: Ask each participant to think
of one value he or she currently struggles with that has mostly or
completely come from others. Then have participants select one they
themselves are ambivalent about or have already rejected. Discuss how
difficult it can be for participants to live according to their own
values when they have been punished for not living up to other people's
values, or when they have been promised great rewards for living
according to other people's values.

99

3.  Identify One Value to Work On Now Tell participants: "Most people
    have many important values. Focus on just one that is your highest
    priority. Otherwise, the task will feel too big and overwhelming. Be
    sure to pick a value you

390 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handouts 17--18

actually want to work on at this time in your life. Look at what is in
your life now that you really value, and at what valuable things are not
in your life right now." Good questions to ask participants (and to have
them ask themselves) include the following:  "Which value is your
highest priority right now?"  "In what areas does your current life not
match your values very well?"  "Is your own behavior in accord with your
wise mind values?"  "Are there things you really value that are not in
your life enough?"  "Are you doing things that you value?"  "Are you
doing things that go against your core values?"  "Where do you need to
make changes in your life so that it will match what is most impor-

tant to you?"

99

4.  Identify a Few Goals Related to This Value

<!-- -->

a.  Goals Are Something Specific That You Can Achieve

Say to participants: "Identify a few goals that will get you closer to
your values. Once you have achieved a goal, you don't have to work on it
any more." Example: "If you value being powerful and influencing others,
you can work on increasing that over your entire life. In contrast, a
goal that could help you get more power and influence would be to get a
college degree. Once you get it, you don't continue to work on it."
Example: "If your highest value is contributing to the larger community,
you can continue to do that all your life. Goals that could get you
closer to that value would be to get a parttime volunteer job or to
donate time to a neighborhood spring cleanup. Once you have done these
things, you have achieved those goals." b. What Goals Will Get You
Closer to Living Your Value?

Goals need to be very specific. Good questions to ask participants (and
to have them ask themselves) include the following:  "What is one thing
you could accomplish that would be in accord with the value you

are working on?"  "What is one thing about your behavior that you could
change to be living in accord

with the value you are working on?"  "Are there major impediments that
must be overcome before you can accomplish your

goal?" Examples:  "If your value is to make a great deal of money, your
goals might include first to get an

education, and then to look for a high-­paying job or one with potential
for advancement."  "If your value is to live in secure and safe
surroundings, a goal might be to get an apart-

ment in a safe area of town."  "If your value is to have a steady income
that meets your basic needs, a goal might be

to get a job."  "If your value is to care for nature and the
environment, a goal might be to keep your

room or apartment clean and well maintained."  "If your value is to have
close and satisfying relationships with others, a goal might be

to make one friend."  "If your value is to be courageous in facing and
living life, a goal might be to do some-

thing that you are afraid of or that you are avoiding."

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handouts 17--18 • 391 
"If your value is to be a healthy person, a goal might be to lose or
gain weight when your

doctor recommends it." c. Remember the "Art of the Possible" in Setting
Goals

Continue: "Be sure that your goals are reasonable. There is no point in
setting up goals that cannot be achieved. If the value is to compete
successfully with others, setting a goal to be a national tennis
champion in 2 years when you have never had tennis lessons is
unrealistic. It is also important to avoid goals that will reduce your
quality of life if they are met. For example, if your value is to make
sacrifices for others, giving away your college education savings to a
friend who wants a new car is likely to cause long-term harm that is
much greater than the benefits of solving the friend's temporary
transportation needs."

99

5.  Choose One Goal to Work on Now

<!-- -->

a.  Put Goals in Order of Importance and Reasonableness

Go on: "You cannot work on every goal related to a value at once. It can
be very helpful to organize goals in a list, with the most important and
realistically possible goal at the top of the list. This will enable you
to set your priorities, so that you know which goal to work on first."
b. Select One Goal

Select the one goal that is reasonable and important to work on now.

99

6.  Identify Small Action Steps toward Your Goal Say to participants: 
    "Figure out what small steps will move you toward your goals."  "Ask
    yourself what you have to accomplish to get to the goal."  "Break
    the task into small steps you can take now."  "Break it down again
    if the steps are too big."

99

7.  Take One Action Step Now Example: Value: Be part of a group.
    Possible goals:  Reconnect with old friends.  Get a more social job.
     Join a club.

Pick one goal to work on right now:  Join a club.

Figure out a few action steps for moving toward the goal:  Look for
clubs on craigslist.  Go to the bookstore by my house and ask about book
groups.  Join an interactive online game or chat room.

Take one step:  Turn on the computer.

Practice Exercise: Participants often have trouble telling the
difference among values, goals, and action steps. Ask participants to
work on Worksheet 11 or 11a during session time, and then share what
they filled out on the sheet with each other. This also provides you
with an opportunity to provide feedback before participants leave the
session.

392 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 19

XVI. Build Mastery and Cope Ahead Skills for Emotional Situations
     (Emotion Regulation Handout 19) Main Point: Feeling competent and
     adequately prepared for difficult situations reduces vulnerability
     to emotion mind and increases skillful behavior. Emotion Regulation
     Handout 19: Build Mastery and Cope Ahead. As its title indicates,
     this handout covers the steps for building mastery, as well as for
     coping ahead with emotional situations. Both skill sets are
     ordinarily taught in the same session. Emotion Regulation Worksheet
     12: Build Mastery and Cope Ahead. On this worksheet, participants
     are to schedule activities to build a sense of accomplishment and
     then report on what they actually did. Remember that doing
     activities to build mastery is the target. The point of scheduling
     is to increase the probability that participants will actually do
     the homework assignment. However, in reviewing the homework it is
     important to not penalize participants if they did something other
     than they planned. There is space on this worksheet to report two
     practices of coping ahead. This assignment is hard to do if no
     difficult situation comes up. In this case, you can assign practice
     on past situations that were not handled very well. Emotion
     Regulation Worksheet 13: Putting ABC Skills Together Day by Day.
     This worksheet has a brief section for tracking Accumulate positive
     emotions, Build mastery, and Cope ahead. These skills are also
     tracked on Emotion Regulation Worksheet 9.

99A. Build Mastery 1. What Is Mastery? Tell participants: "Mastery is
doing things that make you feel competent, self-­confident, in control,
and capable of mastering things. Human babies have a natural tendency to
increase mastery. This tendency can be lost over time, however, if
efforts to increase mastery are not reinforced."

99

2.  Why Build Mastery? Doing things to build mastery is an important
    component of two of the most effective treatments for depression,
    cognitive therapy and behavioral activation. 3 Building a sense of
    confidence and competence makes a person more resistant to
    depression and other negative emotions.112, 113 Building mastery
    usually requires doing something that is at least a little bit hard
    or challenging. The idea is to generate a sense of accomplishment.
    Over time, a series of accomplishments leads to a more positive
    self-­concept, higher self-­esteem, and an overall greater level of
    happiness.114, 115 Note to Leaders: In teaching how to build
    mastery, it can be helpful to draw lines like those in Figure 9.2.
    The heavy line two-­thirds of the way up on a whiteboard represents
    the point at which a task becomes impossible. Trying to do a task
    above this line leads to failure (and a consequent sense of failure
    and a lowered sense of mastery and competence). Doing tasks at the
    bottom third of the board, below the dotted line, does not increase
    mastery. The best place to be trying to master something is midway
    up, in a space that is difficult but possible. Accomplishing that
    type of task will give a sense of mastery.

3.  How to Build Mastery

<!-- -->

a.  Do at Least One Thing Each Day

Tell participants: "Do at least one thing each day to build a sense of
accomplishment."

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 19 • 393

99

b.  Plan for Success, Not Failure

Say: "Do something difficult, but possible. Lives of failure are lives
where expectations are too high." Example: "When you are starting to
work out, it is not a good idea to try to run 5 miles the first day just
because you heard that a person who is in good shape can do that."

99

Impossible Difficult but possible Easy

FIGURE 9.2. Different levels of task difficulty for

Building Mastery.

c.  Gradually Increase the Difficulty over Time

Continue: "Once you have mastered the first task, try something a little
more difficult each time. However, if any task is too difficult at
first, do something a little easier next time." Example: When I was
learning how to go camping, I started by setting up a tent in the front
yard; then I started sleeping in a sleeping bag in the bedroom; then I
tried doing both at a car camping site. d. Look for a Challenge Note to
Leaders: It is extremely important to give examples of very small things
that can give a sense of mastery, either from your own life or from the
lives of others. An academic bookworm, for example, can get a tremendous
jolt of mastery from something as simple as learning how to light a
campfire. A person who has never exercised seriously before can get a
high from going from lifting 5-pound weights to 10-pound weights. A
person with a phobia can increase mastery through taking small steps of
opposite action.

Discussion Point: Describe a time in your own life when you had a surge
of mastery from an accomplishment. Ask participants for examples from
their own lives. Discuss how it felt to succeed at something. Discussion
Point: Elicit activities that give participants a sense of mastery.
These will probably differ for each person.

B. Cope Ahead

99

1.  What Is Cope Ahead? Say to participants: "Coping ahead is figuring
    out which situations are likely to cause you trouble, and then not
    only planning ahead how to cope with expected difficulties, but also
    imagining being in the situation and coping effectively."

99

2.  Why Cope Ahead? Research Point: There is a large amount of research
    showing that we can learn new skills simply by imagining and
    practicing new skillful behavior in our minds. This is true for all
    sorts of skills from sports (e.g., tennis players can improve their
    tennis by practicing their tennis service in their minds116) to
    interpersonal skills (e.g., individuals can improve their assertion
    skills by practicing assertive behaviors in their minds117). As it
    turns out, imagining an activity fires many of the same regions of
    the brain as actually engaging in that activity does.118 Not only
    does coping ahead help us in planning how to deal with emotionally
    pro-

394 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 19

vocative situations, but it also increases the likelihood that we will
more automatically respond with the skillful sequence of behaviors we
have practiced.

99 99 99

3.  When to Use Cope Ahead Tell participants: "Cope ahead is useful in
    many types of emotional situations. Here are some of them."  "In
    any situation coming up where there is a threat or you feel afraid."
     "When you know your emotions may get so high that you will forget
    your skills, or you will

be unable to put skillful actions together."  "In a new situation where
you are very unsure of your skills, and your insecurity may elicit

an emotional reaction that will make it very difficult for you to manage
the situation effectively."  "When you may have difficult urges---such
as to run away, hit someone, or say yes to using alcohol or
drugs---which would get in the way of skillful behavior if you followed
them."  "When you could get so emotional or your destructive urges could
be so high that you don't even want to behave skillfully."

99 99

4.  How to Cope Ahead

<!-- -->

a.  Describe a Problem Situation

Say: "Start by describing a problem situation for which you are worried
about coping well."  "Once you have described the situation, check the
facts to be sure that the problem you

perceive would be an actual problem if it occurred. (If you need to, use
Emotion Regulation Handout 8.)"  "Then name the emotions and urges
likely to interfere with using your skills."

99

b.  Decide What Skills to Use

Continue: "Next, decide what coping or problem-­solving skills you want
to use in the situation. Be specific. Write it out in detail. You may
need to use problem-­solving skills to figure out how to cope
effectively. Mindfulness, distress tolerance, and interpersonal
effectiveness skills may also be useful."

99

c.  Imagine the Situation

Go on: "Now imagine the situation in your mind as vividly as possible.
Be sure to imagine yourself in the situation, not watching the
situation. Also, be sure to imagine in the present tense---not the
future or the past."

99

d.  Rehearse in Your Mind Coping Effectively  "Rehearse in your mind
    exactly what you could do to cope effectively, including rehears-

ing your actions, your thoughts, what you can say, and how to say it." 
"Rehearse coping with new problems that come up."  "Rehearse coping with
your most feared catastrophe."

99

e.  Practice Relaxation after Rehearsing Note to Leaders: Some
    participants may not have visual imagery. With individuals whose
    imagery is primarily verbal, suggest that they rehearse verbally, in
    their minds, going over the strategies they will use. Suggest that
    they give themselves subvocal instructions in what to do. Other
    participants may find kinesthetic imagery (a sense of body place) or
    audio imagery useful.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 19 • 395

99

Example: I suddenly became afraid of driving in tunnels. To reduce this
fear, I started driving in every tunnel I could find, reassuring myself
that there was no danger of its falling in on me. When this didn't work
(because the fact is that a tunnel could fall in on me, since
earthquakes are possible in Seattle), I asked myself, "What's the
threat?" I realized that telling myself the tunnel wouldn't fall in was
avoiding the threat. Next I drove in tunnels and imagined that one did
fall in on me. I then imagined jumping out of the car, putting on my
Wonder Woman outfit and rushing to save others, and then running out of
the tunnel to safety. I noticed that my fear came down a lot (from 80 to
30 on a 100 scale), but it did not come down to zero. I asked myself
again, "What's the threat?" and realized that the primary fear was that
the tunnel would not only cave in, but I would be trapped in the tunnel
in extreme pain with a fire raging and no one who could get to me to
save me. I then practiced radical acceptance of pain and death, and
after several practices my fear went away completely. Note to Leaders:
Note that in this story I've included imagery of saving others and
radical acceptance, both of which have allowed me to imagine the event
ending with me in a peaceful state. In other words, it may be useful to
end imaginal practice with a behavior that solves a problem or provides
a positive outcome for self or others. If you are using this strategy,
it is important to discuss with each participant what positive event as
an outcome of their behavior would bring them a sense of peace. It is
also important to notice that I used fantasy (jumping out of my car in
my Wonder Woman outfit). See Emotion Regulation Handout 20a: Nightmare
Protocol, Step by Step for another example of this strategy.

Discussion Point: Give either my example above or one of the following
examples in segments, and at each coping point ask participants what
they think the protagonist in the example should be practicing in his or
her imagination.

Example: Joe is getting ready to sing solo for the first time at a
recital given at his university. He has had a cold, and he is afraid his
voice might give out for a minute or two in the middle of his
performance. To cope ahead, he imagines first singing with no troubles.
This is helpful, but he is still anxious. Then he practices in his mind
walking out on stage with a glass of water in his hand, bending over,
and putting it on the floor before he starts. Then he imagines singing,
having his voice go out suddenly, bending over to gather his wits
together, picking up his glass of water, taking a sip of water, and then
continuing to sing when he is ready. In this real life example, Joe's
anxiety went all the way down, and he sang his solo without incident.
Note to Leaders: It is very important to help participants figure out
what the emotion cue actually is in a situation. This is particularly
true where the emotion is fear; it is typical for individuals to
misperceive what they are actually afraid of.

Example: Sharon is addicted to drugs, and her bus stop to work is on a
street where there are a lot of drug dealers. Many of them know her, and
when they see her, they approach and offer to sell her drugs. She cannot
move to a safer neighborhood right now. She practices cope ahead skills
every morning before going to work by imagining herself waiting for the
bus, having a dealer approach her, and then telling the dealer in a
determined voice, "No! Stay away from me!" With her therapist, she
imagines standing at the bus stop with cravings, reviewing her pros and
cons in her mind, and telling the dealer, "No! Stay away!" At a later
point, she practices this at home. Practice Exercise: Elicit several
problem situations, and then select one or two to practice with
participants. Discuss possible ways to cope with each situation, and
have participants write out specific steps. Then encourage the
participants to sit back, close their eyes, and rehearse in imagi-

396 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handouts 19--20

nation using the coping skills to manage the situation. At the end, lead
participants through a brief relaxation exercise. Get feedback and
discuss. Note to Leaders: It is important throughout skills training to
look for situations where participants can practice cope ahead. Add it
as an individual homework assignment where appropriate.

XVII. Taking Care of Your Mind by Taking Care of Your Body (Emotion
      Regulation Handout 20) Main Point: An out-of-­balance body
      increases vulnerability to negative emotions and emotion mind.
      Taking care of one's body increases emotional resilience. The
      mnemonic PLEASE covers treating PhysicaL illness, balanced Eating,
      avoiding mood-Altering substances, balanced Sleep, and Exercise.
      Emotion Regulation Handout 20: Taking Care of Your Mind by Taking
      Care of Your Body. It is rare that a participant has difficulty
      understanding this handout. If pressed for time, you can usually
      go through this handout rather quickly. Emotion Regulation
      Worksheet 14 (see below) is used for recording practice. Emotion
      Regulation Worksheet 14: Practicing PLEASE Skills. On this
      worksheet, participants are to record their use of the PLEASE
      skills during the week. There is a row for each day, and
      participants can record how they practiced each of the PLEASE
      skills that day. At the bottom of each column is a space for
      checkmarking whether each specific skill was helpful over the
      week.

99A. The Body's Influence on the Mind Tell participants: "An
out-of-­balance body increases vulnerability to negative emotions and
emotion mind. If you use the skills in this part of the module to take
care of your body, this will increase your emotional resilience."

99B. The PLEASE Skills Explain to participants: "You can remember these
skills with the term PLEASE. This stands for the following: Treat
PhysicaL illness, balance Eating, avoid mood-Altering substances,
balance Sleep, and get Exercise."

99

1.  Treat PhysicaL Illness Say to participants: "Being sick lowers your
    resistance to negative emotions. The healthier you can become, the
    better able you will be to regulate your emotions." Many individuals
    fear going to a physician or do not have the behavioral regulation
    to get themselves to doctor appointments. Others do not have the
    self-­regulation to take prescribed medications (either psychotropics
    or general medication).

99

99

Discussion Point: Discuss any illnesses participants have had. What
interferes with treating illness? Common obstacles may include
embarrassment about the problem (as in the case of sexually transmitted
diseases), lack of assertion skills, lack of money, problems with
self-­regulation, fear of medical treatment, and negative previous
experiences of seeking medical care.

2.  Balance Eating Say: "Try to eat the amounts and kinds of foods that
    help you feel good---not too much or too little. Both eating too
    much119 and excessive dieting107 can increase your vulnerability to
    emotion mind. When and how often you eat and your daily eating
    routine can be especially impor-

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 20 • 397

tant for some individuals, such as those diagnosed with bipolar
disorder. Stay away from food that makes you feel overly emotional."
Discussion Point: Encourage people to avoid foods that make them feel
bad. Ask participants for foods that make them feel good (e.g.,
chocolate), calm (e.g., milk), or energized (e.g., sugar, meat); stress
the role of such foods, in moderation. Research Point: Research on
restrained eaters on self-­imposed diets shows negative effects of eating
too little. For example, restricting food intake has been shown to lead
both to eating binges and to psychological problems (such as
preoccupation with food and eating, increased emotionality and
dysphoria, and distractibility).107

Note to Leaders: Do not try to convince participants that foods they
think are bad for them are not actually harmful. This is likely to
become a losing battle.

99

3.  Avoid Mood-Altering Substances Explain: "Alcohol and drugs, like
    certain foods, can lower resistance to negative emotions. Stay off
    illicit drugs. Use alcohol in moderation, if at all." Discussion
    Point: Use this as an opportunity to discuss alcohol and drug
    problems participants may be having. Discuss the effects of
    mood-­altering substances on emotions,120 as well as difficulties in
    staying off these substances.

99

99

Discussion Point: Mood-­altering substances alter moods! This is why it
is not a good idea to drink alcohol or use drugs before a job interview,
or before or during other events where behavioral and emotional control
is very important. Elicit other examples from participants of when it
has been important for them not to use alcohol or other drugs.

4.  Balance Sleep Continue: "Try to get the amount of sleep that helps
    you feel good---not too much or too little, usually between 7 and 9
    hours. Keep to a consistent sleep schedule, especially if you are
    having difficulty sleeping." Research Point: An increasing amount of
    research suggests that lack of sleep is related to a wide variety of
    emotional difficulties.121

Discussion Point: Elicit participants' troubles with sleep. This is
usually an important problem for emotionally dysregulated individuals.
Too little sleep, especially, can make them particularly vulnerable to
negative emotions; it may be part of a depression syndrome. What has
helped? What has made things worse?

5.  Get Exercise Explain: "Aerobic exercise, done consistently, is an
    antidepressant.122 In addition, a regular exercise schedule can
    build mastery. Do some sort of exercise 5 to 7 days per week. Try to
    build up to 20 minutes of exercise each time." Discussion Point: Ask
    what forms of exercise participants engage in. An important problem
    here is that consistent exercise requires self-­management skills,
    and most emotionally dysregulated individuals have few such skills.
    This discussion is an opportunity to discuss principles of

398 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handouts 20--20a

self-­management, especially reinforcement principles. (For information
on reinforcement, see Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 20: Strategies
for Increasing the Probability of Behaviors You Want.) Note to Leaders:
The nightmare and sleep hygiene protocols are ordinarily not reviewed in
skills training groups unless the participants are in the group
specifically to deal with nightmares or sleep disturbances. I ordinarily
assign these handouts as reading material and suggest that if needed
they ask their individual therapist to work with them on the protocols.
I have not put any checkmarks on these protocols. If you teach them,
each numbered step in each protocol should be reviewed.

XVIII. Nightmare Protocol (Emotion Regulation Handout 20a) Main Point:
       Recurrent nightmares are not only highly distressing but they
       also interfere with adequate and restful sleep. Emotion
       Regulation Handout 20a: Nightmare Protocol, Step by Step
       (Optional). This optional handout, together with Worksheet 14a
       (see below), can be used when participants have recurrent
       nightmares. Emotion Regulation Worksheet 14a: Target Nightmare
       Experience Forms (Optional). If Handout 20a is used, it is very
       important to go over this worksheet in detail. Note that this
       worksheet consists of three forms. On the Target Nightmare
       Experience Form, the participant describes in detail the
       distressing dream. For some individuals, this may be very
       difficult, and you might want to have such a participant fill it
       out in the presence of a therapist. Some therapists in our group
       have skipped this first form and started the protocol with the
       second form, the Changed Dream Experience Form. Here, the
       participant describes a changed dream in detail. The changed
       dream scenario should be reviewed with each individual to be sure
       he or she follows the instructions exactly. When practicing the
       nightmare protocol, participants track their progress on the
       third form, the Dream Rehearsal and Relaxation Record.

Research Point: The nightmare protocol described below and outlined in
Emotion Regulation Handout 20a is based on the Imagery Rehearsal Therapy
(IRT) for chronic nightmares developed by Barry Krakow and
colleagues.123 Several controlled clinical trials of IRT have shown that
it is effective in reducing the frequency of nightmares.124, 125

99Explain to participants that this treatment is based on the following
ideas:  Nightmares are behaviors that are learned, often as a result of
traumatic events. Once learned,

99 99

they may be maintained by habit.  Habitual nightmares can be changed by
practicing new dreams to replace them.  New dreams are learned by
rehearsing a changed dream---one without the negative and traumatic

events in the old nightmare---and following the rehearsal with
relaxation.  In developing new dreams, it is important to put in changes
that elicit a sense of mastery and

control. In nightmares people ordinarily feel not only terrified but
also out of control. Current clinical thinking is that this factor---the
increase in personal mastery in the dream---­appears to be important in
how IRT works. Point out as well that the nightmare protocol is very
similar to the skill of cope ahead. Both focus on writing out a script
and rehearsing it mentally. Thus both seek to change problem behaviors
by imaginal rehearsal of coping and mastery behaviors.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 20a • 399

99A.

Practice Necessary Skills Tell participants: "Practice necessary skills
first to be sure you are ready to work on changing nightmares." 1.
Relaxation Say: "Practice relaxation. Decide what relaxation method you
want to use while working on your nightmares. Practice it to be sure
that you can do it, and that when you practice you do become more
relaxed." 2. Pleasant Imagery Go on: "Practice pleasant imagery to be
sure that you can evoke imagery." 3. Coping Skills Continue: "Decide on
and rehearse coping skills in case you become distressed when thinking
about your nightmares." Explain that TIP skills (see Chapter 10 and
Distress Tolerance Handout 6) may be useful if arousal gets very high.
Other distress tolerance skills, such as temporary distraction or
self-­soothing, may also be useful. Problem solving (see Section XI of
this chapter) may be necessary to determine whether the target nightmare
is too severe to work on at the moment.

B. Choose a Recurring Nightmare Tell participants: "Choose a recurring
nightmare to work with. Select one you are prepared to manage. Do not
start with your most severe or traumatic nightmare unless you are very
prepared. First practice on easier ones, and work up to harder ones."

C. Write Down the Target Nightmare Say: "Now write down your target
nightmare in moment-to-­moment detail. Include events in the environment,
as well as thoughts, feelings, and assumptions about yourself during the
dream." Note to Leaders: The step of writing down the nightmare can be
skipped for individuals with PTSD, for whom the nightmare is itself
traumatic. The key event in this protocol is developing a sense of
mastery, not exposure to the nightmare itself.

D. Choose a Changed Outcome for the Nightmare Continue: "Next, choose a
way to change the outcome of the nightmare. This can be any change
before anything traumatic or bad happens. It can be anything you want it
to be, as long as it prevents the bad outcome of the usual nightmare
from occurring. There are some people who believe that the more
outrageous the change (for instance, a gun turning into a banana), the
better the protocol works." Explain that the outcome can include
insertion of new information. For example, a male veteran who feels
ashamed of his own behavior in war and believes he has let down his
troops can stand up in the dream and see a huge group of people whose
lives have been saved by his behavior. A woman who has been raped and
feels weak for not fighting back can imagine her arms and legs bulging
with muscles and an auditorium of people giving her a standing ovation
for speaking up and admitting the rape. Note to Leaders: It is important
to work with participants to be sure that any new ending has the desired
effect of making them feel competent and good about themselves.

400 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handouts 20a--20b

E. Write Down the Full Nightmare with the Changes Go on: "Now write down
the full nightmare, with the changed outcome and any other changes you
have made."

F. Rehearse and Relax Each Night Say: "Rehearse the entire changed dream
by visualizing it each night before practicing relaxation. The
relaxation should be something that is effective; each person might use
a different strategy." Note to Leaders: Suggest mindfulness practices,
or progressive relaxation as described in Distress Tolerance Handout 6b:
Paired Muscle Relaxation, Step by Step.

G. Rehearse and Relax during the Day Conclude: "Finally, rehearse the
new dream as often as possible during the day, followed by relaxation.
The key idea here is to remember that changing nightmares takes
practice, practice, practice. But, in general, the effects should show
up within a few weeks." Note to Leaders: See
www.huffingtonpost.com/belleruth-­naparstek/getting-rid-of-­repeating_b\_
487024.html for variations on this protocol as used with veterans. The
basic idea here is to follow the protocol as described, but also to add
to the dream an ending that will allow the person to wake up in a
peaceful state. In other words, the aim is to add an ending where the
dreamer engages in a behavior that solves a problem or provides a
positive outcome for others. If you use this strategy, it is important
to discuss with each participant what positive event as an outcome of
his or her behavior would bring the participant a sense of peace.

XIX. Sleep Hygiene Protocol (Emotion Regulation Handout 20b) Main Point:
     Adequate sleep on a daily basis is essential for both mental and
     physical health. Difficulties in sleeping can often be solved by
     using a series of sleep-inducing strategies. Emotion Regulation
     Handout 20b: Sleep Hygiene Protocol (Optional). This optional
     handout, together with Worksheet 14b (see below), can be used when
     participants have these particular sleep difficulties. Emotion
     Regulation Worksheet 14b: Sleep Hygiene Practice Sheet (Optional).
     If Handout 20b is used, review this worksheet with participants.
     Point: There is an enormous amount of research showing that both
     quantity and quality of 99 Research sleep are related to physical
     and mental health.126 Length of sleep is also related to longevity:
     Either too little or too much sleep is associated with a shorter
     lifespan.127 Evidence for the particular importance of sleep in the
     mood disorders has mushroomed over the past decade. Among
     adolescents and adults with a mood disorder, sleep disturbance: ••
     Is a risk factor for mood disorder episodes. •• Can contribute to
     relapse. •• Has an adverse impact on emotion regulation. •• Has an
     adverse impact on cognitive functioning. •• Compromises health. ••
     May contribute to substance use comorbidity and suicidality. Sleep
     disturbance is now seen as an important but underrecognized
     mechanism in the cause and main-

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 20b • 401
tenance of the mood disorders.128 Because the biology underpinning the
sleep and circadian system is an open system, readily influenced by
inputs from the environment, there are now several powerful, simple, and
inexpensive treatments.

The suggestions for good sleep hygiene in the following protocol are,
for the most part, extremely common in most sleep hygiene lists. Steps
1--6 in this protocol are intended to increase the likelihood of
restfulness/sleep.

99

1.  Develop and Follow a Consistent Sleep Schedule Even on Weekends
    Explain to participants: "When it comes to sleep, ritual is
    everything. Go to bed and get up at the same times each day. Engage
    in the same ritual each night when it is time for bed. Avoid
    anything longer than a 10-minute nap during the day. The idea here
    is to get time of day to be a prompting event for sleep."
2.  Do Not Use the Bed for Daytime Activities Say: "Do not use your bed
    for activities such as watching TV, talking on the phone, or reading
    during the day. This will make you more likely to associate your bed
    with sleep."
3.  Avoid Certain Things before Bed Continue: "Avoid caffeine, nicotine,
    alcohol, and heavy meals late in the day, and exercising for 3--4
    hours before going to bed. Also, do not watch TV before bed if a
    show is emotionally arousing (for example, it is election night and
    your candidate is losing)."
4.  Prepare the Room for Sleep Continue: "Turn off the light, keep the
    room quiet, and make the temperature comfortable and relatively cool
    when you are preparing to sleep. Try an electric blanket if you are
    cold; putting your feet outside the blanket or turning on a fan
    directed toward your bed if you are hot; or wearing a sleeping mask,
    using earplugs, or turning on a 'white noise' machine if needed."
5.  Give Yourself Half an Hour to an Hour to Fall Asleep Say: "Give
    yourself from 30 to 60 minutes to fall asleep. If this doesn't work,
    evaluate whether you are calm, or whether you are anxious or
    ruminating, and follow the appropriate steps after Step 6."

99

6.  Do Not Catastrophize about Not Sleeping Explain: "Catastrophizing
    about not sleeping is sure to keep you awake. Worrying about not
    sleeping is one of the major factors in continuing insomnia.129 If
    sleep is completely elusive, rest in bed, reminding yourself that
    you will be OK with reverie and resting. Do not decide to give up on
    sleeping for the night and get up for the 'day.' " Steps 7--9 are
    for use if participants are calm but wide awake.
7.  Get Out of Bed and Pursue a Quiet Activity Say: "Go to another room
    and read a book, or do some other quiet activity that will not wake
    you up further."
8.  Listen to Public Radio "With eyes closed, listen to public radio
    (BBC, NPR, or the like) at low volume. Public radio is a good choice
    for this, because there is little fluctuation in voice tone or
    volume." (Do not listen to news that will disturb you.)

402 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 20b

9.  Eat a Light Snack "Eat a light snack of complex carbohydrates130
    (such as an apple)." Steps 10--15 are for use if participants are
    anxious or ruminating.

99 10. Use TIP Skills Say: "Splash your face with cold water, or put
your face in a bowl of ice water or cold water on your eyes and upper
face (this will reduce arousal for a brief time). Then get right back in
bed. To block ruminating, practice paced breathing as soon as you lie
back down. Remember, if you have any medical condition, get medical
approval before using cold water." (See Distress Tolerance Handout 6a:
Using Cold Water, Step by Step.)

99 11. Try the 9--0 Meditation Practice "Try the 9--0 meditation
practice, to put a slight burden on your memory that will interfere with
worries. Breathe in deeply and breathe out slowly, saying in your mind
the number 9. On the next breath out, say 8; next, say 7; and so on
until you are saying 0. Then start over, but this time, instead of
starting with 9, start with 8 as you breathe out, followed by 7 and so
on until you reach 0. Next, start with 6 and so on to 0; then start with
5; then with 4 and so on until you have gone all the way down to
starting with 1. Continue with the practice, starting over as often as
necessary until you fall asleep. There are other similar strategies,
such as counting to 10 at least 10 times, first pausing after the count
of 1, the next time pausing after the count of 2, then pausing at 3, 4,
and so on to 10. Then, if you are not out like a light, start over." 12.
Focus on Bodily Sensation "Focus on the bodily sensation of the
rumination if you find yourself ruminating."38, 131 13. Read an
Emotionally Engrossing Novel "Read an emotionally engrossing novel for a
few minutes until you feel somewhat tired. Then stop reading, close your
eyes, and try to continue the novel in your head." 14. Reassure Yourself
"Remind yourself that what appear to be very big problems in the middle
of the night often do not seem so worrisome in the morning. In the
middle of the night, remember those times and tell yourself, 'These are
just middle-of-the-night thoughts, and in the morning I will think and
feel differently.' " 15. If Rumination Doesn't Stop . . . "If rumination
doesn't stop, follow these guidelines. If it's solvable, solve it. If it
is insolvable, go deep into the worry all the way to the
'catastrophe'---the very worst outcome you can imagine--- and then
imagine coping ahead with the catastrophe."132 (See Emotion Regulation
Handout 19: Build Mastery and Cope Ahead.) Discussion Point: Discuss
with participants how using these strategies for combating rumination
can be useful at others times of the day---not just when they are trying
to sleep.

99

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants difficulties they have with
sleep and any strategies they have used that were helpful. Discuss use
of prescription medications for sleep, and emphasize that really good
sleep hygiene practices can be as helpful in the long run. Do not
hesitate to share sleep strategies you have found helpful.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handouts 21--22 • 403

XX. Overview: Managing Really Difficult Emotions (Emotion Regulation
    Handout 21) Main Point: At times, the intensity of negative emotions
    can be so high that special skills are necessary to manage them.
    Emotion Regulation Handout 21: Overview: Managing Really Difficult
    Emotions. This handout is an overview to orient participants to what
    is coming next. Review it quickly. It can also be skipped and the
    information written on the board.

99A. Mindfulness of Current Emotions Say to participants: "Suppressing
emotion increases suffering. Mindfulness of current emotions is the path
to emotional freedom."

99B. Managing Extreme Emotions Say: "Sometimes emotional arousal is so
high that you can't use any skills, particularly if the skills are
complicated or take any thought on your part. This is a skills breakdown
point. Crisis survival skills, like the ones described in Distress
Tolerance Handouts 6--9a, are needed."

99C. Troubleshooting Emotion Regulation Skills Remind participants:
"Troubleshooting emotion regulation skills helps you figure out why a
skill isn't working. When you are learning many new skills, it is easy
to forget many of them or forget how to practice them."

99D. Reviewing Skills Point out that reviewing emotion regulation skills
can also be helpful. The flow chart model of emotions (see Section V of
this chapter, and Emotion Regulation Handouts 5 and 25) puts the skills
in order so that they are better understood and remembered.

XXI. Mindfulness of Current Emotions (Emotion Regulation Handout 22)
     Main Point: Suppressing emotion increases suffering. Mindfulness of
     current emotions is the path to emotional freedom. For advanced
     groups, or participants who you feel confident can experience their
     own emotions without trauma, mindfulness of current emotions can be
     moved up and taught before Emotion Regulation Handout 6: Ways to
     Describe Emotions. Emotion Regulation Handout 22: Mindfulness of
     Current Emotions: Letting Go of Emotional Suffering. Do not try to
     skip over this handout or rush through it. Mindfulness of current
     emotions is a critical skill underpinning many if not most of the
     skills in DBT. Avoiding emotions interferes with using almost every
     other skill in this module. Emotion Regulation Worksheet 15:
     Mindfulness of Current Emotions. The worksheet allows participants
     to check off what skills they have used in practicing mindfulness
     of emotions. This can be very helpful, because participants often
     forget exactly how to practice the skill. If necessary, remind
     participants how to rate intensity of emotions (0 = no emotion; 100
     = maximum intensity). The "Before" and "After" spaces are for
     rating the intensity of the emotion before and after practicing
     mindfulness of current emotions. If participants have trouble
     identifying what emotion they are feeling, instruct them to review
     Emotion Regulation Handout 6, and/or to fill out Emotion Regulation
     Worksheet 4, 4a, or 5. Worksheet 15 ends with a section for
     comments and a description of experiences while practicing.

404 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 22

99A. What Is Mindfulness of Current Emotions? Mindfulness of current
emotions means observing, describing, and "allowing" emotions without
judging them or trying to inhibit them, block them, or distract from
them.

99B. Why Be Mindful of Current Emotions? 1. To Learn That Emotions Are
Not So Catastrophic Tell participants: "By exposing yourself to
emotions, but not necessarily acting on them, you will find that they
are not so catastrophic. You will stop being so afraid of them. Once you
are less afraid, the fear, panic, and anger that you feel in response to
your own emotions will dissipate. Observing emotions works on the same
principle as exposure does in treating phobias and panic."

99

2.  To Find a Path to Freedom Say: "Over time and with practice, you
    will gradually feel more and more free, less controlled by your
    emotions. Letting go of controlling emotions is a path to freedom.
    Many people believe that they have to control their emotions at all
    times. When you believe this, it is easy to become controlled by
    your own rules about emotions. You lose your freedom to be and feel
    as you do. Other people believe that they simply cannot bear painful
    emotions---that they will fall into the abyss or they will die if
    they do not control their emotions. This is the road to losing
    freedom. Wisdom and freedom require the ability to allow the natural
    flow of emotions to come and go, experiencing emotions but not being
    controlled by emotions. Always having to prevent or suppress
    emotions is a form of being controlled by emotions."

99

3.  To Decrease Suffering Explain to participants that accepting painful
    emotions eliminates the suffering, leaving only the pain. At times,
    acceptance even reduces the pain. Fighting emotions ensures that
    they stay.13 This is simply a restatement of the principles of
    mindfulness (see Chapter 7 of this manual) and of distress tolerance
    (see Chapter 10), but these points are extremely important to get
    across.
4.  To Accept Painful Emotions as Part of the Human Condition There are
    valid reasons for negative emotions. Short of making tremendous life
    changes, people probably cannot get rid of a lot of them; even then,
    negative emotions will always be a part of life. Ergo, the trick is
    to find a new way of relating to negative emotions so that they do
    not induce so much suffering. The way is through acceptance.
    Discussion Point: Learning to let go of emotions is extremely
    difficult. It takes a lot of practice. Discuss the role of
    acceptance of emotional suffering. Usually, you can expect
    participants to get this point. Get feedback.

99C. How to Let Go of Emotional Suffering 99 1. Observe Your Emotion
Tell participants: "Start by just observing your emotion. Acknowledge
its presence. Step back. Get unstuck from the emotion."

99

a.  Experience the Emotion as a Wave

Say: "Try to experience your emotion as a wave, coming and going.
Imagine that you are on a beach and that emotions, like the waves of the
ocean, are coming in and out, in and out. Dig your toes into the sand
and allow them to come and go."

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 22 • 405

99

b.  Imagine Surfing the Wave

Continue: "Now imagine you are on a surfboard, riding the waves of your
emotions. Try to keep your balance and just ride the surfboard." Explain
that surfing emotions is very similar to surfing urges in the treatment
of substance use disorders.133 Surfing urges and surfing emotions are
similar if not identical skills. Surfing emotions can be extremely
useful when it is important to inhibit the action linked to the emotion.

99

c.  Try Not to Block or Suppress the Emotion

Go on: "Open yourself to the flow of the emotion. Do not try to get rid
of the emotion. Don't push it away. Don't judge or reject it." d. Be
Willing to Have the Emotion

Trying to build a wall to keep emotions out always has the effect of
keeping emotions in. It is like trying to keep the ocean off the beach
by building a wall of sand. The ocean inevitably seeps through, but it
pools behind the wall because it is unable to go back out to the ocean
quickly. Point: More and more research shows that trying to block or
suppress emotions actually makes 99 Research them worse.97, 134 In fact,
avoiding emotional sensation appears to be at the root of generalized
anxiety disorder. Thus it is important to practice tolerating emotional
sensations, without either trying to shut them down or to avoid them by
going in circles with worry.

e.  Do Not Try to Keep the Emotion Around

Say: "Don't cling to the emotion. Don't rehearse it. Don't hold on to
it. Don't amplify it." 2. Practice Mindfulness of Body Sensations Tell
participants: "Pay attention to your physical sensations. It can be very
useful here to concentrate on just physical parts of the emotion." 
"Notice where in your body you are feeling emotional sensations." 
"Experience the sensations as fully as possible."  "Watch to see how
long it takes for the emotion to go down, or the quality of experience
to

change. Adopt a curious mindset."

99

3.  Remember: You Are Not Your Emotion Remind participants: "You are not
    your emotion. Do not necessarily act on the emotion. Continue to
    observe it. Also, remember times when you have felt different."
4.  Practice Loving Your Emotions  "Respect your emotion. Don't assume
    that it is irrational or based on faulty perceptions or

distortions."  "Let go of judging your emotion."  "Practice willingness
to have the emotion."  "Practice radical acceptance of your emotion."
Note to Leaders: See Distress Tolerance Handout 11: Radical Acceptance
and Distress Tolerance Handout 13: Willingness. If necessary, comment on
the meaning of willingness and radical acceptance, for those who have
trouble understanding the concepts.

406 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 22

Point 4 above is of course a difficult one. "Loving" in this context
means "acceptance." The idea of loving and accepting emotions does not
mean increasing or augmenting them. Fighting emotions does not make them
go away. Accepting emotions allows a person to do something about them.
Note to Leaders: These general instructions for mindfulness of current
emotion often do not appear useful to participants at first. Remind
participants that the point of mindfulness is to become free so that
even intense emotions are not so disturbing. This takes a lot of
practice. It is important to practice this skill with participants.
Throughout skills training in this and other modules, often refer back
to mindfulness of current emotion.

The following story is adapted from one I was told by a Zen teacher, who
read it in a book by another spiritual teacher, Anthony de Mello.135 The
story is a very helpful one in teaching the concept of loving one's
emotions.

99 \$ Story Point: A man bought a new house and decided that he was
going to have a very beautiful

lawn. He worked on it every week, doing everything the gardening books
told him to do. His biggest problem was that the lawn always seemed to
have dandelions growing where he didn't want them. The first time he
found dandelions, he pulled them out. But, alas, they grew back. He went
to his local gardening store and bought weed killer. This worked for
some time, but after summer rains, alas, he found dandelions again. He
worked and pulled and killed dandelions all summer. The next summer he
thought he would have no dandelions at all, since none grew over the
winter. But, then, all of a sudden, he had dandelions all over again.
This time he decided the problem was with the type of grass. So he spent
a fortune and had all-new sod put down. This worked for some time, and
he was very happy. Just as he started to relax, a dandelion came up. A
friend told him it was due to the dandelions in the lawns of his
neighbors. So he went on a campaign to get all his neighbors to kill all
their dandelions. By the third year, he was exasperated. He still had
dandelions. So, after consulting every local expert and garden book, he
decided to write the U.S. Department of Agriculture for advice. Surely
the government could help. After waiting several months, he finally got
a letter back. He was so excited. Help at last! He tore open the letter
and read the following: "Dear Sir: We have considered your problem and
have consulted all of our experts. After careful consideration, we think
we can give you very good advice. Sir, our advice is that you learn to
love those dandelions."

This story can be told as often as necessary. The idea is to get to the
point where clients say to you, "I know, this is a dandelion."
Discussion Point: Have participants share times when radical acceptance
of emotions has reduced suffering. Share your own experiences. Discuss
the idea of "loving" one's emotions. Practice Exercise: Play a few
minutes of emotion-­generating music. This can be dissonant jazz fusion
(e.g., Track 1 of John Coltrane's album Meditations) or other emotional
music (such as Carl Orff's Carmina Burana, Dimitri Shostakovich's
Symphony No. 10, or Samuel Barber's Adagio for Strings). Instruct
participants to experience their emotions while listening. Elicit
reactions. Practice Exercise: It can sometimes be very hard to get
participants to have emotional responses just when you want to practice
mindfulness of current emotions. A current emotion is needed to practice
on! Be creative and try exercises that are very likely to generate some
sort of emotion. For example, go around in a circle and have everyone
sing one line of a song. Interrupt them periodically to redirect them to
pay attention to their bodies and not escape into self-­judgment, or into
thinking about what they're going to sing. Or ask everyone to yell as
loudly as they can at the same time, for about 10--20 seconds. Instruct
participants to pay close attention to their emotional responses while
engaging in the exercise.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handouts 22--23 • 407

99

Practice Exercise: Review Emotion Regulation Worksheet 15 with
participants, and ask them to check off the ways they are willing to
practice mindfulness of current emotions. Discuss.

XXII. Managing Extreme Emotions (Emotion Regulation Handout 23) Main
      Point: Knowing one's own skills breakdown point is important. It
      signals the need first to use crisis survival skills (see Chapter
      10 and Distress Tolerance Handouts 6--9a) and then to return to
      emotion regulation skills. Emotion Regulation Handout 23: Managing
      Extreme Emotions. This handout teaches participants how to
      identify their skills breakdown point. Crisis survival skills are
      listed on this handout, and you can give brief descriptions from
      the teaching notes below. You may be tempted to stop teaching
      emotion regulation skills and go to the crisis survival skills.
      Don't! Simply mention that set of skills, and spend time helping
      participants know when they should use emotion regulation skills
      first and when they should try crisis survival skills first.
      Worksheet: None. If needed, refer participants to the appropriate
      Distress Tolerance Worksheets.

99A. What Is the Skills Breakdown Point? Tell participants: "You are at
your skills breakdown point when your emotional distress is very
high---so extreme that you go into overload."  "You are completely
caught in emotion mind. You can't focus on anything but the emotion

itself."  "You are emotionally overwhelmed."  "Your mind is shutting
down. Your brain stops processing information."  "You can't solve
problems or use complicated skills."

Go on: "Knowing at what point emotional distress interferes with your
own coping and problem solving can be very important. In these times of
crisis, special skills may be needed."

99B. Identify Your Personal Skills Breakdown Point Continue: "When you
are not in a crisis situation, think back on previous emotional
episodes, and figure out how emotionally distressed you were when you
'hit the wall' and simply could not use your emotion regulation skills.
This is your skills breakdown point." 1. How Distressed Were You? "At
what level of distress were you when you couldn't focus your mind on
anything but the emotion, couldn't solve problems, or couldn't use any
other complicated skills? Think back."

99

2.  Check the Facts "Check the facts. Do you really 'fall apart' at this
    level of arousal? Check to be sure the problem is not that although
    you could use skills, you just don't want to because they seem too
    hard. If you really do want to use skills but just can't figure out
    how to do it at this level, then this is indeed your personal skills
    breakdown point." Note to Leaders: It is important to note that
    reaching the point where their skills have broken down does not mean
    that participants themselves have broken down.

408 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handout 23

99C. What to Do at the Skills Breakdown Point Note to Leaders:
Ordinarily I do not teach what to do at the skills breakdown point
during the emotion regulation module. Instead I tell them they will get
these skills in the next module, distress tolerance skills. If you need
to teach these skills here, use the distress tolerance skills handouts
and worksheets listed below.

99

1.  Use Crisis Survival Skills Tell participants: "The first thing to do
    when you know you have reached your skills breakdown point is to use
    the crisis survival skills covered in Distress Tolerance Handouts
    6--9a."

<!-- -->

a.  TIP Skills for Changing Body Chemistry  "Change your body
    temperature by putting cold water on your face, or by having a

warm bath or foot soak."  "Do intense aerobic exercise for 20 minutes or
more."  "Do paced breathing."  "Focus on your body to tense and then
relax muscles, one group at a time."

b.  Distraction from the Event Prompting the Emotion  "Shift your
    attention: Move your mind away from what is distressing you." 
    "Focus your mind on something else---­anything else."  "Leave the
    situation completely."

c.  Self-­Soothing through the Five Senses  "Look at something pleasant
    (vision)."  "Listen to soothing music or other pleasant sounds
    (hearing)."  "Touch something soft or soothing."  "Smell something
    pleasant."  "Eat or drink something good (taste)."

d.  Improving the Moment You Are In  "Imagine being somewhere else or in
    a different situation."  "Pray."  "Find relaxing things to do." 
    "Encourage yourself."  "Find some kind of meaning in the present
    moment."  "Focus your entire mind on one thing in the moment." 
    "Take a short vacation from the moment by briefly avoiding the
    situation."

<!-- -->

2.  Return to Mindfulness of Current Emotions Go on: "At times the most
    useful thing to do, even with very extreme emotions, is to just
    'sit' with them. Sooner or later they always go down. It may be
    difficult, but it can keep you out of trouble for now."
3.  Try Other Emotion Regulation Skills Say: "If nothing seems to be
    working, go to Emotion Regulation Handout 24: Troubleshooting
    Emotion Regulation Skills."

9. Emotion Regulation Skills: Emotion Regulation Handout 24 • 409

XXIII. Troubleshooting Emotion Regulation Skills (Emotion Regulation
       Handout 24) Main Point: When one or more emotion regulation
       skills do not seem to work, it is important not to give up on the
       skills. Instead, participants should troubleshoot how they are
       being applied. Emotion Regulation Handout 24: Troubleshooting
       Emotion Regulation Skills. This handout helps participants figure
       out what is interfering with their efforts to control or regulate
       difficult and ineffective emotions. Worksheet 16 provides much of
       the same information. Teaching works best if participants have
       Worksheet 16 out, as well as Handout 24, while you go over it. If
       you are tight for time, teach this section by only going over the
       worksheet, or have participants use the worksheet during the week
       and then discuss it during homework review in the next session.
       Emotion Regulation Worksheet 16: Troubleshooting Emotion
       Regulation Skills. For many, this worksheet teaches itself.

99A. Questions for When Skills Aren't Working 99 1. Ask: Am I
Biologically More Vulnerable? Advise participants to check for temporary
changes in biology, such as physical illness, menstrual cycle (for
women), too little or too much food, effects of mood-­altering drugs or
alcohol, too little or too much sleep, too little exercise or movement
or over-­exercise, or biological imbalance caused by some mental
disorders (such as bipolar disorders or schizophrenia). If biological
disruptions are suspected, then it is important to get the body back in
balance. At times, with some mental disorders, taking psychotropic
medications may also be important.

99

2.  Ask: Did I Use My Skills Correctly? The first step in answering the
    second question is for participants to carefully read over the
    instructions for each skill tried. If this does not help, the next
    step is for them to get some coaching in how to use the skills or in
    how to select the skill(s) likely to be the most effective.

99

3.  Ask: Is My Environment Reinforcing Intense Emotionality? Say to
    participants: "If you have tried everything else to change your
    emotions and nothing has worked, then it is reasonable to suspect
    that your emotions are giving you some hidden benefit. Outside of
    your awareness, something might be reinforcing your emotions. To
    find out, these activities can be very useful."  "Review Emotion
    Regulation Handout 3."  "Fill out Emotion Regulation Worksheet 2
    and/or 2b."

99

4.  Ask: Am I Putting in the Time and Effort That Regulating My Emotions
    Will Take?  "Do a pros and cons (Emotion Regulation Worksheet 1)." 
    "Practice radical acceptance and willingness skills (see Distress
    Tolerance Handouts 11 and

13)."  "Practice the mindfulness skills of participating and
effectiveness (see Mindfulness Hand-

outs 4c and 5c)." 5. Ask: Am I Too Upset to Use Complicated Skills? Say
to participants: "Trying complicated skills when you are at your skills
breakdown point can lead to intense frustration and eventually giving up
on skills altogether. However, you may be so far into emotion mind that
you don't even know you have hit your skills breakdown point.

410 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Emotion Regulation
Handouts 24--25

The secret is to practice your most important skills intensely when you
are not in emotion mind. However, sometimes even when you have practiced
the skill, your skills simply don't help. When this happens, try the
following steps."  "If the problem can be easily solved now, then
immediately begin problem solving (see Emo-

tion Regulation Handout 12)."  "If the problem cannot be solved now and
you are worrying about it, practice mindfulness

of current emotions (see Emotion Regulation Handout 22). Worries often
are just your mind's way of trying to escape from painful emotional
sensations.41 Escape, however, often does not work. It is hard to escape
your own self. It may be paradoxical, but it appears to be true that if
you simply focus your mind on experiencing your sensations, neither
trying to suppress them or enlarge them, they will start to fade away
before too long. Watch and see how long it takes for intense sensations
to go down. Pay attention to which physical sensations you are actually
feeling. Focus on physical sensations rather than on emotional thoughts
or images."  "If the emotional intensity is too high for you to think
straight or use any skills, then use TIP skills or other crisis survival
skills (see Emotion Regulation Handout 23 and Distress Tolerance
Handouts 6--9a)."

99

6.  Ask: Are Emotion Myths Getting in the Way? Conclude: "Finally, are
    myths about emotions getting in your way? For example, are you being
    judgmental about your emotions ('My emotions are stupid')? Or do you
    believe that your emotions are who you are? If so, complete Emotion
    Regulation Worksheet 3. Or simply check the facts, challenge the
    myths, and practice thinking nonjudgmentally."

<!-- -->

XXIV. Review of Skills for Emotion Regulation (Emotion Regulation
      Handout 25) Main Point: Modifying any part of the emotion system
      will have an effect on the emotion. Specific DBT skills are aimed
      at specific components of emotions. Emotion Regulation Handout 25:
      Review of Skills for Emotion Regulation (Optional). This optional
      handout is an overview of the major groups of DBT skills. The flow
      chart is very similar to the one in Emotion Regulation Handout 5:
      A Model for Describing Emotions. The handout can be used in a
      number of ways to summarize what has been learned in the entire
      module. It can be pinned up to remind participants of their
      emotion regulation skills (this works even better if the handout
      is laminated). It can also be distributed to other providers
      working with participants as an aid in figuring out what skills to
      use. When time is short, reviewing this handout with participants
      should be skipped. Worksheet: None.

Briefly go over the model of emotions on Emotion Regulation Handout 25,
reminding participants of the skills they have learned.

References   1. Farchione, T. J., Ellard, K. K., Boisseau, C. L.,
Thompson-­ Hollands, J., Carl, J. R., Gallagher, M. W., et al. (2012).
Unified Protocol for transdiagnostic treatment of emotional disorders: A
randomized controlled trial. Behavior Therapy, 43, 666-- 678.

  2. Barlow, D. H., Farchione, T. J., Fairholme, C. P., Ellard, K. K.,
Boisseau, C. L., Allen, L. B., et al. (2010). Unified protocol for
transdiagnostic treatment of emotional disorders. New York: Oxford
University Press.   3. Dimidjian, S., Hollon, S. D., Dobson, K. S.,
Schmal-

9. Emotion Regulation Skills • 411 ing, K. B., Kohlenberg, R. J., Addis,
M. E., et al. (2006). Randomized trial of behavioral activation,
cognitive therapy, and antidepressant medication in the acute treatment
of adults with major depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 74, 658--670.   4. Foa, E. B.,Wilson, R. (2001) Stop
obsessing!: How to overcome your obsessions and compulsions. New York:
Bantam Books.   5. Bolger, N., DeLongis, A., Kessler, R. C., &
Schilling, E. A. (1989). Effects of daily stress on negative mood.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 808--818.   6.
Thompson, S. C., Sobolew-­Shubin, A., Galbraith, M. E., Schwankovsky, L.,
& Cruzen, D. (1993). Maintaining perceptions of control: Finding
perceived control in low-­control circumstances. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 64, 293-- 304.   7. Misanin, J. R., & Campbell,
B. A. (1969). Effects of hunger and thirst on sensitivity and reactivity
to shock. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 69(2),
207--213.    8. Bonanno, G. A. (2004). Loss, trauma, and human
resilience: Have we underestimated the human capacity to thrive after
extremely aversive events? American Psychologist, 59, 20--28.    9.
Hayes, A. M., & Feldman, G. (2004). Clarifying the construct of
mindfulness in the context of emotion regulation and the process of
change in therapy. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11,
255--262. 10. Martell, C. R., Dimidjian, S., & Herman-Dunn, R. (2010).
Behavioral activation for depression: A clinician's guide. New York:
Guilford Press. 11. Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G.
(1979). Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford Press. 12.
Gross, J. J. (2014). Handbook of emotion regulation (2nd ed.). New York:
Guilford Press. 13. Campbell-Sills, L., Barlow, D. H., Brown, T. A., &
Hofmann, S. G. (2006). Effects of suppression and acceptance on
emotional responses of individuals with anxiety and mood disorders.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44, 1251--1263. 14. Lemerise, E. A., &
Dodge, K. A. (2008). The development of anger and hostile interaction.
In M. Lewis, J. M. Haviland-Jones, & L. Feldman Barrett (Eds.), Handbook
of emotions (3rd ed., pp. 730-- 741). New York: Guilford Press. 15.
Rozin, P., Haidt, J., & McCauley, C. R. (2008). Disgust. In M. Lewis, J.
M. Haviland-Jones, & L. Feldman Barrett (Eds.), Handbook of Emotions.
(3rd ed., pp. 757--776). New York: Guilford Press. 16. Barr-­Zisowitz, C.
(2000). Sadness: Is there such a thing? In M. Lewis & J. M.
Haviland-Jones (Eds.),

Handbook of emotions (2nd ed., pp. 607--622). New York: Guilford Press.
17. Rizvi, S., & Linehan, M. M. (2005). The treatment of maladaptive
shame in borderline personality disorder: A pilot study of "opposite
action." Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 12, 437--447. 18. Buss, D.
M., Larsen, R. J., Westen, D., & Semmelroth, J. (1992). Sex differences
in jealousy: Evolution, physiology, and psychology. Psychological
Science, 3, 251--255. 19. Salovey, P., & Rothman, A. (1991). Envy and
jealousy: Self and society. In P. Salovey (Ed.), The psychology of
jealousy and envy (pp. 271--286). New York: Guilford Press. 20.
Hatfield, E., & Rapson, R. L. (2000). Love and attachment processes. In
M. Lewis & J. M. Haviland-Jones (Eds.), Handbook of emotions (2nd ed.,
pp. 654--662). New York: Guilford Press. 21. Averill, J. R., & More, T.
A. (2000). Happiness. In M. Lewis & J. M. Haviland-Jones (Eds.),
Handbook of emotions (2nd ed., pp. 663--676). New York: Guilford Press.
22. Darwin, C. (1998). The expression of the emotions in man and animals
(3rd ed., P. Ekman, Ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. 23.
Ghazanfar, A. A., & Logothetis, N. K. (2003). Neuroperception: Facial
expressions linked to monkey calls. Nature, 423, 937--938. 24. Peltola,
M. J., Leppanen, J. M., Palokangas, T., & Hietanen, J. K. (2008).
Fearful faces modulate looking duration and attention disengagement in
7-month-old infants. Developmental Science, 11, 60--68. 25. Mehrabian,
A., & Wiener, M. (1967). Decoding of inconsistent communications.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 6(1), 109--114. 26.
Sweeny, T. D., Grabowecky, M., Suzuki, S., & Paller, K. A. (2009).
Long-­lasting effects of subliminal affective priming from facial
expressions. Consciousness and Cognition, 18, 929--938. 27. Monahan, J.
L., Murphy, S. T., & Zajonc, R. B. (2000). Subliminal mere exposure:
Specific, general, and diffuse effects. Psychological Science, 11,
462--466. 28. Sheese, B. E., Voelker, P., Posner, M. I., & Rothbart, M.
K. (2009). Genetic variation influences on the early development of
reactive emotions and their regulation by attention. Cognitive
Neuropsychiatry, 14, 332--355. 29. Larsen, R. J., Diener, E., & Emmons,
R. A. (1986). Affect intensity and reactions to daily life events.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 803--814. 30. Calkins,
S. D. (1994). Origins and outcomes of individual differences in emotion
regulation. In N. A. Fox (Ed.), The development of emotion regulation:

412 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES

Biological and behavioral considerations. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 59(2--3, Serial No. 240), 53--72. 31.
Kaitz, M., Maytal, H. R., Devor, N., Bergman, L., & Mankuta, D. (2010).
Maternal anxiety, mother--infant interactions, and infants' response to
challenge. Infant Behavior and Development, 33, 136--148. 32. Moore, G.
A., Hill-­Soderlund, A. L., Propper, C. B., Calkins, S. D., Mills-­Koonce,
W. R., & Cox, M. J. (2009). Mother--infant vagal regulation in the
faceto-face still-face paradigm is moderated by maternal sensitivity.
Child Development, 80, 209--223. 33. Moore, G. A. (2010). Parent
conflict predicts infants' vagal regulation in social interaction.
Development and Psychopathology, 22, 23--33. 34. Muraven, M., Tice, D.
M., & Baumeister, R. F. (1998). Self-­control as limited resource:
Regulatory depletion patterns. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74, 774--789. 35. Goldberg, L. S., & Grandey, A. A. (2007).
Display rules versus display autonomy: Emotion regulation, emotional
exhaustion, and task performance in a call center simulation. Journal of
Occupational Health Psychology, 12, 301--318. 36. Lyubomirsky, S., &
Nolen-­Hoeksema, S. (1995). Effects of self-­focused rumination on
negative thinking and interpersonal problem solving. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 176--190. 37. Nolen-­Hoeksema, S.
(2000). The role of rumination in depressive disorders and mixed
anxiety/depressive symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109,
504--511. 38. Borkovec, T. D., & Inz, J. (1990). The nature of worry in
generalized anxiety disorder: A predominance of thought activity.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28, 153--158. 39. Lyubomirsky, S., &
Nolen-­ Hoeksema, S. (1993). Self-­perpetuating properties of dysphoric
rumination. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 339--349.
40. Borkovec, T. D., & Hu, S. (1990). The effect of worry on
cardiovascular response to phobic imagery. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 28, 69--73. 41. Borkovec, T. D. (1994). The nature, functions,
and origins of worry. In G. Davey & F. Tallis (Eds.), Worrying:
Perspectives on theory, assessment, and treatment (pp. 5--33). New York:
Wiley. 42. Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (2012).
Acceptance and commitment therapy: The process and practice of mindful
change (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press. 43. Mauss, I. B., Levenson,
R. W., McCarter, L., Wilhelm, F. H., & Gross, J. J. (2005). The tie that
binds?: Coherence among emotion experience, behavior, and physiology.
Emotion, 5, 175--190.

44. Lemke, M. R., Fischer, C. J., Wendorff, T., Fritzer, G., Rupp, Z., &
    Tetzlaff, S. (2005). Modulation of involuntary and voluntary
    behavior following emotional stimuli in healthy subjects. Progress
    in Neuropsychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 29, 69--76.
45. Dimberg, U., & Thunberg, M. (1998). Rapid facial reactions to
    emotional facial expressions. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology,
    39, 39--45.
46. Ortony, A., & Turner, T. J. (1990). What's basic about basic
    emotions? Psychological Review, 97, 315--331.
47. Davidson, R. J., Jackson, D. C., & Kalin, N. H. (2000). Emotion,
    plasticity, context, and regulation: Perspectives from affective
    neuroscience. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 890--909.
48. Davidson, R. J. (2000). Affective style, psychopathology, and
    resilience: Brain mechanisms and plasticity. American Psychologist,
    55, 1196--1214.
49. Linden, D. E. J. (2006). How psychotherapy changes the brain: The
    contribution of functional neuroimaging. Molecular Psychiatry, 11,
    528--538.
50. Brody, A. L., Saxena, S., Stoessel, P., Gillies, L. A.,
    Fairbanks, L. A., Alborzian, S., et al. (2001). Regional brain
    metabolic changes in patients with major depression treated with
    either paroxetine or interpersonal therapy: Preliminary findings.
    Archives of General Psychiatry, 58, 631--640.
51. Amini, F., Lewis, T., Lannon, R., Louie, A., Baumbacher, G.,
    McGuinness, T., et al. (1996). Affect, attachment, memory:
    Contributions toward psychobiologic integration. Psychiatry:
    Interpersonal and Biological Processes, 59, 213--239.
52. Liggan, D. Y., & Kay, J. (1999). Some neurobiological aspects of
    psychotherapy: A review. Journal of Psychotherapy Practice and
    Research, 8, 103--114.
53. Post, R. M., & Weiss, S. R. B. (1997). Emergent properties of neural
    systems: How focal molecular neurobiological alterations can affect
    behavior. Development and Psychopathology, 9, 907--929.
54. Shin, L. M., & Liberzon, I. (2010). The neurocircuitry of fear,
    stress, and anxiety disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology, 35,
    169--191.
55. Schober, J. M., & Pfaff, D. (2007). The neurophysiology of sexual
    arousal. Best Practice and Research: Clinical Endocrinology and
    Metabolism, 21, 445--
56. 
57. Panksepp, J. (2000). Emotion as a natural kind within the brain.
    In M. Lewis & J. M. HavilandJones (Eds.), Handbook of emotions (2nd
    ed., pp. 137--155). New York: Guilford Press.
58. Davidson, R. J., Kalin, N. H., & Shelton, S. E. (1993). Lateralized
    response to diazepam predicts temperamental style in rhesus monkeys.
    Behavioral Neuroscience, 107, 1106--1110.
59. Davidson, R. J. (1998). Anterior electrophysiological asymmetries,
    emotion, and depression: Concep-

9. Emotion Regulation Skills • 413 tual and methodological conundrums.
Psychophysiology, 35, 607--614. 59. Davidson, R. J., Putnam, K. M., &
Larson, C. L. (2000). Dysfunction in the neural circuitry of emotion
regulation: A possible prelude to violence. Science, 289, 591--594. 60.
Davidson, R. J. (2000). Affective style, psychopathology, and
resilience: Brain mechanisms and plasticity. American Psychologist, 55,
1196--1214. 61. Henriques, J. B., & Davidson, R. J. (1991). Left frontal
hypoactivation in depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100,
535--545. 62. Tucker, D. M., & Williamson, P. A. (1984). Asymmetric
neural control systems in human self-­ regulation. Psychological Review,
91(2), 185--215. 63. Oatley, K. J. J. M. (1992). Human emotions:
Function and dysfunction. Annual Review of Psychology, 43, 55--85. 64.
Ekman, P. (1993). Facial expression and emotion. American Psychologist,
48, 384--392. 65. Ekman, P. (1994). All emotions are basic. In P. Ekman
& R. J. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of emotion (pp. 15--19). New York:
Oxford University Press. 66. Diamond, R., & Carey, S. (1977).
Developmental changes in representation of faces. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 23, 1--22. 67. Nelson, C. A. (1987). The
recognition of facial expressions in the first 2 years of life:
Mechanisms of development. Child Development, 58, 889--909. 68.
Montague, D. P. F., & Walker-­ A ndrews, A. S. (2001). Peekaboo: A new
look at infants' perception of emotion expressions. Developmental
Psychology, 37, 826--838. 69. Cohn, J. F., & Tronick, E. Z. (1983).
Three-monthold infants' reaction to simulated maternal depression. Child
Development, 54, 185--193. 70. Lamb, M. E., Morrison, D. C., & Malkin,
C. M. (2007). The development of infant social expectations in
face-to-face interaction: A longitudinal study. Merrill-­Palmer
Quarterly, 33, 241--254. 71. Fogel, A. (1993). Developing through
relationships: Origins of communication, self, and culture. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. 72. Matsumoto, D. (2008). Mapping
expressive differences around the world: The relationship between
emotional display rules and individualism versus collectivism. Journal
of Cross-­C ultural Psychology, 39, 55--74. 73. Lively, K. J., & Powell,
B. (2006). Emotional expression at work and at home: Domain, status, or
individual characteristics? Social Psychology Quarterly, 69, 17--38. 74.
Buck, R. (1980). Nonverbal behavior and the theory of emotion: The
facial feedback hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 38, 811--824.

75. Soussignan, R. (2002). Duchenne smile, emotional experience, and
    autonomic reactivity: A test of the facial feedback hypothesis.
    Emotion, 2, 52--74.
76. Lieberman, M. D., Eisenberger, N. I., Crockett, M. J., Tom, S. M.,
    Pfeifer, J. H., & Way, B. M. (2007). Putting feelings into words:
    Affect labeling disrupts amygdala activity in response to affective
    stimuli. Psychological Science, 18, 421--428.
77. Ackerman, B. P., & Izard, C. E. (2004). Emotion cognition in
    children and adolescents: Introduction to the special issue. Journal
    of Experimental Child Psychology, 89, 271--275.
78. Borkovec, T. D., Ray, W. J., & Stober, J. (1998). Worry: A cognitive
    phenomenon intimately linked to affective, physiological, and
    interpersonal behavioral processes. Cognitive Therapy and Research,
    22, 561--576.
79. Williams, J. B. W., Stiles, W. B., & Shapiro, D. A. (2007).
    Cognitive mechanisms in the avoidance of painful and dangerous
    thoughts: Elaborating the assimilation model. Cognitive Therapy and
    Research, 23, 285--306.
80. Philippot, P., Baeyens, C., Douilliez, C., & Francart, B. (2004).
    Cognitive regulation of emotion: Application to clinical disorders.
    In P. Philippot & R. S. Feldman (Eds.), The regulation of emotion
    (pp. 71--100). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
81. Roseman, I. J. (2001). A model of appraisal in the emotion system:
    Integrating theory, research, and applications. In K. R. Scherer, A.
    Schorr, & T. Johnstone (Eds.), Appraisal processes in emotion:
    Theory, methods, research (pp. 68--91). New York: Oxford University
    Press.
82. Gross, J. J. (2001). Emotion regulation in adulthood: Timing is
    everything. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 10,
    214--219.
83. Siemer, M., Mauss, I., & Gross, J. J. (2007). Same situation---­
    different emotions: How appraisals shape our emotions. Emotion, 7,
    592--600.
84. Hunter, P. G., Schellenberg, E. G., & Griffith, A. T. (2012). Misery
    loves company: Mood-­ congruent emotional responding to music.
    Emotion, 11, 1068--1072.
85. White, L. K., Suway, J. G., Pine, D. S., Bar-Haim, Y., & Fox, N. A.
    (2011). Cascading effects: The influence of attention bias to threat
    on the interpretation of ambiguous information. Behaviour Research
    and Therapy, 49, 244--251.
86. Forgas, J. P., & Vargas, P. T. (2000). The effects of moon on social
    judgment and reasoning. In M. Lewis & J. M. Haviland-Jones (Eds.),
    Handbook of emotions (2nd ed., pp. 350--368). New York: Guilford
    Press.
87. Barlow, D. H. (Ed.). (2014). Clinical handbook of psychological
    disorders: A step-by-step treatment manual (5th ed.). New York:
    Guilford Press.

414 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES

88. Young, J. E., Klosko, J. S., & Weishaar, M. E. (2003). Schema
    therapy: A practitioner's guide. New York: Guilford Press.

89. Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P. (2004). Psychotherapy for borderline
    personality disorder: Mentalizationbased treatment. New York: Oxford
    University Press.

90. Lackner, J. M., & Quigley, B. M. (2005). Pain catastrophizing
    mediates the relationship between worry and pain suffering in
    patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Behaviour Research and
    Therapy, 43, 943--957.

91. Riddle, D. L., Wade, J. B., Jiranek, W. A., & Kong, X. (2010).
    Preoperative pain catastrophizing predicts pain outcome after knee
    arthroplasty. Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research, 468, 798--

92. 

93. Vlaeyen, J. W., Timmermans, C., Rodriguez, L. M., Crombez, G., van
    Horne, W., Ayers, G. M., et al. (2004). Catastrophic thinking about
    pain increases discomfort during internal atrial cardioversion.
    Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 56, 139--144.

94. Smith, R. H., & Kim, S. H. (2007). Comprehending envy. Psychological
    Bulletin, 133, 46--64.

95. Cuijpers, P., Van Straten, A., & Warmerdam, L. (2007). Behavioral
    activation treatments for depression: A meta-­analysis. Clinical
    Psychology Review, 27, 318--326.

96. Antony, M. M., & Stein, M. B. (Eds.). (2009). Oxford handbook of
    anxiety and related disorders (Oxford library of psychology). New
    York: Oxford University Press.

97. Kassinove, H., & Tafrate, R. C. (2002). Anger management: The
    complete treatment guidebook for practitioners. Atascadero, CA:
    Impact.

98. American Psychiatric Association. (2013, May). Social anxiety
    disorder fact sheet. Washington, DC: Author. Available from
    www.dsm5.org/Documents/Social Anxiety Disorder Fact Sheet.pdf.

99. Gross, J. J., & Levenson, R. W. (1993). Emotional suppression:
    Physiology, self-­report, and expressive behavior. Journal of
    Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 970--986.

100. Gross, J. J., & John, O. P. (2003). Individual differences in two
     emotion regulation processes: Implications for affect,
     relationships, and well-being. Journal of Personality and Social
     Psychology, 85, 348--362.

101. Moreland, R. L., & Beach, S. R. (1992). Exposure effects in the
     classroom: The development of affinity among students. Journal of
     Experimental Social Psychology, 28, 255--276.

102. Norton, M. I., Frost, J. H., & Ariely, D. (2007). Less is more: The
     lure of ambiguity, or why familiarity breeds contempt. Journal of
     Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 97--105.

103. D'Zurilla, T. J., & Nezu, A. M. (1999). Problem-­ solving therapy: A
     social competence approach to clinical intervention (2nd ed.). New
     York: Springer.

104. Paulus, P. B., & Brown, V. R. (2007). Toward more creative and
     innovative group idea generation: A cognitive--social--­motivational
     perspective of brainstorming. Social and Personality Psychology
     Compass, 1, 248--265.

105. Porter, S., Spencer, L., & Birt, A. (2003). Blinded by emotions?:
     Effect of the emotionality of a scene on susceptibility to false
     memories. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 35, 165--175.

106. Beck, J. S. (2011). Cognitive behavior therapy: Basics and beyond
     (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.

107. Folkman, S., & Moskowitz, J. T. (2000). Positive affect and the
     other side of coping. American Psychologist, 55, 647--654.

108. Polivy, J. (1996). Psychological consequences of food restriction.
     Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 96, 589--592.

109. Fredrickson, B. L., & Joiner, T. (2002). Positive emotions trigger
     upward spirals toward emotional well-being. Psychological Science,
     13, 172--175.

110. Williams, K. E., Chambless, D. L., & Ahrens, A. (1997). Are
     emotions frightening?: An extension of the fear of fear construct.
     Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35, 239--248.

111. Creswell, J. D., Welch, W. T., Taylor, S. E., Sherman, D. K.,
     Gruenewald, T. L., & Mann, T. (2005). Affirmation of personal
     values buffers neuroendocrine and psychological stress responses.
     Psychological Science, 16, 846--851.

112. Davidov, E., Schmidt, P., & Schwartz, S. H. (2008). Bringing values
     back in: The adequacy of the European Social Survey to Measure
     Values in 20 countries. Public Opinion Quarterly, 72, 420--445.

113. Diener, E., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2002). Very happy people.
     Psychological Science, 13, 80--83.

114. Dobson, K. (1989). A meta-­analysis of the efficacy of cognitive
     therapy for depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
     Psychology, 57, 414--419.

115. Bandura, A. (1977). Self-­efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of
     behavioral change. Psychological Review, 84, 191--215.

116. Christensen, K., Stephens, M., & Townsend, A. (1998). Mastery in
     women's multiple roles and wellbeing: Adult daughters providing
     care to impaired parents. Health Psychology, 17, 163--171.

117. Atienza, F. L., Balaguer, I., & Garcia-­Merita, M. L. (1998). Video
     modeling and imagining training on performance of tennis service of
     9- to 12-year-old children. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 87,
     519--529.

118. Kazdin, A. E., & Mascitelli, S. (1982). Covert and overt rehearsal
     and homework practice in developing assertiveness. Journal of
     Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 50, 250--258.

119. Jeannerod, M., & Frak, V. (1999). Mental imaging of motor activity
     in humans. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 9, 735--739.

9. Emotion Regulation Skills • 415 119. Hilbert, A., & Tuschen-­Caffier,
B. (2007). Maintenance of binge eating through negative mood: A
naturalistic comparison of binge eating disorder and bulimia nervosa.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 40, 521--530. 120. Stritzke,
W. G. K., Patrick, C. J., & Lang, A. R. (1995). Alcohol and human
emotion: A multidimensional analysis incorporating startle-probe
methodology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104, 114--122. 121. Yoo, S.
S., Gujar, N., Hu, P., Jolesz, F. A., & Walker, M. P. (2007). The human
emotional brain without sleep: A prefrontal amygdala disconnect. Current
Biology, 17, R877--R878. 122. Salmon, P. (2001). Effects of physical
exercise on anxiety, depression, and sensitivity to stress: A unifying
theory. Clinical Psychology Review, 21, 33--61. 123. Krakow, B.,
Hollifeld, M., Johnston, L., Kloss, M. S. R., Warner, T. D., Tandberg,
D., et al. (2001). Imagery rehearsal therapy for chronic nightmares in
sexual assault survivors with posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of
the American Medical Association, 286, 537--545. 124. Nappi, C. M.,
Drummond, S. P. A., Thorp, S. R., & McQuaid, J. R. (2010). Effectiveness
of imagery rehearsal therapy for the treatment of combat-­ related
nightmares in veterans. Behavior Therapy, 41, 237--244. 125. Moore, B.
A., & Krakow, B. (2007). Imagery rehearsal therapy for acute
posttraumatic nightmares among combat soldiers in Iraq. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 164, 683--684. 126. Moore, P. J., Adler, N. E., Williams,
D. R., & Jackson, J. S. (2002). Socioeconomic status and health:

The role of sleep. Psychosomatic Medicine, 64, 337--344. 127. Hublin,
C., Partinen, M., Koskenvuo, M., & Kaprio, J. (2007). Sleep and
mortality: A population-based 22-year follow-up study. Sleep, 30,
1245--1253. 128. Harvey, A. G. (2011). Sleep and circadian functioning:
Critical mechanisms in the mood disorders? Annual Review of Clinical
Psychology, 7, 297--319. 129. Harvey, A. G., & Greenall, E. (2003).
Catastrophic worry in primary insomnia. Journal of Behavior Therapy and
Experimental Psychiatry, 34, 11--23. 130. Afaghi, A., O'Connor, H., &
Chow, C. M. (2007). High-­ glycemic-index carbohydrate meals shorten
sleep onset. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 85, 426--430. 131.
Borkovec, T. D., & Boudewyns, P. A. (1992). The treatment of initial
insomnia. In J. M. G. Williams (Ed.), The psychological treatment of
depression: A guide to the theory and practice of cognitive behaviour
therapy (2nd ed., pp. 138--142). London: Routledge. 132. Borkovec, T.
D., & Ruscio, A. M. (2001). Psychotherapy for generalized anxiety
disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 62, 37--45. 133. Marlatt, G.
A., Larimer, M. E., & Witkiewitz, K. (Eds.). (2012). Harm reduction:
Pragmatic strategies for managing high-risk behaviors (2nd ed.). New
York: Guilford Press. 134. Gross, J. J., & Levenson, R. W. (1997).
Hiding feelings: The acute effects of inhibiting negative and positive
emotion. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106, 95--103. 135. De Mello, A.
(1984). The song of the bird. New York: Image Books.

Chapter 10

Distress Tolerance Skills

Goals of the Module Most approaches to mental health treatment focus on
changing distressing events and circumstances. They have paid little
attention to accepting, finding meaning for, and tolerating distress.
Although the distinction is not as clear-cut as I am making it seem,
this task has more often been tackled by religious and spiritual
communities and leaders. DBT emphasizes the benefits of learning to bear
pain skillfully. The ability to tolerate and accept distress is an
essential mental health goal for at least two reasons. First, pain and
distress are part of life; they cannot be entirely avoided or removed.
The inability to accept this immutable fact itself leads to increased
pain and suffering. Second, distress tolerance, at least over the short
run, is part and parcel of any attempt to change oneself; otherwise,
efforts to escape pain and distress (e.g., through impulsive actions)
will interfere with efforts to establish desired changes. Distress
tolerance skills constitute a natural progression from mindfulness
skills. They have to do with the ability to accept, in a nonevaluative
and nonjudgmental fashion, both oneself and the current situation.
Essentially, distress tolerance is the ability to perceive one's
environment without putting demands on it to be different; to experience
one's current emotional state without attempting to change it; and to
observe one's own thoughts and action patterns without attempting to
stop or control them. Although the stance advocated here is
nonjudgmental, this should not be understood to mean that it is one of
approval. It is especially important that this distinction be made
clear: Toler416

ance and/or acceptance of reality are not equivalent to approval of
reality. The distress tolerance behaviors targeted in DBT skills
training are concerned with tolerating and surviving crises (including
crises caused by addictive behaviors) and with accepting life as it is
in the moment.

Crisis Survival Skills The portion of the module devoted to crisis
survival skills (Sections II--IX) begins by defining "crisis" and the
types of situations in which these skills can be most useful. By
definition, crisis survival skills are short-term solutions to painful
situations. Their purpose is to make a painful situation more tolerable,
so that it is possible to refrain from impulsive actions that can make
the situation worse. These skills can be overused and must be balanced
by problem solving (see Chapter 9, Section XI). There are six sets of
crisis survival strategies.

The STOP Skill The STOP skill helps individuals refrain from impulsive
actions. STOP is a mnemonic for the following steps: Stop, Take a step
back, Observe, and Proceed mindfully.

Pros and Cons Evaluating pros and cons is a decision-­making strategy.
The focus here is on thinking through the positive and negative
consequences of acting on impul-

10. Distress Tolerance Skills • 417

sive urges in crisis situations and of not acting on them (i.e.,
tolerating distress).

TIP Skills The TIP skills can be used to change body chemistry quickly,
so as to counteract disabling emotional arousal. TIP is a mnemonic for
Temperature, Intense exercise, Paced breathing, and Paired muscle
relaxation. (Note that although there are two P skills, the mnemonic
remains the word TIP.)

Distracting with Wise Mind ACCEPTS Distracting methods work by reducing
contact with emotional stimuli or, in some cases, with the most painful
aspects of the stimuli. They may also work to change parts of an
emotional response. There are seven sets of distraction skills. The word
ACCEPTS is a mnemonic for these strategies: Activities (discordant to
the negative emotion), Contributing, Comparisons, Emotions (opposite to
the current negative emotion), Pushing away from the situation,
Thoughts, and Sensations.

Self-­Soothing Self-­soothing strategies focus on the five
senses---vision, hearing, smell, taste, and touch. They consist of
sensual activities that feel comforting, nurturing, and soothing. The
body scan meditation also falls into this category.

Improving the Moment The final set of crisis survival skills is an
idiosyncratic collection of ways to improve the quality of the moment.
The word IMPROVE is a mnemonic for each of these strategies: Imagery,
Meaning, Prayer, Relaxing actions, One thing in the moment, Vacation,
and Encouragement.

Reality Acceptance Skills Whereas the goal of crisis survival is to get
through the crisis without making it worse, the goal of reality
acceptance skills (Sections X--XV) is to reduce suffering and increase
freedom when painful facts cannot be changed immediately, if ever. There
are five sets of reality acceptance skills.

Radical Acceptance Radical acceptance is complete and total acceptance,
from deep within, of the facts of reality. It involves acknowledging
facts that are true and letting go of a fight with reality. Acceptance
is often misunderstood as approval (it is not) or as being against
change (it is not).

Turning the Mind It usually takes multiple efforts over time to accept a
reality that feels unacceptable. The skill of turning the mind toward
acceptance is choosing to accept reality as it is. It is not itself
acceptance, but it is the first step toward acceptance, and it must
usually be taken over and over again.

Willingness Willingness and its opposite, willfulness, are concepts
derived from the work of Gerald May (1982).1 May describes willingness
as follows: Willingness implies a surrendering of one's self-­
separateness, an entering into, an immersion in the deepest processes of
life itself. It is a realization that one already is a part of some
ultimate cosmic process and it is a commitment to participation in that
process. In contrast, willfulness is the setting of oneself apart from
the fundamental essence of life in an attempt to master, direct,
control, or otherwise manipulate existence. More simply, willingness is
saying yes to the mystery of being alive in each moment. Willfulness is
saying no, or perhaps more commonly, "yes, but . . . " (p. 6)

May continues: Willingness and willfulness do not apply to specific
things or situations. They reflect instead the underlying attitude one
has toward the wonder of life itself. Willingness notices this wonder
and bows in some kind of reverence to it. Willfulness forgets it,
ignores it, or at its worst, actively tries to destroy it. Thus
willingness can sometimes seem very active and assertive, even
aggressive. And willfulness can appear in the guise of passivity. (p. 6)

Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands The skills of half-­smiling and willing
hands are usually taught together and are ways to accept reality

418 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES

with the body. In half-­smiling, facial muscles are relaxed, with lips
slightly upturned at the corners. Because emotions are partially
controlled by facial expressions, 2, 3 adopting this facial expression
helps clients feel more accepting. In willing hands, the hands are
unclenched, with palms up and fingers relaxed. Willing hands are the
opposite of clenched hands, which are indicative of anger and of
fighting to change reality.

Mindfulness of Current Thoughts Mindfulness of current thoughts is
observing thoughts as thoughts (i.e., as neural firing of the brain or
as sensations of the brain), rather than as facts about the world. This
skill teaches clients to differentiate thoughts from facts---to distance
themselves from their thoughts and become less reactive to them, while
allowing them to arise and fade away. The approach is different from
that of cognitive therapy, which emphasizes analyzing thoughts and
changing them when they are irrational or inaccurate.

Skills When the Crisis Is Addiction The seven sets of skills included in
the final portion of the module (Sections XVI--XXI) were developed in a
series of studies treating individuals with drug dependence.4--6 These
skills are dialectical abstinence, clear mind, community reinforcement,
burning bridges, building new ones, alternate rebellion, and adaptive
denial. When most or all participants of a skills training group have
serious addictions, these skills can be integrated into the core DBT
skills (as outlined in Schedule 8 in this manual's Part I Appendices),
or they can be taught as a separate skills module either in place of one
of the standard modules or in addition to the standard skills modules.
The skills can also be taught on an as-­needed basis in group or
individual therapy.

Dialectical Abstinence Dialectical abstinence brings together an
abstinence approach and a harm reduction approach. This synthesis of
approaches has historical roots in the original cognitive-­behavioral
relapse prevention model proposed by Marlatt and Gordon;7 the goal of
this maintenance approach was to prevent lapses from occurring (i.e.,
lapse prevention) and to manage

them when they did occur to prevent a full-blown relapse (i.e., relapse
management). Many have critiqued relapse prevention for giving clients
"permission" to engage in addictive behaviors, for helping clients plan
how to cope with a lapse or relapse, or for describing the abstinence
violation effect. However, a harm reduction approach suggests that when
a person has relapsed and is ready to drop out or give up, helping the
person cope with the lapse and its demoralizing consequences is very
often the best course of action.8

Clear Mind "Clear mind" is a synthesis or middle ground between the
extremes of "addict mind," which is governed by the addiction, and
"clean mind," which is abstinent but takes risks and forgets that
relapse is possible. Clear mind is abstinent from addictive behaviors,
but also knows that relapse is possible.

Community Reinforcement Community reinforcement focuses on building
reinforcers in the community that will reward abstinence instead of
addiction.

Burning Bridges and Building New Ones "Burning bridges" means actively
eliminating potential triggers for the addiction. "Building new bridges"
refers to finding physical sensations and creating mental images to
compete with addiction urges.

Alternate Rebellion and Adaptive Denial When addictive behavior
functions as rebellion, "alternate rebellion" focuses on finding
alternative ways to rebel that are expressive but safer. "Adaptive
denial" refers to suspending logic and denying---­ shutting out---urges
for addictive behaviors when they hit. Denial can also take the form of
believing that the addictive behavior is not possible.

Selecting Material to Teach As noted above, there is a great deal of
material for each skill in the teaching notes that follow. You will not
cover most of it the first several times you teach specific skills. The
notes are provided to give you a

10. Distress Tolerance Skills • 419

deeper understanding of each skill, so that you can answer questions and
add new teaching as you go. As in Chapters 6--9, I have put a checkmark
() next to material I almost never skip. If I am in a huge rush, I may
skip everything not checked. Also as in the earlier Part II chapters, I
have indicated information summarizing research in special "Research
Point" features. The great value of research is that it can often be
used to sell the skills you are teaching. As always, it is important
that you have a basic understanding of the specific skills you are
teach-

ing. The first several times you teach, carefully study the notes,
handouts, and worksheets for each skill you plan to teach. Highlight the
points you want to make, and bring a copy of the relevant pages with you
to teach from. Be sure to practice each skill yourself, to be sure you
understand how to use it. Before long, you will solidify your knowledge
of each skill. At that point you will find your own favorite teaching
points, examples, and stories and can ignore many of mine.

420 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 1

Teaching Notes I.

Goals of This Module (Distress Tolerance Handout 1) Main Point: Distress
tolerance skills enable us to survive immediate crises without making
things worse, and to accept reality when we can't change it and it's not
what we want it to be. Distress Tolerance Handout 1: Goals of Distress
Tolerance. This handout lists goals, not specific skills. Briefly review
the three goals; provide enough information and discussion to orient
participants to the module; link the module to participants' own goals;
and generate some enthusiasm for learning the distress tolerance skills.
An important point is that crisis survival skills are needed for getting
through crisis situations, but they are not intended to become a way of
life. Over the long term, reality acceptance and problem solving have to
be practiced if a client is to have a life worth living. Worksheet:
There is no worksheet for this handout.

Explain the goals of distress tolerance skills to clients as follows.

99A. Survive Crisis Situations without Making Them Worse The skills in
this module are ways of surviving and doing well in crisis situations
without resorting to behaviors that will make the situation worse. They
are needed when we can't immediately change a situation for the better,
or when we can't sort out our feelings well enough to know what changes
we want or how to make them. Note to Leaders: If you plan on teaching
the skills for addiction (Distress Tolerance Handouts 16--21), it can be
useful here to define "addiction" as "any behavior you are unable to
stop, despite negative consequences and despite your best efforts to
stop." Note that many repetitive behaviors qualify as addictions.
Getting over addictions requires immense distress tolerance!

99B. Accept Reality As It Is in the Moment Acceptance of reality---of
life as it is in the moment---is the only way out of hell. It is the way
to turn suffering that cannot be tolerated into pain that can be
tolerated. We can think of it as follows:  Pain + nonacceptance =
Suffering and being stuck  Pain + acceptance = Ordinary pain (sometimes
extremely intense) and the possibility of mov-

ing forward Emphasize to participants that life is not all crisis.
Although some clients may live as if their lives are a constant crisis,
life in its totality is not all crisis. Living life as if it is always a
crisis perpetuates the experience of crises, because it interferes with
problem solving that will resolve problems over the long term; thus it
can actually backfire and create more crises. At some point, therefore,
we all have to experience and accept the lives that we have in front of
us (so to speak). This is ultimately the only way to build a life worth
living.

99C. Become Free

We are truly free when we can be at peace and content with ourselves and
our lives, no matter what circumstances we find ourselves in. In many
ways, freedom is an outcome of mastering both crisis survival and
radical acceptance. The crisis survival skills are the bulwark keeping
us from giving in to cravings on the way to freedom. Radical acceptance
skills produce the quieting of intense desire. When we are free, we can
look in the face of our cravings and desires and say "I don't have to
satisfy

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handouts 1--2 • 421

you." Our intense emotions become like a passing tempest at sea, instead
of a demand for action we must give in to. Note to Leaders: The distress
tolerance goal of becoming free is identical to the goal of freedom in
practicing mindfulness from a spiritual perspective. The important point
is that both mindfulness practice and reality acceptance practice lead
inevitably to a greater sense of freedom. In a sense, mindfulness
practice is a reality acceptance practice. If you have not covered this
goal in teaching mindfulness, you can teach it now. If you have
previously taught it, simply make the connection between the two sets of
skills. (The teaching notes are very similar.)

99 II.

Discussion Point: Either before or after reviewing Distress Tolerance
Handout 1, ask participants to check off each goal that is important to
them in the boxes on the handout and then share choices.

Overview: Crisis Survival Skills (Distress Tolerance Handout 2) Main
Point: The goal of crisis survival is to get through a crisis without
making things worse. Crisis situations are, by definition, short-term.
Thus these are not skills to be used all the time or as a lifestyle.
Distress Tolerance Handout 2: Overview: Crisis Survival Skills. This
handout can be reviewed quickly. It is simply an overview to orient
participants to what is coming next. It can also be skipped and the
information written on the board. Do not use this handout to teach the
skills. Distress Tolerance Worksheets 1, 1a, 1b: Crisis Survival Skills.
These are three different versions of a worksheet that can be used with
Handout 2. Each worksheet covers all of the crisis survival skills and
can be employed here if you are using this handout as a review. These
worksheets can also be given again and again for each of the crisis
survival skills (Distress Tolerance Handouts 4--9a) if you do not want
to use the worksheets specific to each skill. Worksheet 1 provides space
for participants to practice crisis survival skills only two times
between sessions. Thus this can be a good starter worksheet with
individuals you are trying to shape into more frequent skills practice.
Worksheet 1a provides for practicing each skill twice. Worksheet 1b
provides for multiple opportunities to practice each skill. Choose the
worksheet that best fits the participants you are teaching. Review the
worksheet you assign with participants. Alternatively, you can allow
participants to choose the handout they wish to use. Allowing choice
gives participants a greater sense of control and may result in higher
homework compliance.

A. Crisis Survival Skills

99

1.  What Are Crisis Survival Skills? Crisis survival skills are skills
    for tolerating and surviving a crisis situation.
2.  When Should These Skills Be Used? These skills are for use when a
    crisis cannot be avoided. The basic idea is to get through crisis
    situations without making them worse.

99

3.  Six Categories of Crisis Survival Strategies There are six groups of
    crisis survival skills. Each is a series of methods for
    short-­circuiting or coping with overwhelming negative emotions and
    almost intolerable situations.  The STOP skill, for stopping oneself
    from engaging in impulsive behavior.  Pros and cons.  TIP skills,
    for changing your body chemistry.

422 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 2--3

Distracting.  Self-­soothing.  Improving the moment.

99

4.  Effects and Limits of These Skills These skills are not a cure for
    all problems in life. Their beneficial effects may only be temporary
    (but achieving them is not a small feat, nonetheless). These skills
    are primarily ways to survive painful emotions. They are not
    designed to be emotion regulation strategies (i.e., ways to reduce
    or end painful emotions), although they may help to regulate
    emotions and to reduce stress. Their central goal is to enable us to
    survive a crisis without making things worse.

<!-- -->

III. Knowing a Crisis When You See One (Distress Tolerance Handout 3)
     Main Point: Crisis survival skills are for crisis situations, which
     are, by definition, short-term. Thus these are not skills to be
     used all the time. Overusing them can get in the way of problem
     solving and change, and thus of building a life worth living.
     Distress Tolerance Handout 3: When to Use Crisis Survival Skills.
     Do not spend much time on this handout, but the core information is
     important to review and clarify. Worksheet: There is no worksheet
     for this handout.

A. What Is a Crisis? 1. Crises Are Highly Stressful Situations with
Potential for Very Negative Outcomes Example: "Your rent money was
stolen, and you have no other money and are facing eviction. You are
overwhelmed and just want the problem to go away. You then run into your
old drug dealer, who offers you free drugs. Taking drugs in such a
situation is likely to make things worse." 2. Crises Are Short-Term
Crisis survival skills are designed to be used only in the short term.
When they are overused (i.e., used in every painful situation or to
avoid every unwanted emotion), problems will never be resolved. When
this happens, crisis survival skills can amount to avoidance of building
a life worth living and can make things worse rather than better in the
long term. Example: "You may be able to get through a period of urges to
use drugs or an urge to attack another person if you distract yourself
from the urges by playing loud music, going to a movie, or the like. But
if every time a difficult-to-solve problem comes along, you avoid it or
distract from it, problems will remain unsolved and life is unlikely to
improve." Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when they
have used coping strategies that work in the short term but are harmful
when overused or used to excess (e.g., eating, ignoring problems, going
to sleep, distracting from important work that needs to be done).

3.  Crises Create Intense Pressure for Quick Resolution Most crises fall
    into two broad categories. Explain these to participants:  "You have
    a strong desire to engage in a destructive behavior (such as to take
    drugs, com-

mit suicide, strike out in anger, or quit a job). Acting on these strong
urges is ineffective."

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 3 • 423  "You
are facing a major demand that will have serious consequences if it goes
unmet (such

as to write a report before a deadline, submit taxes on time, or pay
bills or credit card debt). You feel completely overwhelmed and unable
to focus and get it done. Shutting down and avoiding such demands is not
effective." In both cases, crisis survival skills are needed.

99B. When to Use Crisis Survival Skills 1. Having Intense Pain That
Cannot Be Helped Quickly Tell participants: "Use short-term crisis
survival strategies to reduce pain to manageable levels so that the
crisis can be managed and destructive behavior can be avoided. Once the
pain's intensity is lowered, use more long-term skills---such as emotion
regulation skills, reality acceptance and/ or mindfulness skills, and/or
interpersonal effectiveness skills." Example: "You have had an operation
and are in a lot of pain. You have taken your prescribed medications,
but have a strong urge to take a lot more than prescribed or to get
drunk to ease the pain. Using a crisis survival skill (such as
distraction, self-­soothing, improving the moment) can help you tolerate
the pain in the moment." Discussion Point: Surviving crisis situations
is part and parcel of being effective---"doing what works" (a core
mindfulness skill). However, at times people are more interested in
proving to others how bad a situation is than in surviving the
situation. The problem with proving how bad things are is that it hardly
ever works over the long term in meeting any constructive goals. That
is, although it may result in short-term gains (e.g., being put in the
hospital or getting a lover to return), it usually fails in the long
run. Elicit situations where this has been the case with clients. If you
can give personal examples here, so much the better.

2.  Wanting to Act in Emotion Mind When That Would Make Things Worse
    Continue: "Crisis survival skills are useful when you suddenly have
    an intense urge to do something that you know will make matters
    worse, and you want to stop yourself before you do it." Example:
    "You are with your family at an outdoor concert, and a man near you
    pushes and shoves you to get a better seat ahead of you. You
    immediately have an urge to yell obscenities at this man, but
    realize it would be poor modeling for your children and might make
    matters worse if the man yells back at you. Using a crisis survival
    skill (e.g., STOP) can help you block such a reaction, so that you
    can enjoy the concert with you family." Discussion Point: At some
    point, all of us have made a crisis worse by our own behavior.
    Elicit such examples from participants, particularly examples where
    they would have liked new skills to handle the situation more
    effectively.

3.  Having Emotional Distress Threaten to Become Overwhelming At times
    it is more effective to reduce feelings immediately than to
    experience them fully. Example: "You are at home alone and are
    craving a drink. You have an alcohol problem, but you have been
    clean and sober for 3 months. You don't have alcohol in the house,
    but you start thinking about going out and buying some. Crisis
    survival skills can help you get through the urges without acting on
    them. For example, you can use distraction by calling a friend and
    asking him to come over for a while and watch a movie on TV. To
    distract yourself until he gets there, you put on loud music, remind
    yourself of how lucky you are compared to others you know who have
    not gotten so far in sobriety, and start replying to e-mails and
    surfing the Internet."

424 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 3--4

4.  Feeling Overwhelmed but Needing to Meet Demands High stress can be
    so disorganizing that we lose our ability to solve problems and cope
    well with difficult situations. "Falling apart" emotionally under
    high stress can create a new crisis, which can then exacerbate the
    original emotional crisis or dramatically increase destructive
    urges. Continuing with effective and functional behavior can be
    critical to divert an emerging crisis. Crisis survival skills can
    buy time to regulate distress, so that other DBT skills (e.g.,
    problem solving---see Emotion Regulation Handout 12) can be used.
    Example: "There was a fire in your apartment last night, caused by
    an electrical problem next door. The fire was contained to an
    outside porch, and you got out OK, but there was a lot of smoke in
    your apartment. You stayed at a friend's house overnight. When you
    come back the next day, everything above waist level is covered with
    smoke residue. You can see that you are going to have to do a lot of
    cleaning, sorting what to save and what to throw out, and so on. You
    are so overwhelmed that you can't think or organize what to do, so
    you sit down and read a magazine instead of getting to work on your
    apartment. Realizing that this is not effective, you use one of the
    crisis survival skills (such as a TIP skill) to calm yourself down
    enough to call your sister and ask her to come over and help you
    clean."
5.  Having Extreme Arousal and Problems That Can't Be Solved Immediately
    When emotional arousal is extreme and a situation feels like a
    crisis, it can sometimes be very difficult to distract and "put a
    problem on the shelf," so to speak. The urgency to solve a problem
    right now may make it very difficult to do anything that is not
    focused on the crisis. If the timing is not right for working on a
    particular problem, this sense of urgency can create its own
    problems. Crisis survival skills can be used to distract from the
    situation until it can be solved. Example: "You are at home one
    evening when you get very upset after realizing that you made a big
    mistake earlier that day at work. However, there is nothing you can
    do to fix the problem until tomorrow morning, when the building
    opens again. So to get through until the next day, you play games
    with your daughter and read her a bedtime story. After she is in
    bed, you self-­ soothe by putting bubble bath into a nice hot tub,
    turning on your favorite music, getting in, and reading something
    that will take your mind off the day." Discussion Point: Elicit from
    participants examples of coping with crisis situations effectively.

C. How to Evaluate Whether Crisis Survival Skills Are Working 1. Most
Important Say to participants: "When time passes and you haven't done
anything to make things worse, the skills are working. This is true even
if you don't feel better." 2. Next Continue: "Skills are working when
you start feeling more able to tolerate the problem while using your
other skills. To figure this out, rate your distress tolerance from 0
('I can't tolerate it at all') to 100 ('Although this is painful, I can
definitely tolerate it')." 3. Last "Crisis survival skills might help
you feel better (this is emotion regulation). If so, great, but if not,
keep your focus on surviving the crisis!"

IV. STOP Problematic Behavior Immediately (Distress Tolerance Handout 4)
    Main Point: The STOP skill helps individuals refrain from acting
    impulsively on their emotions and making a difficult situation
    worse. The skill does that by helping an individual resist acting on
    the first impulse

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 4 • 425 to act
(Stop); Take a step back and detach from the situation; Observe to
gather information about what is going on; and then Proceed mindfully
(by evaluating the most effective option to take, given the goals, and
finally following that option). Distress Tolerance Handout 4: The STOP
Skill. This handout gives a brief description for each step of the STOP
skill. Teach this handout by first describing each step on the handout
and then illustrating with an example. Distress Tolerance Worksheets 2,
2a: Practicing the STOP Skill. These are alternative worksheets to use
with Handout 4. Worksheet 2 gives space for practicing the STOP skill
two times, and Worksheet 2a gives space for daily practice. Choose the
worksheet that best fits the participants you are teaching. Review the
worksheet you assign. Alternatively, you can allow participants to
choose the handout they wish to use. Again, allowing choice gives
participants a greater sense of control and may result in higher
homework compliance.

A. When to Use the STOP Skill Say to participants: "When emotion mind
takes over, you may find that you often act impulsively without
thinking. When you react impulsively, you do not have time to use your
skills and get to your wise mind. To be able to use your skills, you
need first to stop yourself from reacting. To help you stay in control,
use the STOP skill."

99B. What Is the STOP Skill? The STOP skill consists of the following
sequence of steps: Stop, Take a step back, Observe, and Proceed
mindfully. 1. Stop Tell participants: "When you feel your emotions are
about to take control, stop! Don't react. Don't move a muscle! Just
freeze. Freezing for a moment helps prevent you from doing what your
emotion wants you to do---to act without thinking. Stay in control.
Remember, you are the boss of your emotions." Note to Leaders: For
participants who have visual imagery, instruct them to visualize a STOP
sign whenever they want to stop from reacting to a situation. If
necessary, participants can be instructed to use paced breathing (see
Distress Tolerance Handout 6) after stopping, to get their arousal down.

Example: "If someone says something that provokes your anger (like
calling you names or cursing at you), you might have the urge to attack
this person physically or verbally. That, however, might not be in your
best interest. Doing that might result in getting hurt, being jailed, or
being fined. So stop, freeze, and don't act on your impulse to attack."
Example: "Your partner, whom you still love, just broke up with you. You
see her on the street, and your first impulse might be to go and give
her a hug. However, that might not be wise. Given the situation, she is
likely to reject you, and that would hurt. So stop. Don't act on the
urge to hug her." Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when
they have had strong urges to act on emotions, but when doing that did
or would have made the situation worse. Practice Exercise: Elicit an
example of a difficult situation that usually results in an impulsive
behavior (e.g., being called names and calling names back). Ask a
participant to role-play the situation. First model freezing yourself,
and then have the participant practice freezing. Next, challenge the
participant by escalating the situation while encouraging him or her to
be motionless.

426 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 4

2.  Take a Step Back Continue: "When you are faced with a difficult
    situation, it may be hard to think about how to deal with it on the
    spot. Give yourself some time to calm down and think. Take a step
    back (in your mind and/or physically) from the situation. Get
    unstuck from what is going on. Take a deep breath. Continue
    breathing deeply as long as you need to do this (to reduce extreme
    emotion mind quickly) until you are back in control. Do not let your
    emotion control what you do. Remember that you are not your emotion.
    Do not let it put you over the edge." Example: "You're crossing the
    street and don't notice a car approaching. The driver stops the car,
    gets out, starts cursing at you, and physically pushes you. Your
    urge is to punch him in the face; however, you know that would
    escalate the situation and get you in trouble. So you first stop and
    then literally take a step back to avoid confrontation." Practice
    Exercise: Practice taking a step back, using the same situation as
    in the example above of being pushed by a driver. Model freezing,
    and then physically take a step back and take a deep breath. Have a
    participant go through this sequence of steps. Challenge the
    participant by escalating the situation while encouraging continued
    deep breathing. Elicit from participants other situations that
    trigger strong emotional reactions and destructive urges. Role-play
    with participants some of these situations, and instruct them to
    practice stopping and taking a step back, both physically and in
    their minds.

3.  Observe Go on: "Observe what is happening around you and within you,
    who is involved, and what other people are doing or saying. To make
    effective choices, it is important not to jump to conclusions.
    Instead, gather the relevant facts so as to understand what is going
    on and what the available options are. Use your mindfulness skills
    of observing and nonjudgmentalness (as described in Mindfulness
    Handouts 4 and 5)."

4.  Proceed Mindfully Say: "Ask yourself, 'What do I want from this
    situation? What are my goals? What choice might make this situation
    better or worse?' Ask your wise mind how to deal with this problem.
    Being mindful is the opposite of being impulsive and acting without
    thinking. When you are calm, stay in control, and have some
    information about what is going on, you are better prepared to deal
    with the situation effectively, without making it worse." Example:
    "You get home really late from work, due to a flat tire. Your
    partner starts yelling at you, accusing you of cheating on him, and
    calling you names. You get really angry, and your first impulse is
    to yell and call him names back. However, you want to deal with this
    skillfully. So you stop and then take a step back from your partner.
    You observe that your partner appears drunk, and that there are a
    lot of empty bottles of beer in the kitchen. You know that when he
    is drunk, there's no point arguing, and he's likely to apologize in
    the morning. So you proceed mindfully by explaining the flat tire,
    pacifying your partner, and going to bed. You postpone a discussion
    till the next morning." Practice Exercise: Discuss effective ways of
    dealing with the situation you have already been practicing (i.e.,
    the angry driver), and then role-play the situation by going through
    all four steps of the STOP skill. Role-play with participants other
    difficult situations from the past when they wished they had not
    reacted impulsively, or situations that are likely to be difficult
    in the future. Instruct them to put together all four steps of the
    STOP skill. Discussion Point: Discuss situations at home, work,
    school, or other activities where the STOP skill is needed.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handouts 4--5 • 427

Discussion Point: Ask participants if they have difficulty with a
specific step of the STOP skills. Instruct participants that they can
learn these skills one step at a time (i.e., practicing first Stop, then
Stop and Take a step back, etc.) until they've mastered the entire
sequence.

V.  

Pros and Cons as a Way to Make Behavioral Decisions (Distress Tolerance
Handout 5) Main Point: The eventual goal of using pros and cons is for
the person to see that accepting reality and tolerating distress lead to
better outcomes than do rejecting reality and refusing to tolerate
distress. This skill consists of thinking about the positive and
negative aspects of both acting and not acting on crisis behavior urges.
Distress Tolerance Handout 5: Pros and Cons. Teach this skill by first
describing what is meant by pros and cons, and then putting the basic 2
× 2 grid up on the board and working through several examples of pros
and cons with participants. In a group whose members have drug
addictions, for example, list the pros and cons of using drugs, and then
list the pros and cons of resisting the urge to use drugs. Distress
Tolerance Worksheets 3, 3a: Pros and Cons of Acting on Crisis Urges.
These two worksheets ask for exactly the same work on pros and cons, but
are set up differently. Some people find Worksheet 3 much easier to
understand and work with, and others find Worksheet 3a much easier.
Review both worksheets with participants, and let participants pick the
one they like best. Stress that it is important to fill out each of the
four quadrants. Instruct participants to keep a copy of the completed
worksheet, since it can be very hard to remember why not to engage in
crisis behaviors when they are in emotion mind.

99A. When to Use Pros and Cons 1. To Compare the Advantages and
Disadvantages of Different Options Say to participants: "When you have
to make a decision between two or more options, and want to examine
their advantages and disadvantages, pros and cons can be very important
in helping you make a wise choice. All of us use pros and cons some of
the time, even if only implicitly, to make decisions." Example: My alarm
goes off at 6:00 a.m. on a workday. I am tired and want to stay in bed.
I say to myself, "Oh, it would feel so good to keep staying in bed," and
then I might say, "Oh! If I stay in bed I will be late for work and then
my boss will be really angry with me." I get up. Example: A friend keeps
me waiting at a restaurant before showing up an hour late. While
waiting, I am reviewing in my mind all the pros for just leaving and
standing him up, and all the pros for yelling at him when he finally
does arrive. In fact, I rehearse in my mind all the reasons I should
tell him I am never going to a restaurant with him again. However, I
then remember that this is a good friend and that if I get really mad or
refuse to eat out with him again, it will be a big loss for me. I start
reviewing the pros of tolerating the distress and not yelling at him,
even if he is late without much of a reason. Discussion Point: Elicit
from participants times when they automatically (i.e., without deciding
to do it) think of consequences, positive and or negative, of doing
things. Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when they have
difficult choices to make and need to evaluate the pros and cons of
various choices.

2.  To Help Resist Impulsive or Destructive Urges Continue: "Pros and
    cons can also help you resist urges to act impulsively or do things
    that are destructive, particularly when you are in emotion mind.
    Pros and cons can help us all resist

428 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 5

urges to quit and give up on life. It can help us resist actions such as
using drugs, bingeing and purging, or having angry outbursts at others."
Example: Many individuals react to uncontrollable stress and crises by
doing things that in the short run, the long run, or both are damaging
to their self-­interest and well-being. These might be things such as
using drugs or alcohol excessively to escape difficult emotions or
situations; overeating when distressed; throwing tantrums or saying
things when angry that they later regret; or threatening or attempting
suicide when upset or experiencing intensely painful emotions. Example:
"When you are in the middle of a very important task at work that has to
be done now, you might be tempted to interrupt it to deal with problems
in your personal life, such as a friend's calling you to say she is
really angry at you. However, it might be most effective for you to
tolerate the distress of knowing your friend is upset without solving
that issue right away, and instead to keep working on your urgent task
at work. You would resolve the problem with your friend later." The
eventual goal is for participants to conclude that accepting reality and
tolerating distress lead to better outcomes than do rejecting reality
and refusing to tolerate distress. It is important to note here that all
of us use pros and cons many times during each day, at least implicitly.

99B. How to Do Pros and Cons Doing pros and cons involves writing down
the positive and negative consequences of tolerating distress by
resisting impulsive behaviors, as well as the positive and negative
consequences of not tolerating distress by engaging in impulsive
behaviors. 1. Describe the Crisis Behavior Explain: "Start by describing
the crisis behavior you are trying to stop. A crisis behavior is any
behavior that in the short run, long run, or both is damaging to your
self-­interest and wellbeing." 2. Examine the Advantages and
Disadvantages of the Behavior Go on: "Next, examine the advantages and
disadvantages (pros and cons) of the crisis behavior---of acting on your
crisis urges." 3. Consider Both Short-Term and Long-Term Consequences
"When you are doing pros and cons, don't forget to consider both the
short-term and long-term consequences of the behavior you are
examining." Example: Relief and feeling better immediately (pros) may be
short-term consequences of drinking excessively, using drugs, or yelling
at someone, but having a hangover that interferes with work or ruining a
relationship due to using substances or yelling in anger (cons) may be
the long-term consequences of the same behaviors. 4. Consider Pros and
Cons for Each Different Crisis Urge "Make up separate lists of pros and
cons for each different crisis urge you are working on." Example: "If
you are deciding among using illegal drugs, filing for a divorce,
quitting a job, or another impulsive action, it is important to consider
the pros and cons of each action (using drugs, filing for a divorce,
quitting a job) separately. It is also important to write separate lists
for the pros and cons of not engaging in these actions." Note to
Leaders: Participants often find it strange that they are asked to write
out separate lists of pros and cons for acting on crisis urges and for
resisting crisis urges. They usually believe that the pros of resist-

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 5 • 429 ing
crisis urges and the cons of not resisting crisis urges will be the
same. This is often not the case, but the only way to see it is to have
participants actually practice working out pros and cons in the session.
A good way to do this is with a practice exercise on a class whiteboard
(see below). A strategy to help distinguish the lists is to focus on
what does happen that is a positive or negative consequence of either
choice, as opposed to what does not happen.

Practice Exercise: Draw a pros-and-cons grid on the board. You can use
Figure 10.1 as a model (this type of grid is also seen in Distress
Tolerance Handout 5 and Worksheet 3), or you can use the type of grid
seen in Distress Tolerance Worksheet 3a and in the pros-and-cons
worksheets for other modules. Get participants to generate pros and cons
of tolerating a crisis without doing something harmful and/or impulsive.
Then have them generate pros and cons for not tolerating the crisis
(i.e., for engaging in self-­injury, substance abuse, impulsively
quitting a job, attacking a friend, or other examples of nontolerating
behaviors the participants want to analyze). Be sure to focus on both
short-term and long-term pros and cons. Compare the two sets. Note to
Leaders: It is helpful to avoid working on suicidal urges as an example,
as this can get bogged down in a discussion of what we definitively know
or don't know about what occurs once one dies (i.e., we know nothing).

However, if participants have a firm grasp of how to do pros and cons,
writing out pros and cons for suicide can be very helpful for some
individuals. You will probably need to tolerate a situation where the
pros and cons of acting on suicidal urges come out more or less equal in
weight and where an individual is undecided. If a person seems to have
clearly decided on committing suicide or is leaning toward suicide, it
is important to move to suicide risk assessment and crisis management
strategies. It is equally important to remember that working through the
pros and cons of suicide with a participant in a validating,
noncontrolling, and nondemanding manner

Pros

Cons

Advantages

Disadvantages

Advantages

Disadvantages

Acting on crisis urges

Resisting crisis urges

FIGURE 10.1. Pros and cons for acting versus not acting on urges.

430 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 5

may be your most effective way for the participant to end up choosing
life. See Chapter 15 of the main DBT text for crisis strategies and
suicidal behavior strategies. 5. Rehearse Pros and Cons Multiple Times
Encourage participants: "Rehearse the pros of resisting urges and the
cons of giving in to urges multiple times before overwhelming urges hit.
Such rehearsal makes it more likely that the pros of avoiding
destructive behavior and cons of engaging in destructive behavior will
pop into your mind when needed. The idea here is to get thinking about
the long-term benefits of avoiding destructive behavior to become
stronger, and thinking about immediate benefits of destructive behavior
to become weaker." 6. Review Earlier Pros and Cons When a Crisis Urge
Strikes Continue: "Review the pros and cons you have written earlier
when an overwhelming emotion or urge hits. If these are not available,
then this is the time to write up such pros and cons. However, it can be
very difficult to do this in emotion mind, so it is advisable to solicit
support from someone else for doing pros and cons while you are in a
crisis." 7. Say No to Crisis Urges "It can be very helpful to say out
loud or yell 'No!' when an overwhelming emotion or urge hits. Once this
is done, it is important to distract yourself from the urge and from
tempting events. Say to yourself, 'No, that's it; there is no going
back,' or something similar." Note to Leaders: The problem with strong
urges is that they are associated with a very strong desire to act on
the urge. Subliminally, an individual also knows that if he or she
actually practices pros and cons, then the desired activity is much less
likely. Thus, at this level, the individual realizes that thinking of
pros and cons will get in the way of engaging in a reinforcing activity,
even if the activity only provides shortterm reinforcement and is
destructive in the long term. Thus it is very common for clients to
resist doing pros and cons, because it gets in the way of desired
activities. This might be a good time to discuss with participants the
fact that immediate reinforcement is always much more powerful than
delayed reinforcement. Engaging in pros and cons strengthens the power
of delayed reinforcement (reinforcement for resisting the urge) and
weakens the power of immediate reinforcement (reinforcement for giving
in to the urge).

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when the idea of
thinking of pros and cons does not come into their minds, or when even
if it does, they resist thinking of pros and cons. Discuss strategies to
bring pros and cons to mind when needed, as well as strategies to break
down resistance. Practice Exercise: Ask each person to complete a
pros-and-cons exercise for one targeted problem behavior they would like
to stop. Use plain paper, or use one of the worksheets (3 or 3a). After
each person has completed the exercise, discuss a few examples. Elicit
from participants ideas about where to keep the exercise or worksheet
for use in a crisis. Note to Leaders: Pros and cons can be very
effective for helping individual participants make difficult decisions
about their lives. It is very important at these points that you not
communicate a preference for one side or the other of the pros and cons.
The task here is to help the person develop a reasonably comprehensive
list of all the pros and cons for each side of the decision. It is
important, then, to trust the wise mind of the participant in making a
decision. A good guide to using pros and cons in these situations is the
principle related to a "decisional balance." This principle comes from
Motivational Interviewing, which was developed for clients with
substance use disorders, but is useful in other venues as well.9

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handouts 6--6c • 431
The one exception to relying exclusively on "wise mind" is when the
decision is to commit suicide or not. See the earlier Note to Leaders on
using pros and cons with suicide.

VI. TIP Skills for Managing Extreme Arousal (Distress Tolerance Handouts
    6--6c) Main Point: Very high emotional arousal can make it
    impossible to use most skills. TIP skills are rapid ways to reduce
    emotion arousal. These skills are Temperature (use of cold water on
    the face to elicit the dive response), Intense exercise, Paced
    breathing, and Paired muscle relaxation. (As noted in the
    introduction to this chapter, there are two P skills, although there
    is only one P in TIP.) Caution: Alert participants that the effect
    of cold water on the face is to reduce heart rate. Any participants
    with any heart risk or allergy to cold should not participate in the
    ice water exercise unless cleared to do so by their physicians.
    Distress Tolerance Handout 6: TIP Skills: Changing Your Body
    Chemistry. This handout lists all the TIP skills and is useful for a
    review. See the other materials below for teaching individual
    skills. In particular, progressive relaxation is best taught by
    conducting a brief relaxation exercise such as described on Handout
    6b. Distress Tolerance Handout 6a: Using Cold Water, Step by Step.
    This handout recapitulates the steps for the use of cold water. If
    you do not teach this skill for some reason, this handout can be
    skipped. Distress Tolerance Handout 6b: Paired Muscle Relaxation,
    Step by Step. Use this handout to provide training in how to relax
    muscles and how to pair relaxation with breathing out. The
    relaxation training is based on progressive relaxation practice, and
    the handout summarizes instructions for going from tensing and
    relaxing individual muscles to tensing and relaxing the whole body.
    Letting go of muscles is then paired with exhaling while saying
    internally the word "relax." If you do not practice relaxation of
    all the muscle groups in sessions, point out that the rest of the
    muscles are listed on the handout. This handout may also be useful
    for individual therapists. Distress Tolerance Handout 6c: Effective
    Rethinking and Paired Relaxation, Step by Step. This optional
    handout integrates cognitive restructuring with paired breathing. It
    can be very useful when teaching this skill to work with
    participants in filling out Steps 1--3 on Distress Tolerance
    Worksheet 4b, described below. Distress Tolerance Worksheet 4:
    Changing Body Chemistry with TIP Skills. Review this worksheet with
    participants. If necessary, teach participants to rate their level
    of emotional arousal (often called "subjective units of distress" or
    SUDS) on a 0--100 scale. Make 0 equal to no distress at all, and 100
    equal to the most stress ever experienced in their entire lives.
    Remind participants that they can never go over 100 points. Notice
    that this worksheet is primarily a recording device, so that
    participants can describe what they did during homework review.
    There is room on the sheet for describing each skill only once.
    Therefore, you might want to have several copies of the worksheet
    for each person, particularly if you assign daily practice of one or
    more TIP skills. Distress Tolerance Worksheet 4a: Paired Muscle
    Relaxation. Use this worksheet only if you ask participants to
    practice paired muscle relaxation between sessions. This worksheet
    can help participants remember how to tense and relax muscles, and
    also distinguishes between practicing to learn the skill and
    practicing when the skill is needed. If you assign this worksheet,
    review it with participants. Distress Tolerance Worksheet 4b:
    Effective Rethinking and Paced Relaxation. Assign this worksheet if
    you have taught Handout 6c. Other Materials: To teach use of cold
    water, bring to the session zip-lock bags with a few ice cubes and

432 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 6

water, gel cold packs, or pans of cold water and towels. To teach paced
breathing, bring a large clock with a secondhand to the session.

99A. What Are TIP Skills? Tell participants: "There are four TIP skills:
tipping the Temperature of your face with cold water, Intense aerobic
exercise, Paced breathing, and Paired muscle relaxation. (Note that
there are two P skills, though there is only one P in TIP.) Each skill
has the effect of rapidly changing your biological response patterns,
and thereby causing a reduction in your emotional arousal."

B. Why Use TIP Skills? Explain the reasons for using TIP skills as
follows:

99 99

 "TIP skills change your body chemistry to reduce high emotional
arousal and feelings of

being overwhelmed."  "TIP skills work very fast, within seconds to
minutes, to bring down emotional arousal."  "TIP skills are as effective
as dysfunctional behaviors (drinking, using drugs, eating, self-

harm) at reducing painful emotions, but without the short- and long-term
negative results."  "TIP skills work like fast-­acting medications, but
without the cost of medications or the side

effects that some medications cause."  "TIP skills are easy to use and
don't require a lot of thinking."  "Some TIP skills (paced breathing,
some parts of paired muscle relaxation) can be used in

public without others' knowing that you are using the skills."

99C. When TIP Skills Are Useful Go on: "Here are some times when TIP
skills are useful."  "You are caught in emotion mind and can't get out."
"You are in a crisis---that is, a high urge to engage in destructive
behavior hits and you can't

distract yourself."  "An important demand needs to be met, and you are
too overwhelmed to think of what to

do."  "You are not processing information effectively."  "You are
emotionally overwhelmed."  "Other skills are not feasible to do, or are
not helpful even if you are not in a crisis."  "You are at your skills
breakdown point." Note to Leaders: The concept of a skills breakdown
point and how to determine it is discussed in Chapter 9, Section XX. See
that section and Emotion Regulation Handout 23: Managing Extreme
Emotions for instructions on how to teach this concept. Feel free to use
that handout or its teaching notes at this point. If emotion regulation
has already been taught, refer participants back to that skill.

99D. How the TIP Skills Work The TIP skills are designed to activate the
human body's physiological nervous system for decreasing arousal. The
nervous system consists of two parts: a "sympathetic nervous system" and
a "parasympathetic nervous system." These two systems work in opposite
directions. The sympathetic system activates the fight-or-­fl ight
syndrome and increases arousal. The parasympathetic system increases
emotion regulation, which is associated with decreases in emotional
arousal. All of the TIP skills regulate emotions by increasing activity
of the parasympathetic nervous system and decreasing activity of the
sympathetic nervous system.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handouts 6--6a • 433
Note to Leaders: Remind or point out to participants that (1)
physiological arousal is an important component of emotions, and (2)
changing any part of the emotion system affects the entire system. You
can refer to the model of emotions taught in Chapter 9, Section V and in
Emotion Regulation Handout 5: A Model for Describing Emotions.

99E. Tipping Facial Temperature with Cold Water Tell participants: "The
first TIP skill is tipping the Temperature of your face with cold water
or cold packs on the face, while holding your breath. This induces the
human dive reflex, which in turn sets off the parasympathetic system and
reduces physiological and emotional arousal very quickly."10, 11
Research Point: The dive reflex is the tendency in humans (and other
mammals) for the heart to slow down to below resting heart rate when the
person is immersed in very cold water without oxygen. This effect is due
to increased activation of the parasympathetic nervous system, which is
the body's physiological system for decreasing arousal (see the
explanation of the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems, above).
States of emotional overarousal occur when the sympathetic nervous
system becomes overactive and the parasympathetic nervous system is
underactive. (Milton Brown of the DBT Center of San Diego provides more
information and a series of handouts on TIP skills at the Center's
website, www. dbtsandiego.com/current_clients.html.)

1.  Procedures Explain the different ways in which the dive reflex can
    be induced with cold water.

<!-- -->

a.  Use a Bowl of Cold Water

Tell participants: "Bend over, hold your breath, and put your face (up
to your temples) in a bowl of cold water for between 30 and 60 seconds,
or until you start to become uncomfortable. This is usually sufficient
to induce the dive reflex. The colder the water and the longer the
immersion, the better it works. However, do not have the water too cold.
Water below 50ºF may cause facial pain during immersion." b. Use an Ice
Pack, a Zip-Lock Bag of Ice with Water, or a Cold Wet Compress

Say: "Sit in a chair, and hold the ice pack or zip-lock bag (wrapped in
a cloth to keep from being too cold) or cold compress over the eyes and
upper cheeks. Wet the side touching your face. Standing, bending over,
and holding your breath at the same time appears to increase the
effect." c. Splash Cold Water on the Face

Add: "Splashing cold water on your eyes and cheeks may even be
sufficient. To make it work even better, stand, bend over, and hold your
breath." 2. When to Use Cold Water In addition to times of high
emotional arousal, my colleagues and I have found cold water or cold
packs to be helpful in the following situations:  Inability to sleep due
to ruminating or "background" anxiety  Dissociation, including
dissociation during therapy or skills training sessions

3.  Cautions  Heart problems. Using cold water to induce the dive reflex
    can reduce heart rate very rap-

idly. Individuals with any heart disorder, a heart rate below their
normal baseline due to medications, other medical problems, anorexia
nervosa, or bulimia nervosa should only use

434 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 6--6a

this procedure with permission of their medical providers. In general,
recommending that participants check with their medical providers before
using the procedure is a good idea. Adolescents should seek parental
permission as well.  Short-lived effects. The physical effects of the
cold water are actually very short-lived. Thus it is easy for the
out-of-­control emotion to return if participants are not careful. Once
extreme arousal is reduced, it can then be important to practice a
different set of skills appropriate for the problem at hand. Example:
"You are very angry, and you use ice water or a cold pack to reduce the
intensity of the emotion. If you then start thinking about all the
things that set off the anger in the first place, anger is very likely
to be set off again. The same is true of any other emotion." Example:
"You use cold water or a cold pack to interrupt anxiety ruminations that
are keeping you awake. It is important to go back to bed and focus on
something other than anxiety-­ inducing thoughts, such as paced breathing
\[see below\] or thoughts of pleasant events." Example: "A strong urge
to engage in a problem behavior hits, and you use ice water or a cold
pack to reduce the urge. Your arousal and urges come down. A little
later, you go back to thinking about the problem behavior, and the urge
resurfaces. It is thus important to engage in a different activity
(problem solving or distracting) immediately after using the ice."

99

Practice Exercise: If possible, demonstrate the dive reflex with
participants. After screening participants for medical issues, try to
get all those for whom the use of cold water is not ruled out to do the
exercise once. This is a practice trial and increases the likelihood
that they will use it when needed. Another variation is to do this as an
experiment. In this case, the procedure is for participants to rate
their arousal before and right after putting cold water (in zip-lock
bags or cold gel bags) on their upper faces, covering their eyes and
upper cheekbones. Alternatively, participants can take their pulses
before and after practicing (a procedure used in high school science
classes). Make it very clear that participation in the practice session
is optional, and that the exercise is in no way an endurance contest.
Supplies needed for each participant are these: 1. One pint-sized
plastic storage bag with water, or a gel pack that has been kept cold,
and wet paper towels. 2. Alternatively, a cooler of cold water, large
bowls or foil roaster pans, a place to dump water, and towels to dry
faces. The procedure is as follows: 1. Have each participant sit, put a
wet paper towel around the bag or gel pack, and then place the bag or
pack over eyes and cheeks for up to 30 seconds. 2. Alternatively, have
each participant bend over a bowl or pan of water, hold breath, and put
face in water for up to 30 seconds. 3. Once participants have finished
either Step 1 or Step 2, have them discuss their experiences.

Another chance to practice the TIP cold water skill may arise if a
participant is experiencing high arousal during a group session (even
when you are not teaching the TIP skills). In such an instance, you
could bring the supplies into the meeting room and ask the participant
to try that skill. In our group sessions, when needed, we bring in a
cold pack (which we wet on the face side) and a towel. (We keep several
cold packs in the refrigerator at all times.)

99F. Intense Exercise The second TIP skill is to engage in Intense
aerobic exercise of any kind for at least 20 minutes.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 6 • 435

1.  Why Intense Exercise? Point: Intense exercise (of any kind) for
    20--30 minutes or so can have a rapid effect on mood, 99 Research
    decreasing negative mood and ruminative thoughts and increasing
    positive affect after exercising.12  Tell participants: "State
    anxiety decreases significantly if you get your heart rate to 70% of

the maximum for your age."  "Increases in positive emotions are
associated with getting your heart rate up to 55--70% of

maximum heart rate for your age, but the increases are maintained for a
significantly longer time following exercise when you get your heart
rate to 70% intensity."12  "Look up 'calculating heart rate training
zones' on your search engine. Or go to www.
chabotcollege.edu/faculty/kgrace/FitnessCenter/TargetZones.htm for how
to estimate maximum recommended heart rate for your age." A major
characteristic of emotions is that they organize the body for action.
Anger organizes the body to attack or defend, fear organizes the body to
run, and so on. When the body is highly aroused, it can be difficult to
inhibit emotional action even if the action is dysfunctional. Intense
exercise, in these situations, can re-­regulate the body to a less
emotional state. Note to Leaders: Point out to participants that (1)
emotions prepare them for action and that actions themselves are
important components of emotions; and (2) inhibiting emotion-­linked
actions can therefore be very difficult. As noted earlier, you can refer
to the model of emotions taught in Chapter 9, Section V, and in Emotion
Regulation Handout 5.

99

2.  When to Use Exercise Say to participants: "Use exercise when you are
    agitated, when you are angry, when ruminating just won't stop, when
    you need to bring up your mood and willingness in the morning, and
    at any other time it has been useful for you in the past." Example:
    "At the end of your work day, you find out that a report you thought
    was due in a week is actually due tomorrow. If you don't get the
    report done, you'll have big problems at work. You feel so
    overwhelmed by this unexpected demand that you don't know where to
    start to get things done. You can take a short break, go for a run
    to decrease the strong negative emotions, and then return and do
    what is needed to finish the report by its deadline."

99G. Paced Breathing The third TIP skill is Paced breathing. This refers
to slowing down the pace of inhaling and exhaling (to an average of five
to six breath cycles per minute) and breathing deeply from the abdomen.
Breathing out should be slower than breathing in (e.g., 4 seconds in and
8 seconds out). Point: Generally, the heart beats faster during
in-­breaths and slows down during out-­breaths. 99 Research This change in
heart rate is influenced by sympathetic nervous system activation upon
breathing in and parasympathetic nervous system activation upon
breathing out. Paced breathing can itself cause changes in sympathetic
and parasympathetic activity. In a way similar to the dive reflex,
slowing breathing to approximately five or six breaths per minute (i.e.,
to one complete breath cycle lasting 10--12 seconds) is effective at
reducing emotional arousal by activating the parasympathetic nervous
system.13--16

99

Practice Exercise: Demonstrate paced breathing as an exercise with
participants. The goal is to do the exercise once in a session, to
increase the likelihood that the skill will be used again when

436 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 6--6b

needed. You can also do this as an experiment by asking participants to
rate their arousal before and after practicing paced breathing. You will
need one large clock with a secondhand, to help participants to count
breathing in and out. The procedure is as follows: 1. Place the clock
facing participants. 2. Instruct participants to watch the clock and
count the seconds they inhale and the seconds they exhale. Encourage
them to work while counting to get to a comfortable slow breathing rate,
where the count is longer breathing out than breathing in. Give an
example, such as 5 seconds in and 7 seconds out. They can choose to
count the pause at the top of inhaling and at the bottom of exhaling or
not. Give participants a few seconds to work on this. 3. Elicit from
participants what numbers in and out they chose. Discuss. Note to
Leaders: For a set of breathing pacers that will help you and your
clients track breathing in and breathing out, you can again go to Milton
Brown's website at the DBT Center of San Diego
(www.dbtsandiego.com/current_clients.html). This site also provides his
handout "Regulating Emotions through Slow Abdominal Breathing." In
addition, smartphone apps for paced breathing are available for both
iPhones and Android phones, and breath pacers are available on YouTube.

99H. Paired Muscle Relaxation Paired muscle relaxation, the fourth TIP
skill, is the pairing of muscles relaxing with breathing out.  Paired
muscle relaxation is a variation on progressive muscle relaxation, which
is widely used

across many behavioral therapies for anxiety disorders.  The strategy is
to tense muscle groups, noticing the sensation of tension while
breathing in,

and then relax them by letting go of the tension, noticing the
sensations as the muscle tension gradually goes down. The goal is to
increase awareness of both tension and relaxation.  The emphasis on
noticing muscle sensations is similar to a mindfulness procedure
focusing on body sensations (i.e., mindfulness of sensations).  As a
crisis survival skill, paired muscle relaxation teaches participants to
notice tension and then relax muscles, and while doing so to pair
relaxation with exhaling while saying the word "relax." Note to Leaders:
How you teach paired muscle relaxation depends on how much time you
have. If time is short, you can quickly demonstrate (with all
participating) how to tense and relax muscles either one by one from the
progressive relaxation list in Figure 10.2, or by putting muscle groups
together and practicing them in groups. If you have learned relaxation
through using a different order or grouping of muscles, feel free to use
the method you use now. You can also use any of the numerous audio
recordings available for muscle relaxation. It can be particularly
helpful to have participants mentally rate their arousal before and
after the practice and then share any changes. It is important to point
out that relaxing is a skill that takes a lot of practice. Practicing on
a daily basis can prepare clients for engaging in more functional
behaviors during crises.

Orient participants to the procedure as follows:  "Tensing and then
relaxing muscle groups cause your muscles to become more relaxed than

they were in the beginning, and more relaxed than you can ordinarily
achieve by trying to relax without first tensing."  "Pairing letting go
of tension with saying the word 'Relax' in your mind while exhaling
conditions your body to let go of tension and relax in the future when
you say 'Relax' in your mind while exhaling."

Large Medium Small

    10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 6b • 437

                                   
               

Tense each muscle group for 5--10 seconds and then let go for 5--10
seconds.

      

1.  Hands and wrists: Make fists with both hands and pull fists up on
    the wrists.

                 

4.  Forehead: Pull eyebrows close together, wrinkling forehead.

                        

10. Chest: Take deep breath and hold it.

11. Lower and upper arms: Make fists and bend both arms up to touch your
    shoulders.

12. Shoulders: Pull both shoulders up to your ears.

13. Eyes: Shut eyes tightly.

14. Nose and upper cheeks: Scrunch up nose; bring upper lips and cheeks
    up toward eyes.

15. Lips and lower face: Press lips together; bring edges of lips back
    toward ears.

16. Tongue and mouth: Teeth together; tongue pushing on upper mouth.

17. Neck: Push head back into chair, floor, or bed, or push chin down to
    chest.

18. Back: Arch back, bringing shoulder blades together.

19. Stomach: Hold stomach in tightly.

20. Buttocks: Squeeze buttocks together.

21. Upper legs and thighs: Legs out; tense thighs.

22. Calves: Legs out; point toes down.

23. Ankles: Legs out; point toes together, heels out, toes curled under.

FIGURE 10.2. Progressive relaxation: Muscles and muscle groups. Adapted
from Smith, R. E. (1980). Development of an integrated coping response
through cognitive--­affective stress management training. In I. G.
Sarason & C. D. Spielberger (Eds.), Stress and anxiety (Vol. 7,
pp. 265--280). Washington, DC: Hemisphere. Copyright 1980 by Hemisphere
Publishing Corporation. Adapted by permission.

Note to Leaders: Some individuals experience a phenomenon of
"relaxation-­induced panic." That is, they may panic because of not
meeting expectations to relax. To prevent this, it is very important to
instruct participants that tensing and relaxing muscles may not result
in relaxation, and that the important part of the exercise is to learn
awareness of body tension. Individuals should also be instructed to feel
free to stop at any time during practice. Allow those who are
self-­conscious when practicing simply to observe the demonstration
and/or to face the wall during practice. In contrast to regular
mindfulness practice, participants should be instructed to close their
eyes during relaxation practice.

Practice Exercise: Demonstrate and practice tensing and relaxing
muscles. The procedure is as follows: 1. Ask participants to rate their
current arousal (subjective units of distress) on a scale of 0--100 (0
means no distress or tension at all; 100 means the very highest they
could ever imagine).

438 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 6b

2.  Sit facing participants. Once everyone is in a comfortable position
    and can stretch out somewhat, ask participants to follow your
    instructions. Go through each of the muscle groups in Figure 10.2
    (these are repeated in Distress Tolerance Handout 6b), tensing each,
    then letting go of each. Be sure participants see which muscles you
    are tensing and how to do it. In this demonstration, hold the
    tension for about 5--10 seconds, saying, "Notice the tension." Then
    say, "Let go," while rapidly letting go of the muscles, and add,
    "Notice the difference." Let relaxation go for about 5--10 seconds,
    and then go on to the next muscle group. Be sure to talk in a slow,
    steady cadence with an inviting voice tone. You might say something
    like this:

"Make fists with both of your hands, and pull your fists up toward your
wrists; clench them just three-­quarters of the way. . . . Pay attention
to the tension. . . . Notice the tension in your hands . . . notice the
tension . . . notice the tightness . . . just notice. . . . Now LET GO .
. . just let go, let your hands drop down . . . let all the tension flow
out. . . . Notice as your hands start to relax . . . notice the muscles
letting go . . . just notice . . . paying attention to the sensations in
your hands and wrists . . . letting all the tension just flow away. . .
. " (Continue with the muscle groups in Figure 10.2.) 3. As a final
instruction, tell participants to tense all their muscles quickly from
head to toe, as if they are stiff robots, while breathing in deeply.
Then, while breathing out slowly, they should let go like rag dolls,
saying in their minds the word "Relax." 4. Have participants rate their
arousal again. 5. Ask participants whether their arousal went down,
stayed the same, or went up. Although we usually do this practice in
group sessions for only 5--10 minutes, we have found that many
participants have a noticeable reduction in arousal.

After the exercise, explain to participants: "Brief paired muscle
relaxation can also be used in a crisis or when you have very, very
little time. You can inhale while briefly tensing sets of muscles that
can be tensed without being obvious to others---such as your stomach,
buttocks, and chest---and then, when exhaling, relaxing them with the
internal word 'Relax.' " Practice Exercise: If you have the time, you
can have participants practice paired muscle relaxation with a CD or
other recording. It can be very useful to listen to a relaxation
recording. In our clinic, we use one I developed that includes both a
5-minute relaxation and a 20-minute relaxation.17 Many such recordings
can also be found online. Since most participants like to hear their own
therapists or skills trainers, you can make a recording, copy it to CDs
or thumb drives, and give it out to participants. Note to Leaders: If
teaching relaxation is a major part of your intervention, or if you
teach advanced classes, the practice assignments can be as follows: 1.
"Practice tensing and relaxing each of the 16 muscle groups, paying
attention to the tension for 5--10 seconds and attending to the
sensations of relaxing the muscles for 5--10 seconds." 2. "Practice
tensing and relaxing each of the nine larger muscle groups." 3.
"Practice tensing and relaxing each of the four even larger muscle
groups until you are proficient at reducing tension." 4. "Practice
tensing the whole body while inhaling and then letting go of all the
muscles on exhaling, while saying in your mind the word 'Relax.'
Practice this paced relaxation throughout the day."

Note to Leaders: It is important to remind participants that getting
relaxation paired with the word "relax" while exhaling can take a fair
amount of practice. Once participants learn awareness of both

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handouts 6b--6c, 7 •
439 physical tension and the difference between that and relaxation,
they are ready to work on getting relaxation paired with the word relax
while breathing out. I generally suggest practicing 5--10 times a day
until their bodies and minds "get" the pairing; this usually happens in
5--6 weeks.

I. Effective Rethinking and Paired Relaxation The combination of
effective rethinking with paired relaxation is a method of using both
cognitive restructuring and progressive muscle relaxation to bring down
arousal rapidly in moments of high stress. Practice Exercise: If you
teach this combination, the procedure is as follows: 1. Say to
participants: "Identify a situation (a prompting event) that is often
related to distressing emotions, and in which you want to work on
reducing your emotional reactions." 2. "Ask yourself, 'What must I be
telling myself for this situation to be so upsetting?' For example, if
taking difficult exams is a really stressful event for you, you might be
telling yourself during the exam things like 'I am going to fail this,'
'If I fail, I might as well quit because I will never go anywhere in
life,' 'If I fail, people will know it and think I am no good,' or 'If I
fail, it will mean that I am either a lazy good-for-­nothing or am
stupid.' " 3. "Now rethink the situation in such a way as to counteract
the thoughts and interpretations that cause you so much stress. As you
rethink the situation, write down as many effective thoughts as you can
to replace each of the stressful thoughts." 4. "Prepare yourself for the
next time the stressful event or one like it occurs. To do this, combine
rehearsal of your effective thoughts with paired relaxation. To do this,
as you breathe in, imagine the stressful event is happening to you. Be
sure to imagine you are in the stressful scene, not watching it as on
television. Before breathing out, say to yourself (in a convincing tone)
an effective self-­statement followed by "SO RELAX," as you breathe out
while intentionally relaxing all your muscles." 5. "Practice, practice,
practice." 6. "When the stressful situation occurs, practice your
effective rethinking and paired relaxing." 7. Discuss how similar this
is to the cope ahead skill. Note to Leaders: If you are working with
just one person, this procedure can be strengthened by working with the
client to practice incorporating imaginal exposure to the stressful
situation before starting the effective self-­statements and paired
breathing. The idea here is to get stressful emotions up very high and
then have the client practice saying the effective thoughts, followed by
"Relax," while at the same time letting go of muscle tension. It is best
not to try this before you are sure the individual has been able to use
paired relaxation successfully. A forthcoming book will have further
ideas on using paired relaxation.18

J. Review of TIP Skills If you have time, review the TIP skills briefly
to make sure everyone understands them.

VII. Distracting with Wise Mind ACCEPTS Main Point: Distracting methods
     work by reducing contact with whatever set off the distress or its
     most painful aspects. A secondary value is that they also may work
     to change parts of an emotional response. Distress Tolerance
     Handout 7: Distracting. After explaining the value of distracting
     attention as a

440 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 7

distress tolerance skill in a crisis situation, go through each of the
ACCEPTS skills on this handout. Give participants an opportunity to
offer their own distracting methods. It can be useful to ask
participants to put checkmarks in the boxes for distracting activities
they are willing to use or try out. Distress Tolerance Worksheets 5, 5a,
5b: Distracting with Wise Mind ACCEPTS. These worksheets offer three
different ways to record ACCEPTS skills practice. Distress Tolerance
Worksheet 5 provides space for practice only two times between sessions.
Thus it can be a good starter worksheet with individuals you are trying
to shape into more frequent skills practice. Worksheet 5a instructs
practicing every skill twice. Worksheet 5b instructs participants to
practice and gives multiple opportunities for each skill.

99A. When Is Distracting Useful? Say to participants: "When you are in a
crisis, distraction can help you avoid dangerous behaviors, but
distracting can easily be overused. Do not use it as a routine method to
avoid painful emotions. Here are some effective uses of distraction." 1.
When Emotional Pain Threatens to Become Overwhelming Tell participants:
"When your emotional pain or upset becomes so great that you are in
danger of being overwhelmed by it at work, at school, or at meetings, it
may be more effective to distract yourself from the feelings in the
moment instead of fully experiencing them." Discussion Point: Elicit
examples from participants of occasions when pain is intense but it is
not an appropriate time to work on changing the source of the pain or
figuring out and changing the painful emotions.

2.  When Problems Can't Be Solved Immediately Go on: "You can also use
    distraction when you have a problem that can't be solved
    immediately, and urgency to solve the problem right now is making it
    very difficult to focus on anything except the crisis." Discussion
    Point: Distraction can help a person tolerate a problem until the
    time is right for problem solving. Elicit from participants times
    when not tolerating distress and instead trying to solve an
    emotional problem immediately has led to even bigger problems.
    Discussion Point: Discuss factors that get in the way of putting
    problem solving off until a better moment. Discussion Point: Ask
    participants whether they have a tendency to distract themselves too
    much or too little. Practice Exercise: Ask participants to read
    through all the items on Handout 7 and check those they think might
    work for them. Ask people what they checked. (This exercise can be
    done at the beginning or at the end of reviewing the handout.)

99B. Seven Sets of Distracting Skills Distracting from painful emotion
or distress means turning one's attention to something else. There are
seven sets of distracting skills. The sentence "Wise mind ACCEPTS" is a
useful way to remember these skills. 1. Activities Engaging in
activities that are neutral or opposite to negative emotions and crisis
behaviors can work to reduce impulsive urges and distress in a number of
ways. They distract attention and

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 7 • 441

fill short-term memory with non-­crisis-oriented thoughts, images, and
sensations. They affect physiological responses and emotional expressive
behaviors directly. They can reduce the emotional pain that often drives
the crisis behaviors. Treatments that focus on behavioral activation,
for example, are very effective in reducing depression. 2. Contributing
Contributing to somebody else's well-being refocuses attention from
oneself to others and what one can do for them. Participating fully in
the experience of helping someone else can make people completely forget
their own problems for a while. For some individuals, contributing also
increases a sense of meaning in life, thereby improving the moment (see
Distress Tolerance Handout 9). For others, it enhances self-­respect. 3.
Comparisons Making comparisons also refocuses attention from oneself to
others, but in a different way. In this case, the situations of
others---those coping in the same way or less well, or the less
fortunate in general---are used to recast one's own situation in a more
positive light. Alternatively, one can focus on past problems that are
no longer occurring, and compare the present moment to this past
difficult time. Example: "Watch soap operas or other TV shows where
people have problems worse than yours." 4. Emotions Generating different
emotions distracts from the current situation and negative emotion. This
strategy interferes with the current mood state. This technique requires
first figuring out the current emotion, so that activities for
generating a different one can be sought. Example: "Read an emotional
book (such as a thriller). Then, after you put the book down, think back
to the story in the book and experience that emotion. However, don't
read something that will make you feel worse than you already feel, or
that will cue crisis behaviors." Note to Leaders: Remind participants
that they cannot get a different emotion by simply demanding it or using
willpower alone. What is needed is an activity that will reliably set
off an emotion different from the one that is generating so much pain.

5.  Pushing Away Pushing away from a painful situation can be done by
    leaving it physically or by blocking it from one's mind. Leaving the
    situation decreases contact with its emotional cues. Blocking is a
    somewhat conscious effort to inhibit thoughts, images, and urges
    associated with negative emotions. One form of blocking is to
    repeatedly put off destructive behaviors for brief periods of time.
    Blocking is a bit like riding a bicycle; people only understand it
    when they do it. Most individuals seem able to do this and will
    usually know what you mean as soon as you mention the technique. It
    is perhaps related to the ability to dissociate or depersonalize. It
    should not be the first technique tried, but can be useful in an
    emergency. The secret is not to overuse it. Example: "Build up an
    imaginary wall between yourself and others." Example: "Put your
    emotions in a 'box,' and put the box on a shelf. This can be done
    through visualization, or you could make an actual worry box and
    drop pieces of paper in it with labels of the stressors." Example:
    "Put off smoking a cigarette every 5 minutes for 5 minutes."

442 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 7, 8--8a

6.  Thoughts Distracting with other thoughts fills short-term memory, so
    that thoughts activated by the negative emotion do not continue to
    reactivate the emotion. Example: "Sing a song in your head."
    Example: "You are at a funeral and no one is crying, and you feel
    that at any minute you are going to burst out sobbing, which you
    don't want to do. Distract yourself by counting something at the
    funeral---for instance, bricks on the wall, people in the pews, or
    words that are said by the speakers."
7.  Sensations Intense, different sensations can focus attention on
    something other than the emotional distress, its source, or its
    crisis urges. Holding ice cubes,19 in particular, can be very
    helpful. In a skills training group run by a colleague of mine, a
    client brought everyone small refreezable ice packs. Several clients
    would then take them (frozen) to therapy sessions to hold onto when
    discussing very painful topics (e.g., sexual abuse, which one client
    had not previously been able to discuss at all). This technique,
    while at times useful, also needs to be closely monitored so that it
    does not interfere with exposure to important and relevant cues.
    Other ideas for eliciting sensations are tasting Tabasco sauce,
    lemon wedges, and intensely sour candy, or putting on headphones and
    listening to fast, upbeat music. Discussion Point: Elicit any
    objections participants have to using distraction, and discuss
    these. Cheerleading may be needed. Discussion Point: Some
    individuals spend so much time distracting themselves from their own
    issues and focusing on others' problems that they never get around
    to addressing their own. Elicit examples from participants.

<!-- -->

VIII. Self-­Soothing (Distress Tolerance Handouts 8--8a) Main Point:
      Self-­soothing is doing things that feel pleasant, comforting, and
      provide relief from stress or pain. It makes it much easier to
      pass the time without making things worse. Distress Tolerance
      Handout 8: Self-­Soothing. After describing the value of
      self-­soothing, go through self-­soothing methods on this handout,
      focusing on each of the five senses. Give participants an
      opportunity to offer their own methods. It can be useful to ask
      participants to put checkmarks in the boxes for those
      self-­soothing activities they are willing to try out. Distress
      Tolerance Handout 8a: Body Scan Meditation, Step by Step
      (Optional). This handout contains a set of instructions for the
      body scan. If you do not have time to go through this procedure
      with participants, you might suggest that they get a recording
      leading them in a body scan20 or listen to one on YouTube.
      Distress Tolerance Worksheet 6, 6a, 6b: Self-­Soothing. As with the
      worksheets for the distraction skills, each of these provides for
      an increase in the number of practices, from two practices between
      sessions (Worksheet 6) to practice of every skill twice (Worksheet
      6a) to multiple daily practices (Worksheets 6b). Distress
      Tolerance Worksheet 6c: Body Scan Meditation, Step by Step. If you
      assign the body scan meditation as homework, ask participants to
      use this worksheet to record practice. Other Materials: It can be
      useful to bring a few soothing items from one or more of the sense
      categories to share with participants. Examples for soothing smell
      are lavender, vanilla, cinnamon, baked cook-

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 8 • 443 ies,
flowers, or pleasant-­smelling scratch-and-sniff stickers; for touch,
small swatches of fabric with different soothing textures, teddy bears,
or other plush toys; for vision, pictures of nature; for sound, soothing
music (e.g., lullabies, sound machines); for taste, chocolate or
butterscotch candy.

99A. What Is Self-­Soothing? Self-­soothing is being comforting,
nurturing, peacemaking, gentle, and mindfully kind to oneself.

99B. When to Self-­Soothe Self-­soothing activities reduce vulnerability
to emotion mind and to acting impulsively and they reduce the sense of
deprivation that is often a precursor to feelings of vulnerability. They
help people tolerate pain and distress without making things worse.

99C. How to Self-­Soothe 1. Soothe the Five Senses A way to remember the
skills for self-­soothing is to think of soothing the five senses: 
Vision  Hearing  Smell  Taste  Touch

99

Practice Exercise: Ask participants to read through all the items on
Handout 8 and check those they think might work for them. Then ask them
what they checked. (This exercise can be done at the beginning or at the
end of reviewing the handout.) Note to Leaders: Go over the specific
self-­soothing activities on Handout 8, offering a few examples from any
materials brought into the session. You need review only a few in each
category during the session. Devote more time to the following
discussion point.

Discussion Point: Some individuals have difficulties with self-­soothing.
Some believe that they do not deserve soothing, kindness, and
gentleness; they may feel guilty or ashamed when they self-­ soothe.
Others believe that they should get soothing from others; they don't
self-­soothe as a matter of principle, or feel angry at others when they
attempt to self-­soothe. For these participants, self-­soothing requires
opposite action (see Emotion Regulation Handout 10). Elicit examples
from each participant. Note to Leaders: It is important that each
participant learn to self-­soothe. Even if at first it elicits anger or
guilt, self-­soothing should be repeatedly attempted. In time, it will
become easier. Some clients may be quite resistant to practicing
self-­soothing. Keep a watchful eye on homework practice, to be sure that
each participant is at least trying these skills. Assess and
problem-solve difficulties.

Discussion Point: In contrast, other individuals overuse self-­soothing
or use it in self-­destructive ways. Each of the items on Handout 8 can
create problems if used to excess. Elicit examples from each
participant.

2.  Balance Soothing the Senses with Problem Solving It is important to
    balance self-­soothing with focusing and working on a task. This is
    especially important during crises, when sudden demands feel
    overwhelming and keep one from doing

444 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 8--8a

what is required. In such a scenario, self-­soothing can be an effective
first step to bring down the negative emotions. However, self-­soothing
is not sufficient for resolving crises. It needs to be followed by
working on the task and getting it done. Alternatively, you might
suggest one of the TIP skills as a way to reduce feeling overwhelmed,
followed by problem solving, and then followed by self-­soothing as a
reward.

D. Self-­Soothing with a Body Scan Meditation Another option for
self-­soothing is a more focused attention to body sensations, the body
scan (as described in the optional Distress Tolerance Handout 8a). This
is a practice commonly used in meditation. Tell participants: "The idea
here is to settle the mind by letting go of thoughts about the past or
about the future, and instead focus the mind on the present and on your
present experiences of your breath and of your body. It is a way of
approaching the sensations of your body with the curiosity of a child.
Through this process, you will discover a lot about how your body feels,
its sensations, and your mental reactions to paying attention to various
parts of your body." Encourage practice with a CD or web-based
recording. Body scan meditation, like paired muscle relaxation, can be
very soothing when it is done while listening to a soothing voice's
step-by-step instructions. As noted earlier in regard to paired
relaxation, since most participants like to hear their own therapists or
skills trainers, you can make a recording, copy it to a CD or thumb
drive, and give it out to participants. Note to Leaders: The body scan
is an important part of various insight meditation practices,20, 21 and
of the mindfulness-based treatments that evolved from these
practices.22--28 As with paired muscle relaxation and sensory
self-­soothing, how you teach this depends on how much time you have. The
full body scan procedure takes up to 30 minutes. If time is short, you
can quickly demonstrate the body scan (with all participating) by
instructing participants to focus on just two or three body areas (5--10
minutes). If you do not have an audio recording of a body scan, review
and give participants Distress Tolerance Handout 8a to use as a guide
for how to move systematically through the body. As noted above, before
and after the practice, ask participants mentally to rate their ability
to tolerate distress (0--100) without making things worse. Ask them to
share any changes.

The steps for teaching body scan meditation are as follows: 1. Orient
Participants to the Procedure Say to participants: "Focusing your mind
on your breath and on specific body sensations can be a very soothing
experience if it is done slowly, with curiosity and with gentleness. It
does not require a lot of effort or use of imagination. Bringing your
mind back to the present and focusing on your body sensations can anchor
the mind, calming emotions that feel out of control." Note to Leaders:
As noted previously, some individuals experience "relaxation-­induced
panic" because of unmet expectations. To prevent this, instruct
participants that the body scan may not result in relaxation, and that
the important part of the exercise is to learn awareness of their body.
Individuals should be instructed to feel free to stop at any time during
practice. Allow those who are self-­conscious about practicing to simply
observe the demonstration and/or face the wall during practice.

2.  Demonstrate Scanning Body Sensations Ask participants to rate their
    level of distress (0--100) before starting the practice; you can ask
    them to write it down in case they forget. Then ask them to get in a
    comfortable position with their eyes partially open. In a slow and
    easy voice tone, give instructions on which part of the body to
    focus on, pausing for a minute or so between each instruction. For
    example, you can

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handouts 8a--9 • 445

say something like this, speaking slowly and giving participants time to
focus on each part of the body: "Focus your awareness, as if it were a
spotlight, on:  Where your body is touching the chair, (or the floor, or
the bed).  Down the left leg, into the left foot all the way to the
toes.  On each toe in turn.  Expand attention into the rest of the foot,
to:  The ankle.  The top of the foot.  The bones and joints.  The lower
left leg.  The calf, shin, knee, and so forth in turn.  The left thigh."
"Move your focus to:  The right toes, and on to  Foot and ankle.  The
right lower leg.  The right knee.  The right thigh.  Up to the pelvic
area.  Groin, genitals, buttocks, and hips.  The lower back and the
abdomen.  The upper back and the chest and shoulders.  Then move to the
hands.  The sensations in the fingers and thumbs.  The palms and the
backs of both hands.  The wrists, the lower arms, and the elbows.  The
upper arms, the shoulders, and the armpits.  The neck, the face (jaw,
mouth, lips, nose, cheeks, ears, eyes, forehead).  And then the entirety
of the head." 3. Ask Participants to Rate Distress Following the end of
the exercise, ask participants to rate their level of distress, again on
the 0--100 scale. 4. Give Suggestions for a Brief Body Scan Tell
participants: "In a crisis or when you have very, very little time, you
can do a brief body scan. Focus your attention completely on just one
section of your body, moving to a second and then a third."

IX. Improving the Moment (Distress Tolerance Handouts 9--9a) Main Point:
    Improving the moment is an idiosyncratic series of strategies that
    can be helpful in improving the quality of the present moment,
    making it easier to survive a crisis without making it worse.
    Distress Tolerance Handout 9: Improving the Moment. Review each of
    the strategies on this handout, and give participants an opportunity
    to offer their own methods and to share other strategies that work
    well in a crisis. Ask participants to put checkmarks in the boxes
    for those activities they are willing to try.

446 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 9--9a

Distress Tolerance Handout 9a: Sensory Awareness, Step by Step
(Optional). This optional handout can be used as a participant guide for
a relaxing action (the R in IMPROVE) or used as a script for recording
an audio guided relaxation that is distributed to participants. Distress
Tolerance Worksheets 7, 7a, 7b: IMPROVE the Moment. Review worksheets
with participants. As with the worksheets for the previous skills, each
of these provides for an increase in the number of practices from two
practices between sessions (Worksheet 7) to practice of every skill
twice (Worksheet 7a) to multiple daily practices (Worksheet 7b).

99A. What Is Improving the Moment? Improving the moment is replacing
immediate negative events with more positive ones by making the moment
more positive and easier to tolerate. Some strategies involve changing
appraisals of oneself (encouragement) or the situation (creating meaning
in the situation, imagining changes in the situation). Some involve
changing body responses to events (relaxing). Prayer and focusing on one
thing in the moment have to do with acceptance and letting go.

99B. When to Practice Improving the Moment Explain to participants:
"Improving the moment is particularly useful when you are feeling
overwhelmed in a stressful situation that may be long-­lasting, or when
distracting activities and self-­ soothing are not working."

99C. How to Improve the Moment Tell participants: "A way to remember
these skills is the word IMPROVE: Imagery, Meaning, Prayer, Relaxing
actions, One thing in the moment, Vacation, Encouragement."

99

Practice Exercise: Ask participants to read through all the items on
Handout 9 and check those they think might work for them. Ask people
what they checked. (This exercise can be done at the beginning or at the
end of reviewing the handout.)

1.  Imagery Mental visualization---­imagery---can be used to distract,
    soothe, bolster courage and confidence, and make future rewards more
    salient. Say to participants: "Using imagery, you can create a
    situation different from the actual one; in this sense, it is like
    leaving the current situation. With imagery, however, you can be
    sure that the place you go to is safe and secure. Going to an
    imaginary safe place or room within yourself can be very helpful
    during flashbacks. For this strategy to be useful, however, you have
    to practice it enough times when you are not in a crisis to get it
    firmly down as a skill." Practice Exercise: Ask participants to
    breathe deeply and go within themselves to wise mind. Suggest that
    while there, they begin building a safe room inside themselves. Have
    them imagine the furniture in the room, the locks on the doors, the
    things they would put in the room to feel safe. Ask them also to
    imagine what they would put in the room to protect themselves from
    destructive urges. What would they keep out of the room? Ask
    participants to share how they built their room.

Imagery can also be used to cope more effectively with crises.
Practicing effective coping in imagination can actually increase one's
chances of coping effectively in real life. It can be helpful first to
write out a script outlining how one would cope effectively with a
crisis without making it worse, and then practice it in imagination.
Used in this way, imagery is very similar to the emotion regulation
skill of cope ahead (see Emotion Regulation Handout 19). Example:
"Imagine yourself tolerating a very painful emotion or powerful urge to
do some-

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 9 • 447

thing destructive by visualizing yourself flying away into the clouds,
looking down on the pain and intense urges." 2. Meaning Finding or
creating meaning helps many people in crises. Victor Frankl wrote Man's
Search for Meaning, an important book about surviving Nazi concentration
camps. 29 It is based on the premise that people need to find or create
meaning in their lives to survive terrible suffering. Finding or
creating meaning is similar to the dialectical strategy of making
lemonade out of lemons. (See Chapter 7 of the main DBT text.) Discussion
Point: It is important to note that life is at times unfair for reasons
that no one can understand. People do not have to assume that there is a
purpose to their suffering, although those who are religious or
spiritual may see it this way. Those who do not believe in a higher
purpose can still create meaning or purpose, however. Get feedback about
participants' views on the meaning or purpose of suffering.

3.  Prayer The essence of prayer is the complete opening of oneself to
    the moment. This practice is very similar to the notion of radical
    acceptance, discussed later in this module. Note that the suggested
    prayer is not one of begging to have the suffering or crisis taken
    away. Nor is it a "Why me?" prayer. Practice Exercise: During the
    skills training session, have all participants close their eyes,
    imagine or "get in touch with" current pain or suffering, and then
    silently try different types of prayer. These might include an
    acceptance prayer (e.g., "Thy will be done"), a "Deliver me" prayer,
    or a "Why me?" prayer. Have participants refocus on current
    suffering (for only a moment) before each attempt at prayer. Discuss
    afterward. Or suggest that people who are comfortable with praying
    try each type of prayer during the next crisis, and keep track of
    which type actually helps.

4.  Relaxing Actions Relaxing actions as part of improving the moment
    are different from paired muscle relaxation as taught in the TIP
    skills. In paired relaxation, the emphasis is on directly modifying
    how the body is reacting to stress. In relaxing actions, the
    emphasis is on widening activities to include a wider variety of
    relaxing things to do. Explain to participants: "The key here is to
    select activities that ordinarily have the effect of calming you
    down. When you are relaxed, it is usually far easier to resist
    temptations to engage in crisis behaviors. Being relaxed gives you
    time to think and review your pros and cons." Discussion Point: Many
    of the skills taught in this module or in the Mindfulness module can
    be very relaxing. It can be useful to have each participant make a
    list of activities that are especially relaxing. Elicit from
    participants types of activities they find relaxing. Discuss types
    of activities that are relaxing to some but that cause tension,
    anxiety, or irritation for other people. Practice Exercise: It can
    be very relaxing to listen to mindfulness or relaxation exercises
    recordings. As noted earlier, a wide range of these is available
    from various sources; as also noted earlier, these are often most
    useful if a skills trainer or therapist provides the recording. A
    script that can be used for such a recording is provided in Distress
    Tolerance Handout 9a and described below.

5.  One Thing in the Moment "One thing in the moment" is another way of
    describing "one-­mindfully," the second mindfulness "how" skill
    discussed in Chapter 7 of this manual. Although it can be very
    difficult to do, focusing on one thing in the moment can be very
    helpful in the middle of a crisis; it can provide

448 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 9--9a

time to settle down. The secret of this skill is to remember that the
only pain one has to survive is "just this moment." We all often suffer
much more than is required by calling to mind past suffering and
ruminating about future suffering we may have to endure. But, in
reality, there is only "just this moment." This skill is important in
reality acceptance, and a number of specific exercises for improving
focus and increasing awareness are taught in the next segment of this
module. Practice Exercise: During the session, have all participants
close their eyes and imagine or "get in touch with" some current
discomfort, irritation, or anxiety right now, at this moment in the
session. Instruct participants to raise a hand slightly when they have
the focus. Instruct them to notice their level of current discomfort.
Now instruct them to start ruminating about all the past times when they
have had to endure such feelings in sessions. Have them also bring to
mind and ruminate about how much more these feelings have to be endured
in this skills training session and all future sessions. Instruct them
to notice now their level of discomfort. Then have them refocus the mind
on "just this moment." Explain: "Say in your mind, 'Just this moment';
let go of thoughts of the future and the past." Now have them notice
their level of discomfort after doing this. Discuss the exercise.

6.  Vacation Continue: "Taking a 'vacation from adulthood' is coping by
    retreating into yourself or allowing yourself to be taken care of
    for the moment. Everyone needs a vacation from adulthood once in a
    while. The trick is to take it in a way that does not harm you, and
    also to make sure the vacation is brief. It should only last from a
    few moments to no longer than a day. When you have responsibilities,
    taking a vacation depends on getting someone else to take over your
    duties for a while. The idea is similar to the notion of taking a
    time out to regroup." Discussion Point: Some individuals are experts
    at taking vacations. The problem is that they are not in control of
    their vacations; that is, they take them at inappropriate times and
    stay on them too long. When vacation taking becomes a skill to be
    practiced, this gives them the potential for getting in control.
    Elicit from participants times when they have taken vacations in an
    out-of-­ control fashion. Discuss ways to get in control of vacations
    and use them effectively.

99

7.  Encouragement "Encouragement is cheerleading yourself and rethinking
    situations. The idea is to talk to yourself as you would talk to
    someone you care about who is in a crisis---or to talk to yourself
    as you would like someone else to talk to you. In couples, having a
    higher ratio of positive comments to negative comments predicts the
    partners' staying in the relationship. 30--32 You are in a
    relationship with yourself, so to increase well-being, you have to
    say more positive and encouraging things than negatives and
    put-downs. The idea here is to rethink situations when you start
    telling yourself they are hopeless, that they won't ever end, or
    that you cannot do what is needed." Note to Leaders: You may at
    first need to do quite a bit of modeling of self-­encouragement here,
    as well as cheerleading.

Discussion Point: Mention that it is important to balance improving the
moment with staying in the present. Discuss with participants how when
this balance is not achieved, the strategies for improving the moment
can be overused, particularly in invalidating environments. However,
point out that just because they can be overused, this does not mean
they have no value at all. Elicit and problem-solve resistance to using
these skills.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 9a • 449

D. Improving the Moment with Sensory Awareness Sensory awareness (as
described in the optional Distress Tolerance Handout 9a) is aimed at
centering oneself to enhance a sense of calmness and peace. It involves
focusing attention on various sensations that one might have. Although
the procedure is given in the form of questions, the goal is to direct
participants' attention to the presence or absence of sensations asked
about, and to encourage participants to focus on their experiences. Like
body scan meditation, this skill is much easier for participants to
learn if they can listen to a recording of the questions or a live
reader. You can make a recording yourself and put it on a CD or thumb
drive to give to participants, or you can have participants record (on
smartphones if they have them) your reciting the questions in the
session. Note to Leaders: How you teach this depends on how much time
you have. If time is short, you can quickly demonstrate (with all
participating) by asking just ten questions. If you do not have a
recording of the questions, give participants Distress Tolerance Handout
9a to use as a guide for asking themselves questions. It can be
particularly helpful to have participants mentally rate their distress
before and after the practice, and then share any changes. It is
important to point out that relaxing is a skill that takes lots of
practice. Practiced on a daily basis, however, it can prepare clients
for engaging in more functional behaviors during crises.

The steps for teaching sensory awareness are as follows:

99

1.  Orient Participants to the Procedure Tell participants: "This
    procedure asks a series of questions about your body sensations.
    Focusing your mind on body sensations can bring you back into the
    present. This helps many people feel 'grounded' and more at peace,
    calming emotions that feel out of control." The entire procedure,
    practiced at home or in an individual session, ordinarily takes
    about 10 minutes, but it can also be done quickly in 5 minutes (by
    skipping questions).

99

2.  Demonstrate Noticing the Sensations Start with very simple
    instructions: "Find a comfortable position. . . . Now, in your mind,
    rate your current level of distress from 0 to 100. Staying in this
    position, listen to each question that I ask. Listen to each
    question, and notice what occurs before I ask the next question.
    There are no right or wrong responses. Just notice your reaction to
    each question." Then start asking each question in a modulated but
    warm voice tone, pausing for several seconds between each question.
    Questions take between 5 and 7 seconds to read, and pauses should
    last 10--13 seconds. With 20 seconds per question, all of the
    questions can be given in 10 minutes.
3.  "Can you feel your hair touching your head?"
4.  "Can you feel your chest rising and falling as you breathe?"
5.  "Can you feel the space between your eyes?"
6.  "Can you feel the distance between your ears?"
7.  "Can you feel your breath touching the back of your eyes while you
    inhale?"
8.  "Can you picture something far away?"
9.  "Can you notice your arms touching your body?"
10. "Can you feel the bottoms of your feet?"
11. "Can you imagine a beautiful day at the beach?"
12. "Can you notice the space within your mouth?"
13. "Can you notice the position of your tongue in your mouth?"
14. "Can you feel a breeze against your cheek?"
15. "Can you feel how one arm is heavier than the other?"
16. "Can you feel a tingling or numbness in one hand?"
17. "Can you feel how one arm is more relaxed than the other?"

450 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 9a--10

16. "Can you feel a change in the temperature in the air around you?"
17. "Can you feel how your left arm is warmer than the right?"
18. "Can you imagine how it would feel to be a rag doll?"
19. "Can you notice any tightness in your left forearm?"
20. "Can you imagine something very pleasant?"
21. "Can you imagine what it would feel like to float on a cloud?"
22. "Can you imagine what it would feel like to be stuck in molasses?"
23. "Can you picture something far away?"
24. "Can you feel a heaviness in your legs?"
25. "Can you imagine floating in warm water?"
26. "Can you notice your body hanging on your bones?"
27. "Can you allow yourself to drift lazily?"
28. "Can you feel your face getting soft?"
29. "Can you imagine a beautiful flower?"33\*
30. "Can you feel how one arm and leg are heavier than the other?"33
31. Give Suggestions for Brief Sensory Awareness Say to participants:
    "In a crisis or when you have very little time, ask yourself two or
    three of these questions." Discussion Point: Ask participants after
    the practice whether their arousal and distress tolerance went down,
    stayed the same, or went up. Although my colleagues and I often
    spend only 5 minutes on this exercise in session, we have found that
    many participants have a noticeable reduction in arousal, which
    often makes tolerating distress much easier.

E. Summarizing the Crisis Survival Skills Summarize the crisis survival
skills with participants before moving to the next portion of this
module. Note to Leaders: In reviewing the crisis survival skills, note
that whereas some of the skills involve distancing from the painful
reality (e.g., pushing away and most of the other distraction skills),
others allow for some continued contact with the painful circumstance
(e.g., encouragement, one thing in the moment, finding meaning,
comparisons). In this sense, the latter crisis survival skills involve
some reality acceptance. This is a meaningful distinction, as sometimes
it is important to interrupt a crisis response (e.g., when one is on the
verge of self-harm), while in other situations it is ineffective to
distract oneself completely (e.g., while completing a shift at work or
while in a therapy session).

X.  

Overview: Reality Acceptance Skills (Distress Tolerance Handout 10) Main
Point: The goals of reality acceptance skills are to reduce suffering
and increase a sense of freedom through coming to terms with the facts
of one's life. Distress Tolerance Handout 10: Overview: Reality
Acceptance Skills: Review this handout quickly. It can also be skipped
and the information written on the board instead. Do not use this
handout to teach the skills. Distress Tolerance Worksheets 8, 8a, 8b:
Reality Acceptance Skills. Each of these three worksheets

\*Both items marked with note number 33 are adapted from Goldfried, M.,
& Davison, G. (1976). Clinical behavior therapy. New York: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston. Copyright 1976 by Marvin R. Goldfried and Gerald C.
Davison. Adapted by permission of the authors.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handouts 10--11 • 451
covers all the reality acceptance skills and can be used here if you are
reviewing skills already taught. The worksheets vary in the amount of
practice they provide for starting with two practices on Worksheet 8.
This worksheet can be a good starter worksheet with individuals you are
trying to shape into more frequent skills practice. Worksheet 8a
provides for practice of every skill twice, while Worksheet 8a provides
for multiple daily practices. These worksheets can be given again and
again for each of the reality acceptance skills if you do not want to
use the worksheets specific to each skill.

A. Reality Acceptance Skills 1. What Are Reality Acceptance Skills? Tell
participants: "Reality acceptance skills are skills for accepting your
life as it is in the moment. They are particularly useful when you are
living a life that is not the life you want." Note to Leaders: If you
have not (or have not yet) taught crisis survival skills, review the
goals of reality acceptance below as you start. If you have taught
crisis survival skills and discussed the goals of distress tolerance
before (Handout 1), then skip point 2 below and remind participants of
the goals very briefly here. The value of reality acceptance as outlined
below can also be reviewed when you are teaching radical acceptance (see
Distress Tolerance Handout 10).

2.  Goals of Reality Acceptance Skills Say to participants: "The goals
    of reality acceptance skills are to reduce your suffering and
    increase your sense of freedom." Discussion Point: Elicit from
    participants times when refusing to accept reality as it is has led
    to more pain and suffering instead of less pain and suffering.
    Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when letting go of
    having to have whatever they happen to want in a moment in time, and
    instead allowing reality to be what it is, have led to increased
    serenity and a sense of freedom.

99B. Six Basic Reality Acceptance Skills There are six basic reality
acceptance skills:  Radical acceptance  Turning the mind  Willingness 
Half-­smiling  Willing hands  Allowing the mind: Mindfulness of current
thoughts Note to Leaders: It is tempting to start teaching the skill of
radical acceptance on this handout but don't do it unless you are not
planning on using Distress Tolerance Handout 11: Radical Acceptance.

XI. Radical Acceptance (Distress Tolerance Handouts 11--11b) Main Point:
    Radical acceptance is complete and total openness to the facts of
    reality as they are, without throwing a tantrum or responding with
    willful ineffectiveness. Distress Tolerance Handout 11: Radical
    Acceptance. A good way to teach this skill is to review and discuss
    this handout first, but be sure to leave enough time for
    participants to work on the first one or

452 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 11--11b

two steps of Worksheet 9 during the session. (Do not, however, require
sharing.) Most participants will see the relevance of the skill as they
work on the worksheet. This also gives you a good chance to coach
participants in working with the handout. A common misconception is that
people must accept things in life that are not facts. Reviewing the list
of what has to be accepted (and, by omission, what does not have to be
accepted) can be very important. It can be useful also to have
participants decide during the session what facts in their lives they
still need to accept and what they will work on accepting during the
week. The very concept of accepting the reality of facts that are not in
dispute can be difficult for many participants. This is particularly
true when participants have been victims of horrific abuse and believe
that life has been very unfair to them. A common pattern here is
believing that to accept something is to approve of it or to be passive
and not change things that are destructive. A number of reasons for
accepting reality are included on this handout. Orient participants, and
advise them to remain aware that strong primary emotions like sadness
may show up when they are practicing acceptance, either in group
sessions or in other settings. Also explain to them that a sense of
calmness often follows the practice. Distress Tolerance Handout 11a:
Radical Acceptance: Factors That Interfere (Optional). Factors that
interfere with acceptance are outlined on this optional handout.
Information on the handout can be discussed when you are teaching
Handout 11. Distress Tolerance Handout 11b: Practicing Radical
Acceptance, Step by Step (Optional). It is useful to have this handout
available, as it gives instructions for practicing radical acceptance.
For some groups of participants, however, the handout may be
overwhelming, and the list of practice exercises on Worksheet 9 will be
sufficient. Distress Tolerance Worksheet 9: Radical Acceptance. It can
be very useful to have participants fill in the first several questions
of this worksheet during the session. Be sure, however, to review the
entire worksheet with participants before they leave. If participants
have trouble figuring out what they need to accept in their lives,
instruct them to do the best they can and to discuss this with their
individual therapists or with persons who know them well. It is typical
for individuals to decide they need to accept things that are not in
reality facts (e.g., "I am a no-good, rotten person"). At times these
judgmental thoughts may be hidden behind statements that sound like
facts (e.g., "I am a street bum on drugs"). Discuss ratings of level of
current acceptance. Point out that if a person writes something down to
be worked on, this means that acceptance is already above 0. Notice that
this worksheet is not only a worksheet, but a recording device to help
participants remember what they did, so they can describe it during
homework review. Once a person decides what to work on, the practice of
radical acceptance is the homework, not the writing down of the
practice. The exercises at the end are a summary of the exercises on
Handout 11b. If a person is working on accepting more than one life
fact, then you can either give out more than one copy of the worksheet
or suggest using the back of the sheet. Distress Tolerance Worksheet 9a:
Practicing Radical Acceptance. Review the worksheet with participants.
The instructions for how to use this worksheet are similar to those
given for Worksheets 5a, 6a, and 7a.

A. Isn't Radical Acceptance Giving Up or Approving? Pose these two
questions to participants:  "If the point of skills training is to
change, why put in radical acceptance?"  "If you accept evil and
wrongdoing, isn't that approving of it?" Note to Leaders: It is usually
important to address these questions first and get them out of the way.
Generally, I start with reasonably extreme stories where (1) no one will
disagree that acceptance is needed; (2) the pain of the people in the
story is severe enough that participants will not feel that you are
trivializing their pain by suggesting they accept it; and (3) it is
clear that acceptance does not mean approval.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 11 • 453

99 \$ Story Point: In reading books on how individuals survived in Nazi
concentration camps during

World War II, two things became apparent to me. First, a person had to
have luck to survive. Second, if a person was lucky (i.e., was not
killed for random reasons), then to stay alive the person had to
radically accept that he or she was actually in the concentration camp
and that the guards had all the power. What was right, wrong, or fair
had no relevance. Those who gave up fell down and died or committed
suicide. Those who openly rebelled, insisted guards stop breaking the
law, or the like also died: The guards shot them or did something else
equally brutal. Those who lived had luck, but they also radically
accepted the rules imposed by the guards and people in power, and within
those rules they did their very best to "work the system" and be
effective in the environment they eventually survived.

99 \$ Story Point: A man is in prison with a life sentence for a crime
he did not commit. He has used

up his appeals, has no money or resources to hire a lawyer, and cannot
get the Innocence Project to take up his cause. Accepting that prison is
his home for the time being is critical. Without such reality
acceptance, the prisoner might not adapt to prison, learn the skills
necessary to survive in prison, and get whatever good things he can have
while in prison. Tantrums and fighting the system can interfere with
problem solving within the system and can lead to more punishment. Lying
down on his cot, and giving up and giving in, can be just as problematic
for this man and can also lead to punishment and recriminations.

Discussion Point: Ask participants for examples in their own lives where
radical acceptance of the facts of their lives has been important,
either because such acceptance made things a lot better or because
failure to accept made things a lot worse.

99B. What Is the Difference between Acceptance and Radical Acceptance?
Tell participants that acceptance is:  "Acknowledging or recognizing
facts that are true; conceding the facts."  "Letting go of fighting your
reality (and also of throwing tantrums)."

And tell them that radical acceptance is:  "Accepting all the way, with
your mind, your heart, and your body."  "Accepting something from the
depths of your soul."  "Opening yourself to fully experiencing reality
as it is in this one moment."

The idea here is to acknowledge what exists without anger or grudge,
without bitterness, without meanness. Despair (and passivity when action
is needed), bitterness, resentment, and undue shame or guilt are all the
results of failures in radical acceptance. They are also often results
of accepting distorted facts---facts not in evidence. Thus the goal of
radical acceptance is to fully accept just those facts that must be
accepted. It is this full experience of the moment that ultimately will
bring about peace and eventually, with repeated practice, some level of
contentment with life. Note to Leaders: The point of radical acceptance
is extremely difficult for some individuals (and some skills training
leaders) to see. They have great difficulty seeing that they can accept
something without approving of it. They believe that if they accept what
is, they cannot change it. Trying to get them to accept the notion of
acceptance can become a power struggle. As a shaping strategy, you might
suggest the terms "acknowledge," "recognize," or "endure," and discuss
these. You will probably have to discuss them over and over again. Great
patience is needed, but don't give up on radical acceptance. Also, as
noted above, be prepared to orient participants to the possibility that
strong primary emotions like sadness and grief may show up when they are
practicing radical acceptance. Again, these emotions are the results of
the necessary emotional processing of acceptance and are often followed
by a sense of calmness.

454 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 11

99C. What Has to Be Accepted? 99 1. Reality Is What It Is We only have
to accept actual facts about the present and the past, and reasonable
probabilities about the future. Thus we have to be very careful not to
accept distortions of the past (e.g., "My mother hated me from the very
beginning of my life"), exaggerations (e.g., "I never get what I want,"
"I hate everything about where I live"), catastrophes (e.g., "My whole
life was ruined when I got fired"), judgmental assertions (e.g., "My
wife is a jerk, and my children are no good"), or other similar beliefs
or assumptions that are not actual facts. \$ Story Point: Tell the story
of the man who had to learn to love dandelions (see Chapter 9, Section
XIX). As noted there, this story is adapted from one I was told by my
Zen teacher, who read it in a book by another spiritual teacher, Anthony
De Mello.34

Examples: Accepting that a loved one has died is very hard, but also
very necessary if one is to build a life without that person. If you are
lucky to live long enough, at some point you will have to accept that
your hair is turning gray. \$ Story Point: Marie had a job as a clerk
typist for a big insurance company. But she really wanted to be a social
worker. So she decided to find a job as a social worker. She went to an
employment agency, asked them to help her get a new job, and told them
she wanted a job in social work. They found her a job in social work.
She gave notice at the job she had, which was a really good job in the
sense that the people were fabulous and she got a good salary and
benefits. But she really wanted a social work job, so she left. She was
so excited! "Ah! I've got a job in social work!" she thought. She went
in to work the first day, and they asked her to type up reports and
letters. She typed all day and was thinking, "Oh, well, it's not so
terrible; I'm learning what type of work people do here, and I'm not
going to have to keep typing." But the second day, the third day, and
then for a whole week, what did they have her do? Typing! So she went to
her supervisor and asked, "Well, when am I going to get to do the social
work?" The supervisor said, "What do you mean?" Marie said, "Well, I
mean when do I get to do something like social work?" The supervisor
said, "Your job is typing. That's what we need. You don't have the
social work degree required to work as a social worker." The first thing
that went through Marie's mind was "No, that is not true. I took a job
with a social work agency. This can't be true." She actually thought of
staying. She thought of staying and trying to make it into a social work
job. That would be denying reality. Because the fact of the matter was
that this really was a typing job. So what were her options? Well, she
could have stayed miserable. She could have gotten hysterical. She could
have stayed, fought, and told them that they should make it into a
social work job. She could have told them that they were mean for not
doing that. She could have done a lot of things. Marie's other option
was just to radically accept that this was not a social work job. She
had made a mistake. She needed to correct the mistake. And the way to
correct that mistake was to get another job. So that's just what she
did. When her next break came, she called the people at the employment
agency; she told them she had made a mistake. She needed another job.
They said that this was fine, and they would help her look for one. When
they called her old job for a reference, her old boss said they had not
found anyone yet for her old job and would like her to come back. So she
went back to the old job and was a lot happier. She decided to start
saving money so she could go to graduate school in social work. She also
decided to look for a place to volunteer where she could do things like
social work until she got into school.

99

2.  Everyone's Future Has Limitations A limitation on the future means
    that we may be less likely to achieve one or more desired outcomes.
    Limitations are like probabilities. Accepting these limitations (or
    probabilities) can

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 11 • 455

be important in setting goals and in avoiding failures that may only
decrease the quality of our lives. The key here is that only highly
likely limitations have to be accepted. Limitations on our futures are
caused by factors that have occurred in our lives, in the lives of
others, and in our environment. If we do not change the causes that
limit our present and future, then we cannot change, and reality itself
will not change.

99

a.  We Can Be Limited by Our Biology and by Our Environment

We can be limited by our genes, the biology we are born with, an absence
of childhood education or effective parenting, a poor economic
background, social status, country of birth, gender, race, sexual
orientation, ethnicity, body shape, height, age, physical illness or
disabilities, family members who need our care, or any number of other
factors that we have little control over. Examples: If you are born a
boy, you cannot do some things girls can do (like get pregnant). If you
are a woman, you may be limited by some social expectations that are not
applied to men. If you have little artistic talent, it is less likely
that you will be a successful artist. If you are born with one leg, it
is less likely that you will win the New York Marathon.

99

b.  We Can Be Limited by Our Own Past Behavior

Examples: A person who skipped class a lot in high school, didn't study,
and hung out with gang members is less likely to get accepted at a lot
of colleges. A person who has been convicted and jailed for a felony is
more limited in employment aspirations than one who has not. A person
who left a job to stay home and take care of children may have more
difficulty finding a high-­paying job than one who has been working all
along. Psychological disorders such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorders,
repeated major depression, phobias, and crippling anxiety can make life
more difficult for some than for others; if not effectively treated,
these disorders may limit what one does in the future.

99

c.  We Can Be Limited by Known Probabilities

Examples: We all must accept that we will die (this is certain). Most of
us have to accept paying taxes (this is almost certain) or having a
shortened life if we continue to smoke, avoid exercise, and refuse to
manage high blood pressure (these are high probabilities). Refusing at
times to accept that an undesired outcome is almost certainly going to
occur if we don't change our behavior is denial of reality and a failure
of radical acceptance. Examples: "You are unlikely to do well on an exam
if you refuse to accept that you have to study for it. You are unlikely
to keep a job if you refuse to accept that continued hostile behavior at
work is likely to get you fired. Facing and accepting the necessity of
paying bills on time and saving money are necessary if you want to avoid
financial instability."

99

d.  Thoughts about the Future Do Not Have to Be Accepted as High
    Probabilities

Fearful and hopeless thoughts about the future are not facts about the
future. They do not have to be accepted as high probabilities unless the
feared event is highly likely and the causes of the event cannot be
changed. Example: "You may have to accept that you will never get a job
if you are on your deathbed or if you are unwilling to look for a job,
but it does not need to be accepted if you can still work and are
willing to apply for jobs." Example: "No one will ever love me" is an
extreme thought and is unlikely to be true for most of us. We may have
to accept the fact that we have the thought "No one will ever love me,"
but this (the existence of the thought going through our minds) is all
that must be

456 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 11

accepted. The thought does not make it true. We don't have to accept
that "I am a person who will never be loved." Note to Leaders: That
thoughts about the future are not facts about the future is an extremely
important point to make. Be sure that participants understand this
point.

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when they have tried to
accept things about the future that they did not need to accept. e. The
Effects of Limitations on Our Lives Can Vary

We all have limitations, but the effects of specific limitations on our
lives depend on our dreams and goals and on our willingness to accept
not having everything we want in our lives. We cannot always control our
own desires. We can wish we did not want something that is unattainable,
but wishing does not always make things come true. Thus, when goals and
possibilities conflict, it can cause much more pain than when they do
not conflict. Examples: Having limited athletic ability is not a
limitation for a person who doesn't like athletics or doesn't care about
winning; being tone-deaf is not such an important limitation for a
person who doesn't play or sing music; being over 60 may not be a work
limitation for a person who has a secure job and doesn't want to change.

99

3.  Everything in the Universe Has a Cause The point here is that
    everything that exists is an outcome of a cause. The point is not to
    identify specific causes or imply that we can always know the causes
    of events in reality. Nor is it to define what constitutes a cause.
    Thus causes can be physical, psychological, spiritual, or any other
    type of cause we may believe in.

99

a.  For Whatever Happens, We Can Assume a Cause and Effect

If a cause occurs, the effect should also occur. Acceptance from this
point of view is saying, "Everything should be as it is." The point of
this statement is that accepting what occurs in the universe is
acknowledging that it is caused. What is caused should be, in other
words. Or we can say, "Everything is as it is," or "Everything is," or
"Everything is caused." b. The Rules of the Universe Are What They Are

99

Radical acceptance involves saying, "The rules of the universe are the
rules of the universe." Then we can try to figure out what caused what.
When we say that reality should be different, we are saying that somehow
the rules of the universe should be different; not only that, but we are
saying that we should get to say what the laws of the universe are. Of
course, if we got to make up the rules of the universe, we might make a
mistake. There might be some unintended negative consequences as a
result. Refusing to accept reality as it is, in essence, is saying that
causes (or at least some causes) should not have effects. This would be
a remaking of the laws of the universe. For the most part, we only say,
"Things should not be the way they are," when we don't like the way
things are. We rarely say that about things we like, we want, or we
accept.

99 \$ Story Point: Imagine that there's a little boy on a bicycle. The
child is on a hill, and the child is rac-

ing down the hill really fast on his bicycle. He goes into an
intersection. Coming from the other direction down a long, empty road is
a car. The car is going way over the speed limit. The intersection is
unmarked: There's not a stop sign, there's not a stoplight, and there's
not a yield sign. The car's coming the other way. The driver sees the
child too late to stop, and the car and the child on the bike meet up
right in the middle of the intersection. The car hits the child, and the
child dies.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 11 • 457

Should this have happened? Yes, it should have. There wasn't a stop
sign. There wasn't a stop light. There wasn't a yield sign. The car was
speeding. The child was going fast. The car was going fast. The driver
could not stop the car in time. The child was a child. Children go fast.
People speed on long, empty roads. If we want to say that this should
not have happened, we would have to create causes for it not to happen.
We'd have to do something about all those causes. That's an example of
accepting reality as it is and accepting that reality has causes. We do
not, of course, have to approve of this. But, until the causes are
different, that event should happen. It was caused. If we want children
biking down a steep hill to stop being hit by cars coming across an
intersection, we may need to put up warning and stop signs or lights. We
may need more police patrols or speed bumps in the road. Parents may
need to teach their children better bike-­riding habits. Simply saying
that cars should not speed, or drivers should not hit little children,
or children should look right and left before crossing an intersection
does not cut down on accidents. Discussion Point: Elicit from
participants situations in their lives where they have been saying, "Why
me?" or "It shouldn't have happened." Note to Leaders: Relate the
emphasis on "what is caused should be" to nonjudgmentalness as taught in
the Mindfulness module.

c.  Radical Acceptance Does Not Require Knowing the Causes of Things

In the story above of the car and the bicycle, we don't know if the
cause was lack of a stop sign or if the accident could have been avoided
if the driver was not speeding. But we can accept that there was a
cause, even if we don't know it.

99

4.  Life Can Be Worth Living Even When It Contains Pain If life had to
    be pain-free to be worth living, no one would have a life worth
    living. Acceptance requires finding a way not to say that life is a
    catastrophe. Suppressing our desires for what we want is not an
    effective way out of this. When we do that, we are acting as if it
    would be terrible if we did not get what we want, as if we could not
    be happy and could not tolerate not having everything we want. These
    beliefs, of course, just make things worse. \$ Story Point: "Put
    yourself in a situation discussed earlier: You are a person in
    prison for life, for a crime you did not commit. The Supreme Court
    didn't overturn your conviction. What are your options?" "You
    certainly cannot solve the problem. You're not going to get yourself
    out of jail. And it just doesn't seem possible that you're going to
    start being happy that you're an innocent person in jail. So we have
    to rule that one out. So what are your options?" "You could be
    miserable, distraught, upset. You could cry every day for the rest
    of your life. Or you could accept it and figure out a way to build a
    life worth living inside a prison. To go from unendurable agony to
    endurable pain, you're going to have to accept that you can build a
    life. Because if you don't accept it, what will happen? You're not
    going to build a life. And building a life worth living actually
    takes a fair amount of work. Believing that you can't do it makes it
    almost impossible. Believing that you can do it makes it a lot
    easier---so the chances are a lot higher that if you'll actually
    accept that you are in prison for a crime you did not commit, you
    will build a life worth living." Discussion Point: Elicit from
    participants times when they have overcome extremely difficult and
    painful situations or unfair treatment to build something they could
    bear. Discuss how they did it.

458 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 11

99

Practice Exercise: Distribute copies of Distress Tolerance Worksheet 9,
and ask participants to complete Item 1: "Make a list of two very
important things in your life right now that you need to radically
accept. Then put a number \[0--5\] indicating how much you accept this
part of yourself or your life." It may seem early in the teaching to ask
for this, but our experience is that almost all participants can do it.
Most individuals have an intuitive understanding of what radical
acceptance is and of the necessity of it in their lives. To ensure that
group participants encounter what really needs to be accepted in their
lives, it can be a good idea to tell them at the start that you will not
require them to share what items they wrote down. Discuss participants'
experiences with identifying and writing down what they must accept.
Note that if a person writes down what they need to accept, that means
they have already accepted it at least a little bit and should choose a
number above 0.

D. Why Accept Reality?

99

1.  Rejecting or Denying Reality Doesn't Change Reality Rejecting
    reality usually involves avoiding seeing or experiencing reality,
    throwing a tantrum, and insisting (to the universe?) that reality
    change right this minute. It may simply be denying the facts that
    are right in front of our eyes. Although avoiding, tantrums, and
    denying might make us feel better in the moment, they do not change
    the facts that have occurred. Example: Some parents have a difficult
    time accepting that their children have grown up and left for
    college or a job in a new city. This refusal can lead to unrealistic
    demands, unwanted advice, and oversolicitous interference in their
    children's lives, ultimately damaging their relationships with their
    children. Examples: "Refusal to accept that drinking and driving is
    dangerous can lead to a DUI or a wreck that kills someone and lands
    you in jail for vehicular manslaughter. Refusal to accept some of
    your partner's habits that you dislike can lead to high conflict and
    ultimately a lost relationship." Discussion Point: A great myth is
    that "If you refuse to accept something---if you just put your foot
    down and refuse to put up with it---it will magically change." It is
    as if resistance and/or willpower alone will change it. Get examples
    of this. Discuss why participants might believe this. Elicit
    examples of when tantrums and verbal refusals to accept things have
    been reinforced.

99

2.  Changing Reality Requires First Accepting Reality Rejection of
    reality is like a cloud that surrounds pain, interfering with being
    able to see it clearly. Problems that are difficult to see clearly
    are difficult to solve. Examples:  "Refusing to accept an illness
    can lead you not to take care of yourself, which may cause even more
    illness or difficulties."  "Staying in an abusive relationship for
    years because you simply cannot accept that your partner is unlikely
    to stop abusing you is likely to lead only to more abuse." 
    "Insisting that if a person really cares for you, he or she will do
    what you want---when in so many ways the person already shows he or
    she does care for you---will probably lead only to disappointment,
    and perhaps to the end of the relationship too."  "Refusing to
    accept that it could rain on your outdoor wedding, and therefore not
    making any contingency plans, may lead to a ruined wedding."

99 \$ Story Point: "Imagine that you have a car and the brakes have gone
almost completely out. You

take the car to a mechanic and tell him what your problem is, and he
promises to fix your brakes. You come in the next week to get your car,
and all seems fine. Two days later, however, you are driving your car
and all of a sudden the same brakes go out again. You take it back to
the me-

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 11 • 459

chanic again. Who do you think will get your brakes fixed faster---the
mechanic who says, 'Oh, no, I fixed them, and they should run fine. You
must have messed them up,' or the mechanic who says, 'Wow! The brakes
went out again? There must be something wrong. Let me look at them again
and see what I can do'?"

99 \$ Story Point: "Imagine the following situation. You want to buy a
new house, and you finally

find the house of your dreams. There's only one problem with the house:
It's purple, and you hate the color purple. So you make an agreement
with the seller before you buy it. You say, 'All right, I'll pay you
this much money, but you have to repaint the house before I move in so
that it is not purple.' The person agrees, and you sign the papers
sealing the deal. The big day comes to move into the house. It's so
exciting! You pick up your new house keys and you go to the house.
However, when you get there you find that not only is the house still
purple, but the owners have moved to Europe and they are not coming
back." (Pause.) "All right, you have two options. You can throw a
tantrum: 'Ah! I can't stand it! This is a disaster. Oh, God! Where are
those people? I just can't believe this has happened to me. Ah! I'm so
mad! Well, I'm not going to tolerate this! I'm going to sue and make
them paint this house . . . ' And you can go on, and on, and on. You can
storm out of the house, get in your car, leave, and say, 'We're not
buying that house.' But you signed the papers, and now the house is
yours. Now imagine another way. You go in and say, 'Ah, I'm so
disappointed. I didn't want the house purple. I know I could sue them
but it would take a really long time. Where's the nearest paint store?'
" "How do you think you will get the color of the house changed
faster---if you accept that the house is purple, or if you throw a
tantrum?" Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when failure
to accept the facts of a problem interfered with solving the problem.

99

3.  Pain Cannot Be Avoided Pain cannot be avoided; it is nature's way of
    signaling that something is wrong. If we could avoid pain, we would
    do it. If we did avoid pain, however, we would be highly likely to
    die young, as we could easily inadvertently get ourselves in
    dangerous situations that could easily kill us (accidentally burn
    ourselves to death, go into freezing water that would put us in
    shock, etc.). Individuals who are born with no sense of pain have
    very difficult lives, as they must constantly be vigilant so as not
    to harm themselves inadvertently. 35 As discussed in the Emotion
    Regulation module, emotions, including those that are very painful,
    also have functions that are critical to human survival. Example:
    The pain of a hand on a hot stove causes a person to move the hand
    quickly. People without the sensation of pain are in deep trouble.
    Example: The pain of grief causes people to reach out to find loved
    ones who are lost. Without it, there would probably be no societies
    or cultures. No one would look after those who are sick, search for
    loved ones who are lost, or stay with people who are difficult at
    times. Example: Pain of experiencing fear makes people avoid what is
    dangerous. Discussion Point: What are the pros and cons of never
    having painful emotions? Would participants like people who never
    have painful emotions?

99

4.  Rejecting Reality Turns Pain into Suffering Suffering is pain plus
    nonacceptance of the pain. Pain can be difficult or almost
    impossible to bear, but suffering is even more difficult. Refusal to
    accept reality and the suffering that goes along with it can
    interfere with reducing pain. Suffering comes when:

460 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 11

People are unable to or refuse to accept pain.  People cling to getting
what they want, refusing to accept what they have.  People resist
reality as it is in the moment.

Radical acceptance transforms unbearable suffering into bearable pain.
In sum, pain is pain. Suffering and agony are pain plus nonacceptance.
If we take pain and add nonacceptance, we end up with suffering. 5.
Accepting Reality Can Bring Freedom Accepting reality can free us from
happiness, bitterness, anger, sadness, shame, and other painful
emotions. The drive to stop pain no matter the cost is the opposite of
freedom. Much of life involves managing painful situations that cannot
be solved immediately. Although it is easy to think that we can just get
rid of pain by positive thinking or by ignoring or suppressing pain, the
fact is that these strategies often do not work. Our use of these
strategies is usually based on the delusion that we cannot stand the
pain. We feel compelled to do something to stop the pain. We are slaves
to our incessant urges to escape from the present moment. Example: "You
may have experienced the death of someone important to you. Most people,
when someone dies, can't accept it at first. They keep thinking, 'That
can't have happened,' and they keep expecting the person to be there.
Then eventually they accept it and realize that that person really did
die. When you accept it, you're still in pain, but you can move ahead
with your life." Discussion Point: When acceptance is used as a
technique to create change---as a sort of "bargain with God" ("I'll
accept it, and in return you promise to make it better")---it is not
really acceptance, much less radical acceptance. Elicit examples of
bargaining from participants. Practice Exercise: Ask participants to
think of a time when they were very disappointed in something (e.g.,
they were not accepted somewhere; someone died; they lost something very
important; they didn't get something they wanted)---but they eventually
went on with their lives anyway. Ask them first to recall when they
first found out about the disappointment. How did it feel? What was
their reaction? Then ask them to remember what it felt like once they
finally did accept that the event had indeed happened. Discuss any
differences in the experience before and after accepting the facts.
Focus on whether participants felt better able to move on with their
lives after accepting.

99

6.  Acceptance May Lead to Sadness, but Deep Calm Usually Follows
    Acceptance often comes with a lot of sadness, but even with the
    sadness, it feels as if a burden has been lifted. Usually once
    radical acceptance (i.e., acceptance all the way) has taken place,
    people feel ready to move on with their lives. Fear of sadness is
    often at the core of difficulties with acceptance. There is no doubt
    that finally accepting the facts of a painful or traumatic past, or
    that one's present is excruciatingly painful and perhaps even not
    changeable, can indeed be extremely sad. For many, the fear of
    falling into the abyss of sadness is too overwhelming even to
    imagine. This may be why, when losses are severe and irreplaceable,
    complete acceptance usually unfolds over a very long period of time.
    Examples: Acceptance of losing a child can take years. Acceptance of
    not being accepted to college for the third year in a row can take a
    long time to be fully integrated. Realizing, finally, that one does
    not have a childhood home to go home to for holidays can also take a
    long time to come to terms with. When the past is tragic or the
    present is not what we would want, a sense of liberation and freedom
    followed by a sense of deep calmness often follows once we radically
    accept the facts of the situation---once we stop fighting it,
    suppressing it, and catastrophizing it.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 11 • 461

Discussion Point: Elicit from participants times when fear of sadness
has interfered with acceptance. Has sadness when accepting something
ever been followed by calmness or a sense of freedom? Discuss.

99

7.  The Path Out of Hell Is through Misery Say to participants: "The
    bottom line is that if you are in hell, the only way out is to go
    through a period of sustained misery. Misery is, of course, much
    better than hell, but it is painful nonetheless. By refusing to
    accept the misery that it takes to climb out of hell, you end up
    falling back into hell repeatedly, only to have to start over and
    over again." Examples: Exposure is a critical component of treatment
    for PTSD and other anxiety disorders, and it is undeniably painful.
    Behavioral activation and opposite action are necessary to overcome
    depression; each requires doing something that depressed people
    don't want to do at the time. It takes a lot of distress tolerance
    (i.e., misery tolerance) to stop self-­injury, using drugs and
    alcohol, and anger outbursts as ways to escape emotional pain.
    Research Point: PTSD is primarily a result of trying to avoid all
    contact with cues that cause discomfort. Pathological
    grieving---that is, grieving that never ends---is a result of the
    same avoidance. Avoiding all cues that are associated with pain
    ensures that the pain will continue. The more people attempt to
    avoid and shut emotional (as well as physical) pain off, the more it
    comes back to haunt them. Trying to suppress emotional pain or avoid
    contact with pain-­related cues leads to ruminating about the painful
    events; paradoxically, trying to get rid of painful thoughts creates
    painful thoughts. For example, mindfulness is a core part of
    mindfulness-based stress reduction, an effective program for helping
    people with chronic physical pain, described in the book Full
    Catastrophe Living by Jon Kabat-Zinn.36 (See also the section on
    exposure-based treatments in Chapter 11 of the main DBT text.)
    Experiencing, tolerating, and accepting emotional pain are the ways
    to reducing pain.

E. When to Use Reality Acceptance Skills Say to participants: "There are
three types of situations when reality acceptance skills are useful." 
"Life has dealt you major trauma, pain, or difficulty."

Examples: Many of us may have to accept not having had a loving family,
things we have done in the past that we regret, opportunities that we
have not had or that we passed up. Examples: Many people have to accept
that they have family members now who do not treat them well, or
physical disabilities that cannot be helped.  "You are in distress but
not in a crisis. The situation is painful and cannot be changed right

now. The absence of reality acceptance here can lead to irritation,
grumpiness, and sometimes even tantrums that ruin your whole day.
Acceptance soothes the pain." Examples: "Reality acceptance skills can
help if you are waiting in unmoving traffic and are about to be late for
an important appointment; if it is raining on a holiday when you had
outdoor plans; or if a person you are planning on going to a party with
gets sick and can't go with you."  "Problem solving isn't working. In
this case, you may need to evaluate whether you are actu-

ally accepting all the facts of reality. To solve problems, you need
reality acceptance skills to see and evaluate the situation clearly (or
you might solve the wrong problem), to dream up effective and practical
solutions, and to evaluate whether your solution is working." Example:
"You've been planning a vacation for going camping in the mountains for
a long time, and you catch the flu 2 days before. You go to the doctor
and dutifully follow the treatment, but your symptoms are not improving.
This might be a good time to accept the reality that you are sick and
should stay home in order to recover."

462 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 11

Example: "It's late at night. You're returning from work and are looking
for your keys to enter your apartment. You look in your bag and in all
your pockets, and you can't find the keys. You remember you had them
when you left work, because you locked the building door on your way
out. You look again in your bag and in all your pockets, and they're
still not there. You keep looking, hoping that the keys will show up,
although that's very improbable after the fourth thorough search. Not
accepting that the keys are not in your pockets and not in your bag
keeps you from walking the six blocks back to your car to see if you
dropped them somewhere in your car." Example: "You're in love with
someone who tells you that he or she is in love with someone else and
does not want to see you again. You believe in your heart that this is
the person for you, and so for months on end you continue to try getting
the person to come back to you. Failing at that, you sit in your room
each night, pray to God to bring the person back, cry, and write love
letters to the person (which you rip up). Not accepting that the person
is not coming back keeps you from moving on and finding someone else to
love and cherish you." Discussion Point: Elicit from participants facts
of their lives that they must accept. Discuss difficulties accepting
facts that are painful, unfair, or just not right.

99F. What Radical Acceptance Is Not 99 1. It Is Not Approval It is easy
to accept things we like and approve of. It is very hard to accept
things we don't like. This does not mean that we cannot accept things we
do not like or approve of. Example: "It is a lot easier to discover that
the person you married has many more wonderful qualities than you
thought than it is to discover the person has many more negative
qualities than you thought. However, both are equally important to
accept." Examples: "People in jail for crimes they did not commit must
accept that they are there, but they do not have to approve of the
unfairness of this reality. Accepting the fact that you have been
traumatized is critical to overcoming PTSD, but it does not mean that
you approve of being traumatized. Accepting that you indeed have high
blood pressure does not mean you approve of it." Discussion Point:
Elicit from participants things they have had to accept in their lives
that they do not approve of. Discuss.

99

2.  It Is Not Compassion or Love Accepting what people do or say does
    not mean that we have to love them or even have compassion for them.
    Compassion is easier when we accept, but it is not a necessary
    condition of acceptance. We do not have to have loving feelings for
    people, animals, or things we radically accept. Examples: "You can
    radically accept that there are rats in your attic, but you don't
    have to love them. You can radically accept that people abuse
    children, rape women and men, steal from the rich and poor, and
    start wars without liking or approving in any way. Compassion and
    love are easier if you radically accept the individuals and their
    behavior (without approving, of course), but acceptance does not
    require it."

99

3.  It Is Not Passivity, Giving Up, or Giving In Many people are afraid
    to accept things, because they fear that they will then not try to
    change things---that they will become passive and helpless. This
    will happen only if, at the same time, they fail to accept (1) their
    feelings of dislike or disapproval, (2) the possibility that they
    can make changes if they put in enough effort, and (3) the
    possibility that it is worth their time to try to change what they
    don't like.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handouts 11--11a • 463

Discussion Point: Fighting reality can interfere with problem-­solving
reality. Some people, however, are afraid that if they ever actually
accept their painful situation or emotions, they will become passive and
just give up (or give in). Elicit and discuss participants' fears that
this might happen. Explain: "Imagine that you have ordered a pair of
shoes online, and that when they come they are the wrong size. If you
refuse to accept that the shoes are the wrong size, you will never send
them back and get the size you want." Elicit examples of when accepting
things as they are has helped to reduce suffering and resulted in a
greater ability to reduce the source of pain. (This and the next point
have been discussed above under "Why Accept Reality?" and are taken up
again below in Section XIII.)

99

4.  It Is Not against Change Acceptance alone does not change a
    difficult situation, but it makes change possible or more likely. In
    fact, acceptance is essential to bringing about change. The notion
    of acceptance is central to every major religion, East and West.
    Elicit participants' reactions to this and any experiences they
    have. The idea is also similar to the Alcoholics Anonymous notion of
    surrendering to a higher power and accepting things one cannot
    change. (Remember, one can change the future. What one cannot change
    are the facts of the past and this exact---and fleeting---­present
    moment.)

G. Radical Acceptance: Factors That Interfere

99

Practice Exercise: Ask participants to read through the items on
Distress Tolerance Handout 11a, and to check those items on this
optional handout that interfere with their own ability to radically
accept really painful events and facts. (This exercise can be done at
the beginning or at the end of reviewing the handout.) Discuss.

1.  Lack of Skills for Acceptance Say to participants: "As with other
    skills, you may have no idea how to do radical acceptance at first.
    Many individuals try to accept, but simply have no idea of how to go
    about it. Also, because radical acceptance is a skill, you get
    better at it with practice."
2.  Beliefs That Accepting Reality Minimizes or Approves of It Continue:
    "People often confuse acceptance with being passive or doing nothing
    to change or prevent future painful events. The two, however, are
    not the same. In fact, as we've noted throughout this discussion,
    you can't change something you don't accept. If you don't face the
    reality as it is---if you deny it---how are you going to change it?
    If you think that there is no cause, that it just happened magically
    through fate or luck, then how are you going to change it?" "So if
    you want things to change, accept them, then change them. Because
    when we talk about accepting reality as it is, we're not saying,
    'Accept reality as it is and believe it can never change.' Reality
    is always changing. If you want to have an influence on how it
    changes, your interest is to accept how it is right now."
3.  Strong Emotions "Strong emotions may interfere with acceptance,
    because you may feel that accepting will lead to experiencing
    unbearable, overwhelming emotions---such as sadness, anger at the
    person or group that caused the painful event, rage at the injustice
    of the world, overwhelming shame about who you are, or guilt about
    your own behavior."

464 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 11b

H. Practicing Radical Acceptance, Step by Step Note to Leaders: Review
the ways to practice radical acceptance by going over the optional
Distress Tolerance Handout 11b or by reviewing Worksheet 9. If you are
short on time, assign reading this handout as homework. If you review
this handout, highlight the steps as checked below.

99

1.  Observe That You Are Questioning or Fighting Reality Tell
    participants: "Describe in detail what you need to accept, without
    exaggerating or minimizing. Describe factually and without judgment.
    (See Mindfulness Handout 4b: Suggestions for Practicing Describing.)
    It is all too easy to fight reality without even realizing you are
    doing it. This is especially true when you consistently avoid
    contact with what you have to accept. Acknowledging that you are not
    accepting, therefore, is the first essential step to acceptance."

99

2.  Remind Yourself That the Reality Is Just as It Is Say: "Often you
    can skip past nonacceptance by simply making an accepting statement
    to yourself. Useful statements might be 'Everything is as it should
    be,' 'The situation is,' 'Reality is,' or 'Every day is a good day.'
    This last one is a Zen saying meant to convey that everything simply
    is; it's neither good nor bad."

99

3.  Consider Causes of the Reality You Need to Accept Go on: "Acceptance
    is a lot easier once you understand the causes of the situation you
    are trying to accept. Sometimes you may need to go far into the past
    to grasp all of them, but this can be very helpful. People often shy
    away from analyzing causes, because they equate understanding causes
    with making excuses. Making excuses is then equated with 'letting a
    person off' without a consequence for the behavior. However, you can
    ensure consequences for behavior and still understand the causes. In
    fact, without understanding the causes, it will be almost impossible
    ever to change the behavior you do not like." Discussion Point:
    Elicit from participants times when people have refused to
    understand the causes of their behavior. Elicit when participants
    have found it difficult even to try understanding the causes of
    others' behavior. Ask participants whether they have seen
    understanding causes as making excuses.

99

4.  Practice Accepting with the Whole Self (Mind, Body, and Spirit)
    Continue: "The basic idea in radical acceptance is that you've got
    to accept all the way. To do this you need to practice 'letting go.'
    If you are not accepting, your body will tighten up and your muscles
    will tense. Letting go is letting go of the tension in your body."
    Add: "If your mind screams 'No! I don't want to!' and you tighten
    back up, don't worry. That happens. Start over. Just start relaxing
    again and keep letting go. Practice saying yes to the universe.
    Practice mindfulness as a way to practice acceptance of the present
    moment." Note to Leaders: Note that the process of "letting go with
    your body" goes through the same muscles as progressive relaxation.
    (See Distress Tolerance Handout 6b.) The only difference is that
    participants do not tense the muscles before letting go.

All major religions and spiritual disciplines have as an important part
of their contemplative and/or meditative practice a focus on breathing.
The focus is intended to help the individuals accept and tolerate
themselves, the world, and reality as it is. A focus on breathing is
also an important part of relaxation training and the treatment of panic
attacks.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 11b • 465

99

5.  Practice Opposite Action "Next, practice opposite action all the
    way, so that you can accept the present moment." (See Emotion
    Regulation Handout 10.)  "Act as if you have already radically
    accepted something, and you will find in time that you

have accepted it."  "Say out loud in a convincing voice tone that you
accept; say it over and over."  "Do a half-smile and hold your hands in
a willing-hands position to make acceptance

easier. Do this while thinking or talking about what you are accepting."
"Imagine yourself accepting."

99

6.  Cope Ahead "Cope ahead with events that seem unacceptable." (See
    Emotion Regulation Handout 19.) Often difficulties in accepting
    things are due to fears that the truth will be a catastrophe. In
    these situations, cope ahead replaces fear with a sense of mastery.
    Encourage participants:

99 99 99 99

 "Imagine what you would do if you actually did accept what seems
unacceptable."  "Rehearse what you would do if you accepted." 
"Imagine solving or escaping problems that arise."

7.  Attend to Body Sensations Say: "Attend to your body sensations while
    you are thinking of what you are trying to accept."  "Notice
    sensations in your chest, your stomach, your shoulders."  "Notice
    places in your body where you feel tight or tense."  "Scan your body
    very slowly. Adopt a curious mind as you think of what you are
    trying to

accept."  "Practice mindfulness of current emotions when difficult
emotions associated with accep-

tance arise---­sadness, anger, fear, or shame." (See Emotion Regulation
Handout 22.)

99

8.  Allow Disappointment, Sadness, or Grief to Arise within You
    Acknowledge: "At times, acceptance leads to almost unbearable
    disappointment, sadness, and grief. It is very important to
    recognize that although you indeed may feel acute disappointment,
    sadness, or grief, you can survive it, and acceptance leads to
    finding peace at the end of the process."

99

 "Notice sadness as it arises within you."  "Do your best not to
suppress it right away."  "If anger follows immediately, notice how
anger may be blocking or hiding sadness."  "Do your best to let anger go
and allow sadness to arise within you."

99 99

 "Breathe into the sadness, saying in your mind, 'Sadness is arising
within me.' "  "If it becomes unbearable or ineffective, use crisis
survival skills and be kind to yourself."  "Come back to sadness at a
later point while practicing acceptance."

99

9.  Acknowledge That Life Can Be Worth Living Even When There Is Pain 
    "Notice when you are refusing to accept painful events in your
    life."  "Remind yourself that even with painful events, life can be
    worth living."  "With compassion toward yourself, try to let go of
    resistance to accepting."  "Let go of catastrophizing. Say in your
    mind, 'I can stand this. I can handle this.' "  "Remind yourself
    that all lives have some margin of pain."

466 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 11b--12

99 10. Do Pros and Cons "Do pros and cons as a way to motivate yourself
for acceptance."  "Fill out one of the pros-and-cons worksheets for
accepting."  "Put this worksheet where you can read it when acceptance
is hard."  "Review your pros and cons when resistance to acceptance
arises within you."

XII. Turning the Mind (Distress Tolerance Handout 12) Main Point: In
     order to accept a reality that feels unacceptable, we usually have
     to make an effort more than once. We sometimes have to keep
     choosing to accept reality over and over and over for a very long
     time. Distress Tolerance Handout 12: Turning the Mind. A good way
     to teach this skill is first to discuss times when participants
     have tried to accept something, thought they did accept it, and
     then found later that they were not accepting it any more. This is
     a very simple handout and should not take more than a few minutes.
     Its goal is simply to make the main point described above. Distress
     Tolerance Worksheet 10: Turning the Mind, Willingness, Willfulness.
     Review this worksheet with participants. When you are using this
     worksheet with Handout 12, review only the first section on turning
     the mind. You might also want to work with participants during the
     session in developing their plans for catching themselves when they
     drift out of acceptance. If so, have them write these plans down on
     the worksheet during the session. Distress Tolerance Worksheets 8,
     8a, 8b: Reality Acceptance Skills (Optional). These worksheets
     cover all the reality acceptance skills. See the box at the start
     of Section X for instructions on use of these worksheets.

A. What Is Turning the Mind? Turning the mind is choosing to accept.
Acceptance seems to require some sort of choice. People have to turn
their minds in that direction, so to speak. Acceptance sometimes only
lasts a moment or two, so people have to keep turning the mind over and
over and over. The more painful the event, the longer it can take to
accept it fully. The choice has to be made every day---­sometimes many,
many times a day, or even multiple times in an hour or a minute.
Examples: "Accepting that no one wants to see the movie you want to see
may be accepted rapidly. Accepting that you did not get into the school
you wanted to attend, that you did not get the job offer you were hoping
for, that you are disabled after a car accident, or that your child has
died will each take progressively more effort and more times turning the
mind to acceptance." Turning the mind is sometimes like turning the
head; it requires just a few degrees of movement. Sometimes, though, it
is like turning the whole body; it requires a full turn back to the
path. Example: All of us ultimately have to accept that we are who we
are, with all of our imperfections. Not doing so causes no end of
suffering, grief, and sadness. For many, however, this takes repeated
practice, accepting over and over and over. Example: Often, especially
when we are depressed or overly anxious, we must accept that depressive
or anxiety-­provoking thoughts are going through our minds. We may need
to say, "A thought has arisen in my mind," and then refocus on another
topic. We may need to say this many, many times before it sinks in.
Discussion Point: Elicit reasons participants give themselves for not
turning the mind to acceptance of reality as it is. What makes it so
difficult to take that first step? Discuss.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 12 • 467

99B. Turning the Mind, Step by Step 1. Observe That You Are No Longer
Accepting Explain to participants: "The first step in turning the mind
is to notice that you're not accepting something. The tipoff is often
anger, bitterness, annoyance, or falling into the sea of 'Why me?' Or
you might find that you are always trying to escape reality; you're
trying to block things out all the time; you're hiding behind other
things. Or you're covering up how you're really feeling. You find
yourself saying all the time, 'Why? Why is this happening? Why is this
happening?' " 2. Make an Inner Commitment to Accept Reality As It Is
Continue: "The next step is to make an inner commitment to accept
reality as it is. In other words, go inside yourself and turn your mind
toward acceptance. The inner commitment isn't accepting. You don't have
to accept right away. You just have to make the commitment." 3. Do It
Again, Over and Over Say: "Sometimes you may have to go through the
first two steps again, over and over, many times in a minute. Sometimes
you have to do it many times in a day." Example: "A mundane but common
example is losing your keys. You look in your pocket, and they are not
there. You accept that and look elsewhere. But soon you lose your
acceptance and look in your pocket again. It is still not there, you
accept, and . . . you come back to the pocket again." Discussion Point:
Elicit times participants have had to turn the mind over and over again
to accept the facts of reality. Discuss.

4.  Develop a Plan for Catching Yourself When You Drift Out of
    Acceptance As in the skill of cope ahead (see Emotion Regulation
    Handout 19), planning for the future can be very helpful in behaving
    skillfully. Explain: "The idea here is to think through what you
    usually do when you are not accepting. What cues could you use to
    alert yourself that you are drifting away from acceptance? You might
    also decide to check in with yourself on some regular basis---for
    instance, every night before going to bed or each morning---to
    review whether you need to turn your mind to acceptance." Example:
    "You have a job in a large store, managing returns. Customers often
    wait in long lines, and by the time they get to you, they are
    frequently hostile and angry. They insist you take back returns even
    when they have no receipts and the items are clearly used. You find
    yourself getting very judgmental and irritable, and find it very
    hard to accept that customers are not always nice. 'It is what it
    is' does not come into your mind. Thinking the problem through, you
    realize that the first clues that you are not accepting reality are
    a rising sense of irritability, and tense shoulders followed by
    judgmental thoughts. You then consider how you can turn your mind to
    acceptance when these customers come to your station. You decide,
    first, to try and replace judgmental thoughts with nonjudgmental
    thoughts. 'How could you act this way?' can be replaced with 'It is
    what it is' and other similar internal thoughts. 'I can't stand
    this' could be replaced with 'All right, this is a pain. But it's
    not a catastrophe.' You could say, 'I don't like it. I'm frustrated.
    I can stand it.' You could say, 'Everything has a cause. There's a
    reason these customers act this way. Maybe there are problems in
    their lives. Maybe they were never taught to treat people
    differently.' You could turn your mind all the way by relaxing your
    shoulders at the same time. You might remind yourself that whenever
    you are annoyed, frustrated, or thinking things should not be the
    way they are, this is an opportunity for turning the mind. The key
    idea here is that if you're trying to get from nonacceptance to
    radical acceptance, you first have to turn the mind. This will be a
    lot easier if you know how to identify when you need to turn your
    mind."

468 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 12--13

Add: "Next, practice 'cope ahead' by imagining interactions with various
difficult customers. While imagining these scenes, notice your
judgmentalness, tense shoulders, and irritability, and practice turning
your mind by using some of the strategies you developed previously."

XIII. Willingness (Distress Tolerance Handout 13) Main Point:
      Willingness is the readiness to respond to life's situations
      wisely, as needed, voluntarily, and without grudge. Distress
      Tolerance Handout 13: Willingness. Review the handout with
      participants. Contrast willingness with willfulness. Most
      participants will know what willfulness is. Willingness is the
      complete opposite. Distress Tolerance Worksheet 10: Turning the
      Mind, Willingness, Willfulness. When you are using this worksheet
      with Handout 13, review the second section on willingness. You
      might also want to work with participants during the session to
      help them better understand willfulness by filling out the part of
      the worksheet for willing behaviors they could engage in and
      willful behaviors they have done in the past. If you do this, then
      give participants a second copy of the worksheet to use as
      homework.

Note to Leaders: A good way to introduce the skill of willingness is to
introduce willfulness first. You can do this by pantomiming a machine,
with arms out, frantically trying to control an object. Then say,
"Willfulness is also this," and sit on your hands. The point is that
willfulness is trying to control the universe, as well as sitting on
one's hands when something is needed. Explain that passivity is
willfulness, not willingness. Willingness is complete openness to the
moment and doing what is needed. Demonstrate this by standing with
"willing hands," palms out. As noted in the introduction to this
chapter, the notion of willingness versus willfulness is taken from
Gerald May's book1 on the topic. If participants seem to grasp the
concepts as defined below and want to hear more, you can use the two
quotations from May's book in the introduction.

A. What Is Willfulness? Define "willfulness" for participants as
follows:

99 99 99

 "Throwing yourself into trying to control events, those around you,
and so on."  "Trying to control experience, avoid it or escape from it,
and so on."  "Denying life or refusing to be a part of it. Giving up
and sitting on your hands instead of

doing what is needed in the moment."  "Holding back, saying no, or more
commonly saying, 'Yes, but . . . ' "1  "Imposing your will on
reality---trying to fix everything, or refusing to do what is needed. It

is the opposite of doing what works."  "Focusing on ego, on
self-­centered wants, on 'me, me, me.' "  "Holding a grudge or
bitterness." Note to Leaders: Your best teaching examples here will be
times when you yourself have been outrageously willful.

B. What Is Willingness? Define "willingness" for participants as
follows:

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 13 • 469 
"Willingness is accepting what is and responding to what is in an
effective or appropriate way.

It is doing what works. It is doing just what is needed in the current
situation or moment."  "Willingness is focusing on both individual and
common needs."  "It is throwing yourself into life without reservation,
wholeheartedly."  "It is saying yes to the mystery of being alive in
each moment."  "It is responding from wise mind."  "It is committing
yourself to participation in the cosmic process of the universe."

Analogy/example: Life is like hitting baseballs from a pitching machine.
A person's job is just to do his or her best to hit each ball as it
comes. Refusing to accept that a ball is coming does not make it stop
coming. Willpower, defiance, crying, or whimpering does not make the
machine stop pitching the balls; they keep coming, over and over and
over. A person can stand in the way of a ball and get hit, stand there
doing nothing and let the ball go by as a strike, or swing at the ball.
Life is like that. People can get as upset as they want about life, but
actually life just keeps coming---one moment right after the next.
Analogy/example: Life is like a game of cards. It makes no difference to
a good card player what cards are dealt. The object is to play whatever
hand one gets as well as possible. As soon as one hand is played,
another hand is dealt. The last game is over, and the current game is
on. The idea is to be mindful of the current hand, play it as skillfully
as possible, and then let go and focus on the next hand of cards.
Throwing a tantrum about losing the last game will interfere with
winning the current game. Discussion Point: Elicit examples of
willingness and willfulness. If you can point to recent examples of your
and/or your participants' being willful or willing, so much the better.
A light touch is needed. Again, if participants seem ready for a more
sophisticated discussion, give May's definitions in full (see the
introduction to this chapter); elicit agreements and disagreements.
Practice Exercise: The best way to get the ideas of willingness and
willfulness into active use is to start highlighting them during skills
training sessions when you and/or the clients are behaving willfully and
when willingly. Phrase it as a question: "Do you all think I am being
willful here? Hmmm, let's examine this," or "You're not by chance being
willful about this, are you?" (Clients will usually enjoy catching you
in willfulness.) Or when a difficult situation or conflict emerges in a
session, you can say, "OK. Let's all try to be completely willing for
the next 5 minutes."

99C. How to Go from Willful to Willing 1. Observe the Willfulness
Explain to participants: "The first thing you want to do when
willfulness shows up is to just notice it. You observe it. You identify
it. You label it. You describe it. You experience it. You say,
'Willfulness has shown up.' " Discussion Point: Elicit examples of when
it has been hard to notice willfulness. Discuss what gets in the way of
observing it.

2.  Radically Accept the Willfulness Say: "The second step is to
    radically accept that at this moment you feel (and may be acting)
    willful. Denying willfulness is not helpful, and you cannot fight
    willfulness with willfulness. In essence, you have to love the
    willfulness." Discussion Point: Elicit examples of being judgmental
    of willfulness, either in oneself or in others. Discuss what happens
    when one is judgmental of willfulness. Does it reduce it or increase
    it?

470 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 13

3.  Turn the Mind Continue: "Next, turn your mind toward acceptance and
    willingness. Turn your mind toward participating in reality just as
    it is."

4.  Try Half-­Smiling and a Willing Posture Go on: "If you're having
    trouble getting yourself to turn your mind---that is, you want to do
    it, but your mind isn't turning---try half-­smiling and a willing
    posture. Relax your face, let your lips go up just slightly at the
    corners, and open your hands. It is hard to be willing with clenched
    fists. It is hard to be willing when you are grimacing and pursing
    your lips tightly. Half-­smiling and a willing posture are opposite
    actions for willfulness if you have a willful facial expression (a
    grim tight mouth) and a willful posture. Your mind's going one way,
    and your body is going another." Note to Leaders: You will be
    teaching half-­smiling and willing hands next. You can quickly teach
    these skills here, or just tell participants that you will be
    teaching these next.

5.  Ask, "What's the Threat?" Say: "When willfulness is intransigent,
    ask yourself, 'What's the threat?' Usually, immovable willfulness
    has to do with some sort of threat. We think that if we're willing,
    we will lose something big, or something terrible is going to happen
    to us. There's something dangerous out there. That may be true
    also." Example: "You and several friends are asked to go to the back
    of the line while trying to get into a concert. You get angry,
    because you know someone closer to the entrance and think you should
    be able to stand in line with them. You refuse to move, and now the
    people behind you are also angry. You try to let go of willfulness,
    but are just furious thinking that you 'should' be able to join your
    friends at the front of the line. Then the people nearby get angry
    at you, so you realize you need to calm down. You ask yourself,
    'What's the threat?' and realize your fear is that if you have to go
    to the back of the line, you won't get good seats. But then you
    realize that it's not true; your friends will save you seats.
    Immediately your willfulness goes down, and you and your friends
    walk to the back of the line." Example: "You are part of a team at
    work, and a team member is asking you at the last minute to help out
    on a really important task that he or she fell behind on but that is
    due tomorrow. You notice willfulness coming up: 'Why me? I shouldn't
    have to do extra work!' You are about to say no, but you decide to
    ask yourself, 'What's the threat?' You realize you are willful
    because you want to get home and cook a special dinner you were
    planning for your family, and staying an hour late threatens that.
    When you notice this, you realize that you can call home and
    rearrange the special dinner for an hour later or even for tomorrow
    night, and no one will really mind. You can help your teammate and
    still have a special dinner. You decide to help out your team and be
    willing to do the extra task." Really immovable willfulness usually
    also involves some sort of expected catastrophe. We start saying,
    'Not only is there a threat, not only is it dangerous, but I won't
    be able to deal with it.' So we deny it. We push it away. We ignore
    it. Willfulness allows us to do that. Example: Mary hates her job,
    but is afraid to apply for a different job. She complains about it
    constantly at home, and her family is adamant that she should stop
    complaining or look for a new job. Mary is just furious at her
    family for putting pressure on her to do a job search. Finally she
    asks herself, "What's the threat?" and realizes her fear is that she
    will not be able to tolerate job rejections. Her family points out
    that her misery now is worse than any misery she will have looking
    for a job. She agrees, and begins looking for a new job. Conclude:
    "Willingness is active participation in reality. Willingness is what
    you need to overcome a threat. Willingness isn't approval. And it's
    definitely not lying down and letting yourself

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handouts 13--14a • 471

get rolled over. Usually you will find that even if there is a realistic
threat, it will not be a catastrophe. You will be able to use many other
skills---­check the facts, problem solve, cope ahead, build mastery, and
so on---to avert a catastrophe." Discussion Point: Elicit examples of
times when participants have found it really hard to let go of
willfulness, due to fear of some threat. Discuss how hard it can be
sometimes to actually figure out what the threat is.

XIV. Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands (Distress Tolerance Handouts
     14--14a) Main Point: Half-­smiling and willing hands are ways of
     accepting reality with the body. Distress Tolerance Handout 14:
     Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands. Demonstrate how to do half-­ smiling
     and willing hands before reviewing the handout. It is essential to
     practice both of them when you teach. The key to each is to relax
     the muscles of your face (in half-­smiling) and of your shoulders,
     arms, and hands (in willing hands). Distress Tolerance Handout 14a:
     Practicing Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands. Review one or more of
     the exercises on this handout in the session. Distress Tolerance
     Worksheet 11: Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands. Review the worksheet
     with participants. Remind participants that when they practice
     these skills "while contemplating a source of anger," it is
     important that the anger not be overwhelming. See also the Note to
     Leaders at the end of this section. Distress Tolerance Worksheet
     11a: Practicing Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands. This is an
     alternative worksheet to Worksheet 11. It is somewhat simpler
     conceptually than Worksheet 11, but also requires more writing.

99A. Why Half-Smile? Tell participants: "Half-­smiling is a way of
accepting reality with your body." Explain that emotions are partially
controlled by facial expressions. 2, 3 By adopting a half-smile--- a
serene, accepting face---people can control their emotions somewhat. For
example, they can feel more accepting if their faces express acceptance.
(See Chapter 9 of this manual and Chapter 11 of the main DBT text for
further discussion.) Example: "Half-­smiling when thinking about someone
you dislike helps you feel more accepting of them, more understanding."

99B. How to Practice Half-­Smiling Instruct participants: "To half-smile,
relax your face, neck, and shoulder muscles, and then halfsmile with
your lips. Try to adopt a serene facial expression. Remember to relax
the facial muscles." Add: "It is not necessary that anyone else see the
half-smile, but it is essential that you feel it. The half-smile is
mainly a communication to yourself---that is, to your brain---and not to
other people."

99

Practice Exercise: Ask participants to imagine that they are at a party
where they do not want to be. Ask them to put on a phony grin, as if
they are trying to make everyone think they are enjoying themselves. Ask
them to notice how their faces feel. Then stop and instruct them to
relax their faces, starting with their foreheads and going down their
faces to the lower jaw. Then, with relaxed faces, they should turn their
lips just slightly up at the corners---just until they feel it. Discuss
the differences in the two smiles.

472 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 14--14a

Note to Leaders: It is important that you do the exercise above with
participants, as they may be too shy to do it. If necessary, tell
participants they can face the wall when they first try half-­smiling.
The key to teaching this is to be sure they see that the "grinning" is
phony smiling, but half-­smiling is not. It can take some individuals
several practices of this skill before they experience the effect. It
can be helpful for such individuals to hear feedback from others who
have the experience of acceptance and lightness as they practice this.
Then encourage them to continue practicing the skill with an open mind.

Practice Exercise: Have participants sit very still and try to make a
very impassive face---one with no expression. Ask them to experience how
that feels. Then have them relax the muscles of the face---from the
forehead, to the eyes, to the cheeks, to the mouth and jaw---and
experience how that feels. Finally, have them half-smile and experience
how that feels. Discuss the differences.

In discussing both the "grinning" and "impassive" exercises, you can say
to participants: "When your face is tense and you are grinning, you are
sending your brain two conflicting messages: 'This is awful' and 'This
is nice.' Another instance of sending conflicting messages is when you
try to make your face into an impassive mask so that your actual
emotions are not expressed. Masking, however, can have a boomerang
effect. It leads to increased distress."37, 38

99C. Why Willing Hands? Explain willing hands to participants as
follows:  "Willing hands is another way of accepting reality with your
body."  "The essence of willing hands is this physical position: hands
unclenched, palms up, fingers

relaxed."  "Willing hands is part of opposite action all the way for
anger. Clenched hands are indicative

of anger. Anger is often the opposite of accepting reality. Anger says,
'What is should not be.' Anger is an emotion that motivates you to
change reality, to fight it, to overcome it. Anger has its place. But
here we are practicing reality acceptance." Practice Exercise: Have
participants sit very still with their eyes closed. First, have them
imagine a conflict with someone that happened as recently as
possible---one where they got really angry at the other person. Let them
do this for a few moments. Then instruct them to put their hands on
their thighs in a willing-hands position as they continue to imagine the
conflict situation. Ask them to open their eyes and discuss the
exercise. Anger is almost always a reflection of a belief or assumption
that some current reality "should" be different than it is. As
acceptance goes up, anger will go down, and a sense of understanding and
sometimes peace will increase. Note to Leaders: Almost always, it is
difficult for people to stay as angry and nonaccepting as they were,
once they move their hands to a willing-hands position. It is very
helpful if you try this yourself before teaching it and then discuss how
it went for you (assuming that it was helpful in reducing anger). See
Emotion Regulation Handout 11: Figuring Out Opposite Actions.

D. Ways to Practice Half-­Smiling and Willing Hands: Exercises Suggest to
participants these ways of practicing half-­smiling or willing hands: 
"When you first awake in the morning."  "During your free moments." 
"While you are listening to music."  "When you are irritated."  "In a
lying-down position."  "In a sitting position."  "While you are
contemplating a person you hate or despise."

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handouts 14a, 15--15a
• 473 Note to Leaders: Before participants practice the final exercise
listed above, it is essential that you discuss with each of them which
hated or despised person they are planning to think about. Unfailingly,
participants with severe problems will select the person they have had
the most extreme experiences with, such as a person who has raped or
abused them. They then frequently become overwhelmed while doing the
exercise, and their ability to accept and tolerate goes down instead of
up. Caution participants to start with "easy" people, and to move to
more "extreme" people only as their skill develops. This should be
presented as a shaping exercise. Compare using this skill with learning
to drive a car: "You don't start learning to drive on the expressway."

XV. Allowing the Mind: Mindfulness of Current Thoughts (Distress
    Tolerance Handout 15--15a) Main Point: When we "allow the mind," we
    simply let thoughts come and go---­noticing them as they come and go,
    but not trying to control or change them. Mindfulness of current
    thoughts is observing thoughts as thoughts (i.e., as neural firing
    of the brain or sensations of the brain) rather than as facts about
    the world, so that observing thoughts becomes similar to observing
    any other behavior. Distress Tolerance Handout 15: Mindfulness of
    Current Thoughts. The key skill to teach here is the skill of
    differentiating thoughts about oneself and the world from facts
    about oneself and the world. You may need to do repeated exercises
    until participants can reliably notice or observe thoughts as they
    go through their minds. It is essential that you differentiate this
    skill from the emotion regulation skill of checking the facts, as
    well as from efforts at cognitive modification. When observing
    thoughts, one is in essence allowing the mind to be itself, a
    thought-­generating, pattern-­making machine as Pat Hawk, my Zen and
    contemplative prayer teacher used to say. Distress Tolerance Handout
    15a: Practicing Mindfulness of Thoughts (Optional). This is a list
    of examples of how one can practice mindfulness of current thoughts.
    This can be skipped or reviewed very briefly and then given out to
    read between sessions. Distress Tolerance Worksheet 12: Mindfulness
    of Current Thoughts. Review this worksheet with participants. If
    necessary, work with participants in identifying distressing
    thoughts. The thoughts identified can be accurate or inaccurate. Be
    sure participants see that the point of the worksheet is to describe
    thoughts running through their minds, rather than describing the
    events that set off the thoughts. Regardless of whether the thoughts
    fit the facts or not, the idea is to be more mindful of and less
    reactive to thoughts. Distress Tolerance Worksheet 12a: Practicing
    Mindfulness of Thoughts. This is an alternative worksheet to
    Worksheet 12. It is somewhat simpler conceptually than Worksheet 12,
    but also requires more writing. Note to Leaders: It can be helpful
    as you start this skill to relate mindfulness of current thoughts to
    Emotion Regulation Handout 22: Mindfulness of Current Emotions:
    Letting Go of Emotional Suffering, as well as Interpersonal
    Effectiveness Skills Handout 12: Mindfulness of Others.

99A. What Is Mindfulness of Current Thoughts? 1. It Is Noticing and
Radically Accepting Thoughts Explain to participants that mindfulness of
current thoughts is noticing our thoughts and radically accepting them
for what they are---­sensations of the brain that come and go. The focus
here is on thoughts that simply come into our minds. When these thoughts
are negative or worry thoughts, we often either react to them
immediately or grab hold of them and can't let go.

474 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 15

99

Practice Exercise: Because some individuals may not know how to observe
their thoughts, this is a good first exercise to be sure all can do it.
Instruct participants to close their eyes and then notice thoughts that
come into their minds immediately after you say a word out loud. Then,
pausing between words, say five or six words (e.g., "salt," "high,"
"red," "circle," "up," "good"). Select some words that are likely to
elicit a thought quickly (e.g., "salt" to elicit "pepper"). Ask
participants what words came into their minds. Practice Exercise: We can
differentiate thoughts that come into our minds from those that we
choose when we decide to think about something. Instruct participants to
close their eyes and then review in their minds what they have done
today. Give them a minute or so. Discuss what they thought about and how
thinking about something on purpose is different from observing thoughts
that come to mind.

2.  It Is Changing Our Relationship to Thoughts Observing thoughts is
    about changing our relationship to our own thoughts, rather than on
    changing the thoughts themselves. Painful and distressing thoughts,
    both accurate and inaccurate, go through everyone's mind at some
    point. The task is to find a new way of relating to negative or
    painful thoughts so that they do not induce so much suffering. Note
    to Leaders: Observing thoughts means observing not only thoughts,
    but also beliefs, assumptions, interpretations, internal
    descriptions/labels, and any other cognitive concepts. If you also
    have participants who are hearing voices, the same strategies can be
    used to be mindful of current voices: Participants can learn to
    react to them as simple firings of the brain, not beacons of truth.

3.  The Goal Is Not a Mind Empty of Thoughts Both secular and spiritual
    mindfulness practices have as an important part of their
    instructions simply noticing thoughts as they come and go while
    practicing mindfulness. Everyone, when learning to meditate or be
    mindful to the present moment, becomes distracted by thoughts at
    times. Many people erroneously believe that when practicing
    mindfulness they should suppress thoughts. They believe that the
    goal of mindfulness practice is to have an empty mind (i.e., a mind
    with no thoughts). Nothing could be further from the truth. Human
    brains generate thoughts, beliefs, assumptions, and concepts of all
    sorts. The idea in mindfulness is to notice thoughts---while neither
    becoming attached to them nor pushing them away. Discussion Point:
    Learning to let go of thoughts is extremely difficult. It takes a
    lot of practice. Letting go of thoughts is not the same as pushing
    them away. Trying to suppress painful thoughts usually makes them
    worse. Instead, it is allowing them to be as they are, coming and
    going. Discuss difficulties in letting go of thoughts.

B. Why Observe Thoughts? Point: More and more research is showing that
trying to block or suppress thoughts actually 99 Research makes them
worse.39--41 One of the effective treatments for excessive worries and
ruminations has individuals set aside a specific period each day to take
time out and focus completely on worry thoughts.42, 43 The treatment for
obsessional thoughts involves consciously focusing on the obsessional
thoughts, over and over and over.

1.  Unnecessary Suffering and Reactive Problem Behaviors Are Often
    Caused by Thoughts We react to thoughts instead of to the facts they
    are meant to represent.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 15 • 475 Note
to Leaders: Relate this to the same point made in Emotion Regulation
Handout 8: Checking the Facts. This idea is also the central idea
underlying cognitive therapy, which focuses on the role of thoughts in
eliciting negative emotions. The difference between cognitive therapy
and mindfulness of current thoughts is that cognitive therapy emphasizes
analyzing thoughts and, when they are irrational or inaccurate, changing
the thoughts. Mindfulness of current thoughts observes but does not
change thoughts.

2.  Observing Thoughts Provides Distance from Them Tell participants:
    "Observing your thoughts helps you separate yourself from your
    thoughts. It makes it easier for you to figure out what is a
    thought, what is a fact, and what is your emotional reaction to the
    thought." Go on: "Distance also allows you to discover that you are
    not your thoughts. You are not defined by your thoughts (or by
    others' thoughts about you). Many people cannot separate themselves
    from their thoughts; they become their thoughts. Thoughts often
    masquerade as facts. We respond to our thoughts as if they are facts
    about ourselves, others, or the world. The problem here, inevitably,
    is that people have great difficulty accepting that a thought is
    just that, a thought. Most of us are attached to the belief that our
    thoughts represent facts about reality. Or we are attached to the
    idea that meaning and concepts are important---more important than
    the facts of 'what is.' "

99

3.  Observing Thoughts Reveals Them for What They Are Say: "Observing
    thoughts helps you see that thoughts are just thoughts. That is,
    they are sensations of the mind, coming and going. All thoughts are
    temporary, just as all sensations are temporary. A thought might
    come back to mind often, but it is still temporary; it comes and
    goes away."

99 99

4.  Reacting to a Thought As If It Is a Fact Obscures Seeing "What Is"
    Analogy/example: "Asking why (an intellectual question) is usually
    not helpful. Life is often like mountain climbing. If you are
    climbing high on a mountain and you come across a crevasse, you need
    to know how to get across it, not why the crevasse is there." Note
    to Leaders: If you are including a spiritual perspective in your
    teaching, consider the following point that supports this rationale
    for mindfulness of thoughts: Experiencing reality ("what is")
    directly, without attending to thoughts or concepts, is the
    essential mystical experience. Indeed, it is the core spiritual
    experience across religions and spiritual traditions. If you want to
    expand this topic, put "mystical experience" into your search
    engine, and review the many sites that discuss mystical experiences.

99

5.  Observing Thoughts Shows That They Are Not So Catastrophic Continue:
    "Observing thoughts and maintaining your attention on them, instead
    of avoiding them or trying to get rid of them, can help you become
    less reactive to thoughts. Although events in life can be
    catastrophic, thoughts about these events are not themselves
    catastrophic."
6.  Observing Thoughts Is the Path to Freedom Reassure participants:
    "Over time and with practice, you will gradually feel more and more
    free, less controlled by your thoughts about the world. Letting go
    of trying to control thoughts or trying to get rid of them is a path
    to freedom. Many people believe that they should have control over
    their thoughts at all times. When you believe this, it is easy to
    become controlled by your thoughts. You lose your freedom to think
    as you do. Other people believe that they simply cannot bear painful
    thoughts; they think that they will fall into the abyss or they will
    die if they do not control their thoughts and what they believe.
    This is the road to losing freedom. Wisdom and freedom require the
    ability to allow the natural flow of thoughts, beliefs, and
    assumptions

476 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 15--15a

to come and go. They require experiencing thoughts but not being
controlled by them. Always having to prevent or suppress thoughts is a
form of being controlled by thoughts."

99C. How to Be Mindful of Current Thoughts 1. Observe Your Thoughts Tell
participants: "The first step is to observe your thoughts (beliefs,
assumptions, interpretations, and internal descriptions or labels).
Acknowledge their presence. Step back. Imagine you are on top of a
mountain looking down on your thoughts below." 2. Adopt a Curious Mind
about Your Thoughts Say: "Next, try to observe your thoughts coming and
going. Watch in your mind and ask: Where do the thoughts come from?
Where do they go? Notice that every thought you have ever had has both
come into your mind and also left your mind. Notice your thoughts, but
do not evaluate your thoughts. Let go of judgments." 3. Remember That
You Are Not Your Thoughts Go on: "Do not necessarily act on a thought.
Remind yourself that you have had thousands and thousands of thoughts in
your life. All are gone. You are not gone. You are not your thoughts."
4. Try Not to Block or Suppress Thoughts "Open yourself to the flow of
the thoughts. Do not try to get rid of the emotions that go along with
the thoughts. Don't push them away. Don't judge or reject them. Be
willing to have your thoughts. Trying to build a wall to keep thoughts,
particularly worry or other disturbing thoughts, out of your mind always
has the effect of keeping thoughts coming back." Note to Leaders: These
general instructions for mindfulness of current thoughts are often not
useful at first. Remind participants that the point of mindfulness is to
become free, so that even very distressing thoughts are not so
disturbing. This takes a lot of practice. It is important to practice
this skill with participants. Throughout skills training in this and
other modules, often refer back to mindfulness of current thoughts,
mindfulness of current emotions, mindfulness of others, and mindfulness
of this one moment.

D. Practicing Mindfulness of Current Thoughts Note to Leaders: For each
of the mindfulness exercises on Distress Tolerance Handout 15a, you can
substitute other words for "thoughts" ("emotions," "sensations,"
"urges," etc.).

Practice Exercise: Select one or two of the practice ideas for allowing
thoughts "by observing them" from the optional Distress Tolerance
Handout 15a. Instruct participants in how to do the exercise, using the
instructions on the handout. Allow several minutes for each exercise.
Discuss experiences. Practice Exercise: Go over one or several of the
methods for practicing "by using words and voice tone." Practice as a
group and then discuss experiences. Practice Exercise: Practice one or
more of the methods for practicing "with opposite action." Discuss
experiences.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handouts 16--16a • 477

XVI. Overview: When the Crisis Is Addiction (Distress Tolerance Handouts
     16--16a) Main Point: The skills in this portion of the module are
     specifically designed for dealing with various addictions. The
     skills can be taught to individual clients or added to a DBT skills
     program when the majority of participants in a group have serious
     addictions or repetitive dysfunctional behaviors they cannot stop.
     Distress Tolerance Handout 16: Overview: When the Crisis Is
     Addiction. This handout can be reviewed very quickly, or skipped
     and the information written on the board. Orient participants to
     what is coming next. Do not use this handout to teach the skills.
     Distress Tolerance Handout 16a: Common Addictions (Optional). This
     handout can be used to help participants identify whether they have
     an addiction that might not be obvious (different from substance
     use disorders, etc.) and that they would like to work on. Distress
     Tolerance Worksheet 13: Skills When the Crisis Is Addiction. Review
     this worksheet with participants. This worksheet covers all of the
     skills for dealing with addictive behaviors. Use it for
     participants who are likely not to do a lot of homework. Bring
     extra copies when you teach new skills from the list.

99A. Seven Basic Skills for Addiction-­Related Behaviors List the seven
basic skills for use when the crisis is addiction:  Dialectical
abstinence  Clear mind  Community reinforcement  Burning bridges 
Building new ones  Alternate rebellion  Adaptive denial

99B. Backing Down from Addiction Emphasize that these skills focus on
"backing down from addiction." They can be remembered by starting at D
and reciting the alphabet backward: D, C, B, A.

99C. Common Addictions The definition of "addiction" is very broad and
includes any repetitive behavior that an individual is unable to stop,
despite the negative consequences of the behavior and the person's best
efforts to stop. Individuals may have more than one addiction, but it is
usually most helpful to focus on one addiction at a time. Research
Point: Scientists have traditionally confined their use of the term
"addiction" to substances that clearly foster physical dependence.
That's changing, however. New knowledge suggests that as far as the
brain is concerned, a reward is a reward, regardless of whether it comes
from a chemical or an experience. And where there's a reward (as in
gambling, eating, sex, or shopping, among others), there's the risk of
getting trapped in a compulsion.44 Once people get addicted, however,
the pleasure of the addictive behavior may go down---but the urge to
engage in the addictive behavior will not only increase, but will
intensify. At that point, the addictive behavior may become reinforced
not by pleasure, but by relief from the intense and unpleasant urges.
Some people say that when they engage in addictive behaviors, they feel
"normal" again. In these cases, a behavior that may have started with
positive reinforcement (i.e., it gives pleasure) comes to be maintained
by negative reinforcement (i.e., it stops unbearable distress).

478 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 16a, 17--17a

Practice Exercise: Ask participants to read over the list of addictions
on Handout 16a and check those that apply to them. Elicit from
participants the number of addictions they checked. Asking participants
to share what their addictions are can be risky, since several of the
addictions may be very difficult to share publicly, and this can lead to
shame, lying, or not participating. If all members of a group share the
same addiction (e.g., drugs or gambling), you may want to skip this
exercise until later in therapy. Note to Leaders: It is tempting to
start teaching the skills from Handout 16 or 16a, but don't do it unless
you are not planning on using the individual handouts for each skill.

XVII. Dialectical Abstinence (Distress Tolerance Handouts 17--17a) Main
      Point: Dialectical abstinence is a skill that synthesizes two
      approaches for dealing with addictive behaviors: abstinence
      (swearing off addictive behavior completely) and harm reduction
      (acknowledging that there will be slips and minimizing the
      damage). You and each client shift strategies between 100%
      absolute abstinence as long as the client stays off the addictive
      behavior, and relapse management should the client lapse. Distress
      Tolerance Handout 17: Dialectical Abstinence. The key idea here is
      that participants do not have to choose between abstinence and
      relapse prevention; a dialectical perspective suggests a synthesis
      of both. This synthesis can be difficult for some clients to
      accept, particularly those who are very active in Alcoholics
      Anonymous and other similar associations. Thus, it is important to
      teach the concepts clearly. Distress Tolerance Handout 17a:
      Planning for Dialectical Abstinence. The skills listed in the box
      "Plan for Abstinence" correspond to the skills covered in Handouts
      18--21. If you do not have time to review each of these handouts
      in detail, you can teach the major content from this handout. A
      number of suggestions and DBT skills that might be helpful in
      putting together a harm reduction plan are also listed on this
      handout. Distress Tolerance Worksheet 14: Planning for Dialectical
      Abstinence. Review this worksheet with participants. Depending on
      how much time you have, instruct participants during the session
      to fill the worksheet with at least one entry for a number of the
      items. In session, discuss responses to the items so far. Assign
      worksheet as homework to be done more completely.

Note to Leaders: Start by discussing the dilemma posed by alternating a
commitment to abstinence with occasional or even frequent lapses.

The focus in treating addictions here follows a relapse prevention
model: The intent is to foster abstinence from addictive behaviors,
prevent relapse, and maximize harm reduction if there is a relapse.
Relapse prevention45--47 identifies high-risk situations and uses
problem-­solving skills to develop ways to both avoid and to cope
skillfully with such situations and focuses on eliminating myths
regarding the effects of addiction behaviors. Similar to building a life
worth living as described in the Emotion Regulation module, relapse
prevention focuses on building a life worth living without addictions.

99A. What Is Dialectical Abstinence? Dialectical abstinence is a relapse
prevention approach that incorporates a synthesis of focusing on
absolute abstinence whenever one is abstinent even for a moment, and
harm reduction following every slip even when it is very small.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 17 • 479

1.  Abstinence Abstinence here means complete abstinence, which is never
    again engaging in the addictive behavior at any time for any reason.
2.  Harm Reduction Harm reduction, as the term is used here, has as its
    goal minimizing the harm done by a slip into the addictive behavior.
    It acknowledges that there may be slips, tries to minimize the
    damage, and is sympathetic to failures of complete abstinence. The
    basic goal is to manage lapses such that a lapse does not turn into
    a relapse.
3.  The Dialectical Tension Explain to participants: "The dialectical
    tension here is that on the one hand, you have agreed that you value
    living up to your potential and building a life worth living, and
    that your addictive behavior is incompatible with this goal. On the
    other hand, even with this commitment, you accept that you might
    have a lapse and once again engage in the addictive behavior. Thus
    you need a harm reduction plan."
4.  Dialectical Abstinence as a Synthesis In dialectical abstinence, the
    search is for a synthesis between abstinence and harm reduction that
    is more than the sum of the parts. The dialectical approach
    recognizes that both sides exist, and accepts both. It replaces the
    "either--or" relationship between abstinence and harm reduction with
    a "both--and" stance. Example: Positive and negative poles on a
    battery are opposites, yet exist side by side. Example: The yin and
    yang symbol is black and white, yet the synthesis of these is not
    the color gray. The synthesis transcends both.
5.  Pros and Cons The pro of abstinence is that people who commit to
    abstinence stay abstinent from their addictive behavior longer. The
    con of abstinence is that it usually takes people longer to recommit
    to abstinence once they've slipped. People who commit to harm
    reduction usually get back "on the wagon" faster after a slip, but
    also relapse quicker.

99

Discussion Point: When it comes to addiction, people want to stop their
addictive behaviors on the one hand, and on the other hand they very
much want to engage in the addictive behaviors. When people are making a
commitment to abstinence, there is usually a very intense desire to stay
abstinent. After a lapse back to the addictive behavior, there is often
an equally intense desire to continue with the addictive behavior.
Discuss. Discussion Point: Ask participants whether they've tried either
complete abstinence or harm reduction techniques in the past. Discuss
the pros and cons of dialectical abstinence.

B. How to Do Dialectical Abstinence Dialectical abstinence is a
three-step process. First, participants must find a way to make a strong
commitment to abstinence. Second, they need to plan for how to stay
abstinent. And, third, they must plan for harm reduction if a lapse
occurs. A shorthand version of how to do both abstinence and harm
reduction is outlined on the optional Distress Tolerance Handout 17a. If
you use this handout, ask participants to read through all the items and
check those they think might work for them, both for staying abstinent
and for harm reduction if there is a lapse. Ask people what they
checked. (This exercise can be done at the beginning or at the end of
reviewing the handout.)

480 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 17--17a

99

99

1.  Make a Strong Verbal Commitment to Abstinence in Wise Mind Tell
    participants: "Set a goal for yourself to stop your addictive
    behavior. Set a specific date to stop cold turkey. Make a verbal
    commitment to yourself, and share it publicly with other people.
    Because the urge to engage in addictive behavior is so strong, your
    commitment must be 100%. Anything short of that would set you up for
    failure. When faced with the urge to engage in your addictive
    behavior, you cannot have the idea that it is OK to give in for the
    moment, lapse just a little (for instance, have just one cigarette),
    and then plan to 'go right back on the wagon.' Such thinking
    undermines commitment and will make it more likely that you will
    decide to 'fall off the wagon' and slip back to addictive behavior."
    This step can be viewed as "slamming the door shut" to addictive
    behaviors (see Distress Tolerance Handout 20: Burning Bridges and
    Building New Ones for more on this topic). Consider vegetarians.
    They never say "just this one time" and then eat meat or other
    prohibited food. Imagine you have become an "abstinitarian" who like
    vegetarians also never says "just this one time."

99 \$ Story Point: "Stopping addictive behavior is like trying to win a
major Olympic event. So imagine that you are like Olympic athletes and
we, the skills trainers, are your coaches. For Olympic athletes,
absolutely nothing is discussed before the race except winning or 'going
for the gold.' If Olympic athletes thought or said that winning a bronze
medal 'would be just fine,' then their training mentality, performance,
and push would all be affected. Olympic athletes must also not think
about falling down in a race or about what would occur if they should
twist an ankle before the race. Those types of thoughts must stay out of
their minds, even though these are possible outcomes. The athletes must
only strive for the gold. In other words, think of yourselves as Olympic
athletes in the Stop Addictive Behavior Event. The only thing you can
possibly allow yourselves to think about and discuss is absolute and
total abstinence."

99

2.  Plan for Abstinence These points correspond to the points in the
    "Plan for Abstinence" sections of Distress Tolerance Handout 17a and
    Worksheet 14.  "Enjoy your success, but with a clear mind; plan for
    temptations to relapse."  "Spend time or touch base with people who
    will reinforce you for abstinence."  "Plan reinforcing activities to
    do instead of addictive behaviors."  "Burn bridges: Avoid cues and
    high-risk situations for addictive behaviors."  "Build new bridges:
    Develop images, smells, and mental activities (such as urge surfing)
    to

compete with information associated with craving." (Urge surfing is
discussed in Section XX.)  "Find alternative ways to rebel."  "Publicly
announce abstinence; deny any idea of lapsing to addiction" (as
discussed above).

99

3.  Prepare a Harm Reduction Plan, and Be Sure to Put It into Action
    Immediately after a Lapse Abstinence over the long run requires
    planning for abstinence and planning for lapses. Example: A person
    practicing dialectical abstinence is like the quarterback in a
    football game. Quarterbacks are never fully content to obtain a few
    extra yards for a first down in each play; they are always striving
    in each play to obtain a touchdown. After the play is initiated, all
    efforts are oriented to run the full distance to the goal. The
    person practicing dialectical abstinence takes a similar
    approach---­running like mad in the direction of the goal
    (abstinence), stopping only if he or she falls, and ready to resume
    full intent to obtain a touchdown in the next play. Say to
    participants: "Adopt a dialectical view, and prepare for the
    possibility of failure. You

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handouts 17--17a • 481

must keep in your mind (way back in your mind in the very farthest part,
so that it never interferes with your resolve) that if you do slip, you
will deal with it effectively by accepting it nonjudgmentally and
picking yourself back up. This means making a relapse prevention plan
ahead of time for what you will actually do if you do slip. Who will you
call? How will you remember to get right back to abstinence? What will
you do to motivate yourself to get right back to abstinence? What skills
will you use? Rehearse in your mind going through your crisis plan.
Imagine success and a sense of mastery." Encourage participants to use
the skill of cope ahead (see Emotion Regulation Handout 19). Continue:
"If you do slip, immediately fight with all your might the 'abstinence
violation effect.' This can occur after a lapse when a person feels
guilty, ashamed, and out of control, and wants to give up and give in.
Common thoughts are 'I'm a loser,' or 'I might as well keep going now
that I've started,' or 'A little more won't make a difference.' This
kind of thinking can turn lapses into full-blown relapses." Go over
possible harm reduction skills for participants to rehearse and be ready
to use. (These correspond to those listed in the "Plan for Harm
Reduction" sections of Distress Tolerance Handout 17a and also Worksheet
14.)  "Call your therapist, sponsor, or mentor for skills coaching." 
"Get in contact with other effective people who can help."  "Get rid of
temptations; surround yourself with cues for effective behaviors." 
"Review skills and handouts from DBT."  "Practice opposite action
(Emotion Regulation Handout 10) for shame. That is, make your

lapse public among people who will not reject you once they know. If no
other option works, go to an anonymous meeting of any sort and publicly
report your lapse."  "Build mastery and cope ahead (Emotion Regulation
Handout 19), and checking the facts (Emotion Regulation Handout 8), can
be used to fight feelings of being out of control."  "Interpersonal
skills (Interpersonal Effectiveness Handouts 5--7), such as asking for
help from family, friends, sponsors, ministers, or counselors, can also
be helpful. If you are isolated, help can often be found via online
support groups."  "You can conduct a chain analysis to analyze what
prompted the lapse (General Handouts 7 and 7a)."  "Problem solving right
away (Emotion Regulation Handout 12) will suggest ways to 'get back on
the wagon' and repair any damage you have done."  "Distract yourself,
self-­soothe, and improve the moment (Distress Tolerance Handouts 7, 8,
and 9) to let time pass without engaging in the addictive behavior again
right away."  "Cheerlead yourself."  "Do pros and cons of stopping
addictive behaviors."  "Stay away from extreme thinking. Don't let one
slip turn into a disaster."  "Keep a list of all these harm reduction
ideas with you all the time, ready if needed."

99

4.  After a Lapse, Recommit to Total Abstinence Emphasize: "After a
    lapse, recommit yourself to 100% total abstinence, knowing this was
    the last time that you will ever slip."
5.  Cautions Tell participants: "It is possible to do these two
    seemingly contradictory things---commit to absolute abstinence from
    addictive behavior, and accept a lapse should such behavior occur.
    This does not mean accepting a lapse before you have one. It will
    undermine your commitment to say to yourself, in the back of your
    mind, 'Oh, I guess it is really OK if I go ahead and engage in my
    addictive behavior, because if I do, I'll just do a chain analysis
    and recommit.' The possibility of a lapse must be buried somewhere
    outside of your awareness. You'll respond according to your plan, if
    it happens, but it will never happen."

482 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 18--18a

XVIII. Clear Mind (Distress Tolerance Handouts 18--18a) Main Point:
       "Clear mind" is a middle ground between the extremes of "addict
       mind" (being governed by an addiction) and "clean mind" (thinking
       that the problems of addiction are over and there is no need to
       worry any more). Clear mind is the safest place to be, since it
       involves being clean and not engaging in the addiction, while
       remaining vigilant about the temptation to do so. Distress
       Tolerance Handout 18: Clear Mind. Review this handout, stressing
       the difference between clean mind and clear mind in particular.
       Distress Tolerance Handout 18a: Behavior Patterns Characteristic
       of Addict Mind and of Clean Mind. Review this handout with
       participants. Instruct participants to check the behaviors they
       engage in while in clean mind and while in addict mind. Distress
       Tolerance Worksheet 15: From Clean Mind to Clear Mind. Review
       this worksheet with participants. If time allows, practice with
       participants how they could replace one of the clean mind
       behaviors they marked on Handout 18a with a clear mind behavior.
       Assign the rest of the worksheet as homework.

99A. Addict Mind, Clean Mind, and Clear Mind 1. Addict Mind Explain to
participants: "Addict mind is your state of mind when you have given in
to your addiction. You may have never tried to stop your addictive
behavior, or you may have tried but relapsed. In addict mind, you are
ruled by your addiction; urges to engage in the addictive behavior
govern your thoughts, emotions, and behaviors. In addict mind, you are
not even trying to resist your addictive behavior---or, when you are,
the effort is half-­hearted and ineffective." Emphasize: "The danger of
addict mind is that you are not engaging in any of the steps necessary
to stop the addictive behavior. In addict mind, you are willing to do
whatever is necessary to get the high that addictive behaviors bring.
You may lie, steal, hide, break promises, and deny that you are in fact
addicted." Discussion Point: Elicit examples from participants of
behaviors or personal characteristics indicating that they are in the
grip of addict mind.

2.  Clean Mind Continue: "Clean mind occurs when you are 'clean' and
    have not engaged in the problem behavior for a period of time, but
    you are oblivious to the dangers and temptation of relapsing. In
    clean mind, you may feel invincible in your fight against your
    addiction, and immune to the temptation to engage in the addictive
    behavior ever again. The distortion of clean mind is believing that
    you don't have an addiction problem any more." Emphasize: "The
    danger of clean mind is that you may not avoid temptations and
    addiction cues, and may fail to use relapse prevention strategies
    you have developed at other times. In clean mind, you lower your
    guard and defenses against urges, and so you are not prepared when
    they hit."
3.  Clear Mind Go on: "Clear mind represents the synthesis between clean
    mind and addict mind. In clear mind, you are clean, while at the
    same time you stay aware of the dangers of relapse and actively
    engage in behaviors to prevent a lapse or relapse. It is the safest
    place to be. Clear mind is very similar to wise mind when addiction
    is involved."

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handouts 18--18a • 483

99

Discussion Point: Elicit examples of times when participants have been
in clean mind and were not vigilant to the dangers of relapsing. If you
can point to examples of clean mind from your own life, do so. Note to
Leaders: Be careful that the discussion stays at a general level as much
as possible, so that it does not lead to an increase in participants'
urges to engage in addictive behavior.

\$ Story Point: "Overcoming addiction is like fighting a long war
against urges to engage in the addictive behavior. The urges win a
battle when you end up doing the addictive behavior, and you win when,
despite the urges' attacks on you, you don't do the addictive behavior.
Clean mind is forgetting the war once a few battles are over; it's
thinking that because you've repelled the urges a few times, they will
not come back, or that if they do come back they will be easy to repel.
When you are in clean mind, you don't prepare for battle, and your
defenses are down. Urges can catch you unprepared and win. Addict mind
is like being under siege by the urges and believing that you can never
repel them again. When you are in addict mind, you don't remember your
victories; when you are defeated, you don't regroup and fight back.
Clear mind is remembering both your victories and your defeats, fighting
with all your might, and staying prepared for battle even when you are
experiencing no urges."

99B. Behavior Patterns Characteristic of Addict Mind, Clean Mind, and
Clear Mind 1. Addict Mind Behaviors Say: "Behaviors characteristic of
addict mind include engaging in the addictive behavior; glamorizing
addiction; stealing to pay for addictive behaviors; lying, hiding, and
isolating; stealing; not making eye contact with people; avoiding
doctors, therapists, or people or groups who can help you; and so on."

99

Practice Exercise: Ask participants to read through the list of addict
mind behaviors on Distress Tolerance Handout 18a, and to check those
behaviors they remember doing. (This exercise can be done at the
beginning or at the end of reviewing the handout.)

2.  Clean Mind Behaviors Go on: "Behaviors characteristic of clean mind
    include thinking you have now learned your lesson and do not have to
    worry any more about the addiction; going into environments where
    others engage in addictive behaviors; seeing or living with people
    who have your addictions; acting as if all you need to get over
    addictions is willpower; isolating yourself; and so on."

<!-- -->

a.  Apparently Irrelevant Behaviors

Emphasize that apparently irrelevant behaviors are common in clean mind.
Say: "These are actions that take you closer to engaging in the
addictive behavior; they are steps toward addictive behaviors. On the
surface, they look reasonable and unrelated to the addiction, but,
collectively, they help set up a slip back into addictive behaviors.
They are usually based on not thinking about your behavior and its
consequences, on flat-out denial, or on delusion." Alan Marlatt45 coined
the term "apparently irrelevant decisions." Example: "You are having a
party for a close friend. Thinking that you really want to have her
favorite foods, you buy her favorite cookies and ice cream for the
party. You get a lot of each because you want to be sure you don't run
out at the party. You have problems with bingeing and purging (and these
are your usual binge foods)." Example: "You are currently abstinent from
alcohol. You have a craving for a hamburger, and you decide to go out to
dinner at your corner bar, where they have really good hamburgers."

484 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 18a--19

Continue: "Often the problem is not the first behavior, but rather a
multiple set of behaviors in a sequence, all of which bring you closer
to an overwhelming cue for addictive behavior." Example: "Gambling is
your addiction. You decide to go to visit a friend's country house north
of your home. On the way, you decide to stop off at a shopping center.
On the way out of the shopping center, you realize you are hungry for
lunch. There is a really nice hotel next to the shopping center that
serves good food in a relaxing environment. You go there and have a nice
lunch. You have several hours before your friend is expecting you, so
you decide you will just look in on the casino in the same hotel. As you
look in, you decide you will just walk around but not gamble. Before you
know it, you are gambling and never make it to your friend's house."
Practice Exercise: Ask participants to review the list of clean mind
behaviors on Handout 18a. Ask them to add any behaviors that are
indicative of clean mind for them. Discussion Point: Elicit from
participants examples of apparently irrelevant behaviors they engage in.

3.  Clear Mind Behaviors Conclude: "Clear mind behaviors are abstinent
    and vigilant for temptation. You are acutely aware that without
    skills, intense urges can return at any moment."

<!-- -->

XIX. Community Reinforcement (Distress Tolerance Handout 19) Main Point:
     Community reinforcement focuses on restructuring the environment so
     that it will reinforce abstinence instead of addiction. Distress
     Tolerance Handout 19: Community Reinforcement. Review this handout,
     stressing the importance of reinforcement in changing and
     maintaining behavior. Distress Tolerance Worksheet 16: Reinforcing
     Nonaddictive Behaviors. Briefly review this worksheet with
     participants, and assign the worksheet as homework. Focus on
     replacing reinforcers for addiction with reinforcers for
     abstinence, and also on noticing the positive events that occur
     when participants are not engaging in addictive behaviors. Suggest
     (but do not assign) abstinence sampling.

99A. Reinforcement Maintains Addictive Behavior Note to Leaders: A very
good description of the community reinforcement approach by William R.
Miller and Robert J. Meyers, with Susanne Hiller-­Sturmhofel, is
available online (http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/
publications/arh23-2/116-121.pdf).

1.  Immediate Reinforcement Is Stronger Than Delayed Consequences
    Unfortunately, the immediate reinforcement of an emotional high or
    emotional relief that an addictive behavior provides has a stronger
    effect than the delayed aversive consequences (such as remorse,
    guilt, and depression), which is why the addiction is maintained.
    Discussion Point: Elicit from participants whether and how their
    addictive behavior leads to immediate pleasure or immediate relief
    from distress.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 19 • 485

2.  As Addictive Behavior Increases, Other Activities Decrease As
    addictive behavior increases, other activities (e.g., sports,
    community involvement, social activities) decrease, and isolation
    increases. When this happens, the addictive behavior becomes more
    and more associated with the immediate reinforcing consequences, and
    thus becomes stronger and more entrenched. Discussion Point: Elicit
    from participants both positive and negative consequences of their
    addictive behaviors.

B. Replace Addiction Reinforcers with Abstinence Reinforcers Stopping
addictive behaviors requires replacing addiction reinforcers with
abstinence reinforcers. Why? It is because willpower is not sufficient
to change behavior, or else we would all be perfect. In the long run, it
requires making a lifestyle without the addictive behavior more
rewarding than a lifestyle with that behavior. Go over the following
action steps that can be helpful:

99 99

 "Search for people to spend time with who aren't addicted." 
"Increase the number of pleasant activities you engage in that do not
involve your addiction."

(See Emotion Regulation Handouts 16 and 17.)  "If you cannot decide what
addiction-free people or activities you like, sample a lot of differ-

ent groups of people and a lot of different activities." Practice
Exercise: Ask participants to read through the "Replace Addiction
Reinforcers . . . " section of Distress Tolerance Handout 19 (the list
just above corresponds to this part of the handout) and check those they
think might work for them. Ask people what they checked. (This exercise
can be done at the beginning or at the end of reviewing the handout.)

99C. Get Reinforcement from Others for Not Engaging in Addictive
Behaviors 1. Stay Away from Other Addicted People Tell clients: "Stay
away from other addicts who are uncomfortable with you if you are not
also engaging in addictive behaviors." 2. Talk to People Who Really Love
You Say: "Teach your nonaddicted loved ones about reinforcement (if you
have to). Then ask them to be vigilant for when you appear to be
abstinent, and give you lots of reinforcing comments or other things
they have available that could function as reinforcers." 3. Try a
"Deprive, Then Reinforce" Strategy The following strategy is designed
for (1) people who do not have many potential reinforcers for abstinence
in their lives; (2) people who already have most of the things that
could be used as reinforcers (usually people with a fair amount of
money); or (3) people who are so poor that they cannot add anything
reinforcing to their lives. Say to such participants: "The basic idea is
first to deprive yourself of something important that you would work
hard to get back, and then give it back to yourself as a reward if you
engage in the behavior you want to reinforce." Go over the steps with
participants.  "Decide on three things in your life that you really
like, but that you could deprive yourself

of for a week if you really had to." Examples: Coffee; toothpaste; use
of a car; carrying cash and/or credit cards; all jewelry; all but one
pair of socks or underwear; texting or calling others on cell phones;
sitting in chairs; watching TV; playing games.  Week 1: "Deprive
yourself of one item (Item 1) for the week." This is the equivalent of
B. F.

486 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handouts 19--20

Skinner's depriving rats of food before putting them in an experiment
where food was the reinforcer. Note that the deprivation is not
contingent on anything, and thus it is not being used as a punishment. 
Week 2: "For each day you are abstinent, give yourself back Item 1 the
day after. Deprive yourself of a second item (Item 2) for the week." 
Week 3: "For each day you are abstinent, give yourself back Item 2 the
day after. Give yourself back Item 1, but deprive yourself of a third
item (Item 3) for the week."  Week 4: "For each day you are abstinent,
give yourself back Item 3 the day after. Give yourself back Item 2, but
deprive yourself of Item 1 again for the week."  "Continue to repeat the
sequence." Note to Leaders: It is important to make it clear that this
is not a punishment system, but a reinforcement system. For some people,
this can only be done with a coach or another person to be accountable
to. Suggest doing this with a counselor or therapist, a nonaddicted
close friend, or a nonaddicted family member. Stress that the
consequences have to be big enough that participants would actually work
hard to get them.

4.  Monitor Your Abstinence Motivation "When your abstinence motivation
    starts to drop off, do these things."  "Review your plan for
    dialectical abstinence."  "Review your pros and cons for abstinence
    versus addictive behaviors."

D. Abstinence Sampling Say to participants: "Abstinence sampling is
deciding to try out abstinence to see what it is like and to see if
there are any benefits to you of abstinence. This is like doing a
personal experiment. You do not have to commit for the long term until
you see how it goes. Although the short-term emotional high and relief
of addiction will not be there, neither will the terrible consequences
of addictive behavior."  "Commit to a specific number of days of
abstinence, to sample what it would be like to live without addictive
behavior."  "To get through abstinence sampling, implement your
dialectical abstinence plan."  "Observe all the extra positive events
occurring when you are not engaging in addictive behaviors."

XX. Burning Bridges and Building New Ones (Distress Tolerance
    Handout 20) Main Point: "Burning bridges" means actively eliminating
    from one's life any and every connection to potential triggers for
    addictive behaviors. "Building new ones" refers to creating new
    mental images and smells to compete with the addiction urges.
    Distress Tolerance Handout 20: Burning Bridges and Building New
    Ones. First review the strategies for burning bridges and encourage
    participants to be completely honest about what bridges need to be
    burned to stop addiction behavior. Building new bridges here focuses
    on creating visual images and smells to compete with cravings. You
    can also discuss how building a community that will reinforce
    abstinence is another form of building bridges. Distress Tolerance
    Worksheet 17: Burning Bridges and Building New Ones. It can be very
    useful to have participants fill out at least one item in each
    section during the session and also have them write down the imagery
    they will use to help reduce cravings. The homework is then to fill
    out the rest of the items and also carry out the tasks of both
    burning bridges and building new ones.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handout 20 • 487

99A. What Is Burning Bridges? Say to participants: "Burning bridges is
ultimately a skill of radical acceptance, commitment, and action, all
directed toward never engaging in the addictive behavior again. The
action component refers to actively cutting off, and removing from your
life, all connections to potential triggers for the addictive behavior.
You burn the bridge to addictive behavior so that this behavior is no
longer an option.

99 \$ Story Point: "Imagine that you are in front of your house and a
huge, angry elephant is closing in

on you. You race into your garage and slam the door shut. The elephant
is outside; you are inside. As long as you stay inside, the elephant
can't harm you. But what if you've left the garage door slightly open at
the bottom---just enough for the elephant to get its trunk in and lift
up the door? What then? The elephant will get you. Or what if you are
curious and hit the garage door opener just a little bit to see what's
going on? In comes the elephant. Wham!" (Pause.) "Burning your bridges
is like going into the garage of abstinence and slamming that door shut
in front of the elephant (urges to engage in the addictive behaviors).
It is slamming that door down hard and not wavering or even considering
opening it. It is shutting your mind to addictive behavior; it is
putting up an iron wall between you and the addiction. What happens a
lot of times is that you are still curious to see what the elephant is
doing. So you don't close the garage door completely, or you decide
after a while to open it just a little. As soon as the door is opened
even a little, the elephant can get its trunk in and open the door."

99B. Burning Bridges: How to Do It 1. Make a Commitment to Getting Rid
of Everything in Your Life That Makes Your Addiction Possible Say:
"First, make an absolute commitment to discarding all treats to
abstinence. Walk into the garage of abstinence and slam the garage door
shut." 2. List Everything in Your Life That Makes Addiction Possible Go
on: "Now make a list of all the things in your life that make your
addiction possible." Now is the time for complete honesty; no holding
back. 3. Get Rid of These Things "Next, get rid of all these things.
Consider getting rid of some things you might not have thought of
before."  "Phone numbers, e-mail addresses, and other contact
information of people who will col-

lude with your addiction."  "People on social networking sites who might
collude with you on your addiction."  "Clothes and household items
associated with or communicating addiction."  "Cash that can be used to
fuel addiction or secret credit cards."  "Items in your house: food
(e.g., Oreos, chocolate); drink (e.g., alcohol, coffee); magazines

and catalogs; your computer, or at least your Internet connection;
videos, CDs, and TV channels; smartphone apps; gym memberships; tobacco;
and so on."  Paraphernalia for your addictive behavior.  Memberships in
clubs, hotels, casinos, and so forth. 4. List and Do Things That Will
Interfere with the Addiction "Finally, list and do all the things you
can do that will make it hard to continue your addiction."  "Tell the
truth about your behavior ruthlessly to others."  "Tell your friends and
family that you have quit your addictive behavior."

488 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 20

99

Practice Exercise: Ask participants to read through the "Burning
Bridges" section of Distress Tolerance Handout 20 and check those they
think might work for them. Ask people what they checked. (This exercise
can be done at the beginning or at the end of reviewing the handout.)
Discussion Point: Ask participants if they've had the experience of
leaving a bridge intact toward addiction and having this end up
contributing to a lapse or relapse. Discuss the difficulty of burning
bridges and what gets in the way. Discuss pros and cons of burning
bridges.

99C. What Is Building New Bridges? Building new bridges is the strategy
of actively imagining, as vividly as possible, visual images and smells
that compete with those associated with the addictive behavior. Research
Point: People who crave an addictive behavior start experiencing images
and smells in their minds that are linked to the addiction. The more
they focus on the addiction images, the more the craving increases, and
the more difficult it gets to resist engaging in the addictive behavior.
This means that the visual system and olfactory system are loaded with
information when a craving occurs, so if new images and smells compete
for "space" with that information, the craving can be reduced. Actively
imagining images and smells that are very different from the addictive
ones competes for attention with, and decreases the power of, the craved
images.48, 49

99D. Building New Bridges: How to Do It 1. Create Nonaddictive Images
and Smells Say: "First, create new, nonaddictive images and smells to
think about when you have an unwanted craving. These need to engage the
visual and olfactory (smell) systems of your brain, and so 'steal' the
space from the craving." Example: "Whenever you crave a cigarette,
imagine being on the beach. Keep the visual images and the smells of the
beach in mind to reduce the craving for cigarettes." 2. Look at Moving
Images; Surround Yourself with New Smells "Also, when you have a
craving, look at moving images or surround yourself with smells that are
unrelated to the addiction. They will compete with information
associated with your cravings." Example: "When you crave chocolate, look
at moving images or something that will engage the visual part of your
brain. Or smell something that you find pleasant but that is not
chocolate, such as perfume or pine needles." 3. Engage in Urge Surfing
The term "urge surfing" was coined by Alan Marlatt50, 51 as a relapse
prevention strategy for individuals addicted to alcohol and other drugs.
It can be used to help with any addictive behaviors or destructive
impulses. a. Urge Surfing Is Like Surfing or Riding Out a Wave

Say: "The urge is the wave. Instead of trying to stop its movement, you
surf on top of it." b. Urge Surfing Is a Form of Mindfulness

Urge surfing involves using the mindfulness skills of observing and
describing to "surf" over urges to engage in addictive behavior. Mindful
urge surfing is a mindful, nonattached observing of these urges. With
this skill, individuals learn over time to accept urges, cravings, and
preoccupations without reacting to them, judging them, or acting on
them.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills: Distress Tolerance Handouts 20--21 • 489

c.  The Key to Urge Surfing Is Not Reacting

Tell participants: "The key to urge surfing is stepping back and not
reacting. Notice the urge moment by moment, particularly how, like a
wave, it evolves and shifts over time." d. Urge Surfing Involves
Retraining the Brain

When people give in to their urges and engage in addictive behaviors,
they reinforce the link between having an urge and acting on it. Urge
surfing detaches the urge from the object of the urge (the food, drug,
sex, casino, etc.). Over time, the brain learns that it is possible to
experience an urge without acting on it. e. Urge Surfing Involves
Imagery

Say: "Imagine yourself on a surfboard riding the waves. Keep this image
in your mind to help you remember that urges don't last forever---that
this urge will go away, as others have done before it."

XXI. Alternate Rebellion and Adaptive Denial (Distress Tolerance
     Handout 21) Main Point: Alternate rebellion and adaptive denial, as
     their names indicate, are adaptive alternatives to addictive
     behavior. If addictive behavior functions as a form of rebellion,
     some other type of rebellious behavior can be used as a more
     effective alternative to the addiction. In adaptive denial, persons
     with addictions convince themselves that they actually don't crave
     the addictive behavior (denial). For this to work, the individuals
     must be adamant in telling themselves that they don't have an urge
     for the addictive behavior. Distress Tolerance Handout 21:
     Alternate Rebellion and Adaptive Denial. The first half of this
     handout lists possible alternative options for rebellion. Have
     participants read and check off which of the examples they would be
     willing to try. The second half of the handout describes steps for
     adaptive denial. Distress Tolerance Worksheet 17: Practicing
     Alternate Rebellion and Adaptive Denial. Review this worksheet with
     participants. It can be very useful to have participants fill out
     the plans for alternate rebellion during the session, and also have
     them come up with something they could want or crave instead of
     their addictive behaviors. The homework is then to try these skills
     and record the outcomes.

A. Alternate Rebellion52

99

1.  What Is Alternate Rebellion? Say to participants: "When addiction
    functions as rebellion, giving up addiction can be hard, because it
    implies that you need to give up rebelling. With alternate
    rebellion, you can satisfy the wish to rebel without destroying
    yourself or blocking your way to achieving important goals.
    'Alternate rebellion' means finding another rebellious but
    nondestructive behavior to substitute for the addictive behavior."

99

2.  Why Engage in Alternate Rebellion? Emphasize to clients: "Addiction
    as rebellion is ineffective. It does not help you toward your
    overall goal of a higher quality of life. Rebelling against a
    person, society, rules, boredom, or conventions, with addictive
    behavior is 'cutting off your nose to spite your face.' This is the
    opposite of the mindfulness 'how' skill of effectiveness." (See
    Mindfulness Handout 5.) Discussion Point: Elicit from participants
    reasons why addictive behavior is not an effective strat-

490 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES: Distress Tolerance
Handout 21

egy for rebelling. Discuss how overall objectives for obtaining a higher
quality of life are not kept in mind when addictive behavior is used to
rebel. Discussion Point: Ask participants whether addictive behavior
functions in their lives partially or totally as a way to rebel. Prompt
that this might be the case even if they did not intentionally choose
the addiction for this purpose.

3.  How to Do It Again, alternate rebellion means rebelling
    effectively---finding a way to honor the desire to rebel in a
    creative way, instead of suppressing it, judging it, or mindlessly
    giving in to it through addiction. Make clear that there are many
    ways to employ this skill, and invite participants to use their
    imaginations. Discussion Point: Ask participants to review the
    suggestions for alternate rebellion in Distress Tolerance Handout 21
    and check ones they might like to try. Discuss the various
    alternatives. Discussion Point: Ask participants for other effective
    ways to rebel. Practice Exercise: Ask participants who don't buy
    into alternate rebellion (even if their addiction functions as
    rebellion) to do pros and cons for giving alternate rebellion a try.
    Point out that willfulness can get in the way of alternate
    rebellion. Note to Leaders: Since I originally developed this skill,
    a number of people have developed lists of options for alternate
    rebellion and put them on the Internet. Look up "alternative
    rebellion" or "alternate rebellion" on your search engine. Check
    these options out yourself before recommending any.

B. Adaptive Denial

99

1.  What Is Adaptive Denial? Explain to participants: "'Adaptive denial'
    refers to adamantly convincing yourself that you don't want to
    engage in the addictive behavior when an urge hits, or that the
    addictive behavior is not a possibility."

99

2.  How to Do  Begin: "Give logic a break when you are doing adaptive
    denial. Don't argue with yourself

about believing that the urge is not there or that doing the addictive
behavior is not possible."  "Convince yourself that you want something
else other than the addictive behavior."

Example: "Fill a glass jar with dimes. Put the glass jar with dimes and
another glass jar that is empty near you at all times. When you have a
craving, say to yourself and out loud, 'Oh, I have to have a dime.' Then
open the jar with dimes, take one out, and put it into the other jar." 
"Put off addictive behavior. Put it off for 5 minutes, then put it off
for another 5 minutes, and

so on. Each time, tell yourself that you only have to stand this for 5
minutes."  "Do not replace craving for one addictive behavior with
craving for another addictive behav-

ior or for a behavior that is itself destructive."  "Remember that
replacing craving for one thing with craving for something else is to be
used

only in a crisis, when it appears clear that you are unable to tolerate
intense cravings without giving in to it. Suppressing desire over the
long run increases the level of desire rather than reduces it."
Discussion Point: Review the examples in Distress Tolerance Handout 21,
and then ask participants to see if they can think up other examples.

10. Distress Tolerance Skills • 491

References 1. May, G. G. (1982). Will and spirit: A contemplative
psychology. San Francisco: Harper & Row. 2. Ekman, P., Friesen, W. V.,
O'Sullivan, M., Chan, A., Diacoyanni-­Tarlatzis, I., Heider, K., et
al. (1987). Personality processes and individual differences: Universals
and cultural differences in the judgments of facial expressions of
emotion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 712--717. 3.
Ekman, P. (1993). Facial expression and emotion. American Psychologist,
48, 384--392. 4. Linehan, M. M., Schmidt, H., III, Dimeff, L. A., Craft,
J. C., Kanter, J., & Comtois, K. A. (1999). Dialectical behavior therapy
for patients with borderline personality disorder and drug-­ dependence.
American Journal on Addictions, 8, 279--292. 5. Linehan, M. (2001). DBT
versus comprehensive validation treatment + 12 step for multidiagnosed,
opiate-­dependent women with BPD: A randomized controlled trial. In A.
Arntz (Chair), Personality disorders II: Treatment research. Symposium
conducted at the World Congress of Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. 6. Linehan, M. M, Lynch, T. R.,
Harned, M. S., Korslund, K. E., & Rosenthal, Z. M. (2009). Preliminary
outcomes of a randomized controlled trial of DBT vs. drug counseling for
opiate-­dependent BPD men and women. Paper presented at the 43rd Annual
Convention of the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies,
New York. 7. Marlatt, G. A., & Gordon, J. R. (Eds.). (1985). Relapse
prevention: Maintenance strategies in the treatment of addictive
behaviors. New York: Guilford Press. 8. Supnick, J. A., & Colletti, G.
(1984). Relapse coping and problem-solving training following treatment
for smoking. Addictive Behaviors, 9, 401--404. 9. Miller, W. R., &
Rollnick, S. (2013). Motivational interviewing: Helping people change
(3rd ed.). New York: Guilford Press. 10. Jay, O., Christensen, J. P. H.,
& White, M. D. (2006). Human face-only immersion in cold water reduces
maximal apnoeic times and stimulates ventilation. Experimental
Physiology, 92, 197--206. 11. Foster, G. E., & Sheel, A. W. (2005). The
human diving response, its function, and its control. Scandinavian
Journal of Medicine and Science in Sports, 15, 3--12. 12. Tate, A. K., &
Petruzzello, S. J. (1995). Varying the intensity of acute exercise:
Implications for changes in affect. Journal of Sports Medicine and
Physical Fitness, 35, 295--302. 13. Brown, M. Z. (n.d.). Regulating
emotions through slow abdominal breathing (Handout). Available from
www.dbtsandiego.com/DBT2.pdf

14. Clark, M., & Hirschman, R. (1990). Effects of paced respiration on
    anxiety reduction in a clinical population. Biofeedback and
    Self-­Regulation, 15, 273--
15. 
16. McCaul, K., Solomon, S., & Holmes, D. (1979). Effects of paced
    respiration and expectations on physiological and psychological
    responses to threat. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
    37(4), 564--571.
17. Stark, R., Schnienle, A., Walter, B., & Vatil, D. (2000). Effects of
    paced respiration on heart period and heart period variability.
    Psychophysiology, 37.
18. Linehan, M. M. (2005). Putting your worries on a shelf: Progressive
    muscle and sensory awareness relaxation \[Audio recording\].
    Seattle, WA: Behavioral Tech.
19. Smith, R. E., & Ascough, J. C. (2015). Engaging affect in
    cognitive-behavioral therapy. Manuscript submitted for publication.
20. Hollon, S. (1989). Personal communication.
21. Goldstein, J. (1993). Insight meditation: The practice of freedom.
    Boston: Shambhala.
22. Goldstein, J., & Kornfield, J. (1987). Seeking the heart of wisdom:
    The path of insight meditation. Boston: Shambhala.
23. Kabat-Zinn, J., Massion, A. O., Kristeller, J., Peterson, L. G.,
    Fletcher, K. E., Pbert, L., et al. (1992). Effectiveness of a
    meditation-based stress reduction program in the treatment of
    anxiety disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 149, 936--943.
24. Kabat-Zinn, J., Wheeler, E., Light, T., Skillings, A., Scharf, M.
    J., Cropley, T. G., et al. (1998). Influence of a mindfulness
    meditation-based stress reduction intervention on rates of skin
    clearing in patients with moderate to severe psoriasis undergoing
    phototherapy (UVB) and photochemotherapy (PUVA). Psychosomatic
    Medicine, 60, 625--632.
25. Kabat-Zinn, J., Lipworth, L., & Burney, R. (1985). The clinical use
    of mindfulness meditation for the self-­regulation of chronic pain.
    Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 8, 163--190.
26. Bowen, S., Chawla, N., & Marlatt, G. A. (2011). Mindfulness-based
    relapse prevention for addictive behaviors: A clinician's guide. New
    York: Guilford Press.
27. Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., & Teasdale, J. D. (2013).
    Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression (2nd ed.). New
    York: Guilford Press.
28. Zylowska, L., & Siegel, D. (2012). The mindfulness prescription for
    adult ADHD: An 8--step program for strengthening attention, managing
    emotions, and achieving your goals. Boston: Trumpeter Books.
29. Semple, R., & Lee, J. (2011). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy
    for anxious children: A manual for treating childhood anxiety.
    Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.

492 • II. TEACHING NOTES FOR DBT SKILLS MODULES

29. Frankl, V. (2006). Man's search for meaning. Boston: Beacon Press.
    (Original work published 1959)

30. Gottman, J. (1994). Why marriages succeed or fail: And how you can
    make yours last. New York: Simon & Schuster.

31. Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W. (1986). Assessing the role of
    emotion in marriage. Behavioral Assessment, 8, 31--48.

32. Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W. (1992). Marital processes
    predictive of later dissolution: Behavior, physiology, and health.
    Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 221--233.

33. Goldfried, M. R., & Davison, G. C. (1976). Clinical behavior
    therapy. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

34. De Mello, A. (1984). The song of the bird. New York: Image Books.

35. Nagasako, E. M., Oaklander, A. L., & Dworkin, R. H. (2003).
    Congenital insensitivity to pain: An update. Pain, 101(3), 213--219.

36. Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living: Using the wisdom of
    your body and mind to face stress, pain, and illness. New York:
    Delacorte Press.

37. Gross, J. J., & Levenson, R. W. (1997). Hiding feelings: The acute
    effects of inhibiting negative and positive emotion. Journal of
    Abnormal Psychology, 106, 95--103.

38. Gross, J. J., & John, O. P. (2003). Individual differences in two
    emotion regulation processes: Implications for affect,
    relationships, and well-being. Journal of Personality and Social
    Psychology, 85, 348--362.

39. Roemer, L., & Borkovec, T. D. (1994). Effects of suppressing
    thoughts about emotional material. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
    103, 467--474.

40. Wegner, D. M., Schneider, D. J., Carter, S. R., & White, T. L.
    (1987). Paradoxical effects of thought suppression. Journal of
    Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 5--13.

41. Wegner, D. M., & Erber, R. (1992). The hyperaccessibility of
    suppressed thoughts. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
    63, 903--912.

42. Borkovec, T. D., & Inz, J. (1990). The nature of worry in
    generalized anxiety disorder: A predominance of thought activity.
    Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28, 153--158.

43. Borkovec, T. D., & Ruscio, A. M. (2001). Psychotherapy for
    generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 62,
    37--45.

44. Holden, C. (2001). 'Behavioral' addictions: Do they exist? Science,
    294, 980--982.

45. Marlatt, G. A. (1978). Craving for alcohol, loss of control and
    relapse: A behavioral analysis. In P. E. Nathan, G. A. Marlatt, & T.
    Lobe (Eds.), Alcoholism: New directions in behavioral research and
    treatment. New York: Plenum.

46. Marlatt, G. A., & Tapert, S. F. (1993). Harm reduction: Reducing the
    risks of addictive behaviors. In J. S. Baer, G. A. Marlatt, & R. J.
    McMahon (Eds). Addictive behaviors across the life span: Prevention,
    treatment and policy issues (pp. 243--273). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

47. Marlatt, G. A., & Donovan, D. M. (Eds.). (2005). Relapse prevention:
    Maintenance strategies in the treatment of addictive behaviors (2nd
    ed.). New York: Guilford Press.

48. Kemps, E., Tiggermann, M., Woods, D., & Soekov, B. (2004). Reduction
    of food cravings through concurrent visuospatial processing.
    International Journal of Eating Disorders, 36, 31--40.

49. Kemps, E., & Tiggermann, M. (2007). Modality-­ specific imagery
    reduces cravings for food: An application of the elaborated
    intrusion theory of desire to food craving. Journal of Experimental
    Psychology: Applied, 13, 95--104.

50. Marlatt, G. A., Witkiewitz, K., Dillworth, T. M., Bowen, S.,
    Parks, G. A., MacPherson, L. M., et al. (2004). Vipassana meditation
    as a treatment for alcohol and drug use disorders. In S. C.
    Hayes, V. M. Follette, & M. M. Linehan (Eds.), Mindfulness and
    acceptance: Expanding the cognitive-­behavioral tradition
    (pp. 261--287). New York: Guilford Press.

51. Marlatt, G. A., Larimer, M. E., & Witkiewitz, K. (Eds.). (2012).
    Harm reduction: Pragmatic strategies for managing high-risk
    behaviors (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.

52. Safer, D. J., Telch, C. F., & Chen, E. Y. (2009). Dialectical
    behavior therapy for binge eating and bulimia. New York: Guilford
    Press.

Index

ABC PLEASE (Accumulate positive emotions, Build mastery, Cope ahead of
time), 382 Abilities, assessment of, 66--67 Ability, 238 Absences
contingency management and, 92--93 guidelines for skills training and,
51, 52 relationship problem solving and, 102 Absolutes, 351--353
Abstinence approach, 479. See also Dialectical abstinence Abstinence
sampling, 486 Acceptance skills. See also Reality acceptance skills DBT
treatment program and, 14, 14f, 16 dialectical strategies and, 81f, 82f
distress tolerance and, 420 emotion regulation skills and, 356, 404,
405--406 radical acceptance and, 306, 451--466 skills trainers and, 158
therapeutic balance and, 83f turning the mind and, 466--468 willfulness
and, 469--470 wise mind and, 226 Accepting help, 133--134 ACCEPTS
(Activities, Contributions, Comparisons, Emotions, Pushing away,
Thoughts, Sensations), 417, 439--442 Acknowledgement, 82f, 301
Acquisition of skills, 64, 65--69 Action urges. See Urges Actions action
steps and, 391 emotion regulation skills and, 344, 347, 379 problem
solving and, 377--378 Activities, 440--441 Adaptive denial, 418,
489--490 Addict mind, 482, 483 Addiction. See also Distress Tolerance
skills alternate rebellion and adaptive denial, 489--490 burning bridges
and building new ones, 486--489 dialectical abstinence and, 227 distress
tolerance and, 418, 477--490 doing mind and, 224 orienting to skills
training and, 129

overview, 12f schedules for skills programs and, 108, 119 Adolescents,
47t, 108, 116--117 Adult DBT skills training, schedules for, 107--109,
110--115 Adult relationships, 141. See also Relationships Adults,
46t--47t Advanced DBT skills training, 108, 121, 136 Aerobic exercise,
434--435. See also Exercise; TIP (Temperature, Intense exercise, Paced
breathing, and Paired muscle relaxation) skills Affect regulation, 5
Affective instability, 19 Aftereffects of emotions, 344--345, 348
Aggression, 19, 30--31 Alcohol use. See also Substance use or abuse
guidelines for skills training and, 52 orienting to skills training and,
134 standard DBT program and, 19, 20t All-or-nothing thinking, 291
Allowing the mind. See Reality acceptance skills Alternate rebellion,
418, 489, 489--490 Ambivalence, 349 Analyzing Behavior skills, 126, 129,
143 Ancillary treatments, 99 Anger determining the type of skills
training needed, 45t emotion dysregulation and, 10f emotion regulation
skills and, 354-- 355, 357, 362, 368--369, 380 loving kindness and, 219
mindfulness skills and, 162 overview, 328 radical acceptance and, 463
standard DBT program and, 19 Anxiety, 162 Anxiety disorders, 6, 45t
Apologizing, 260--261 Appearing confident, 253--254 Approval, 158, 462
Apps, smartphone. See Smartphone coaching apps Arbitrary consequences,
316 Arousal, 431--439, 437f Asking, "Is this wise mind?" practice,
174--175 Asking for something, 263--266, 264f

Asking questions, 273 Asking wise mind a question practice, 174
Assertiveness DEAR MAN skills and, 251 interpersonal effectiveness
skills and, 232 overview, 235--236 reinforcement of versus following the
rules, 87 Assessment DBT treatment program and, 16 list of, 46t--47t
pretreatment assessment, 43, 43t progress tracking and, 44 Assumptions
emotion regulation skills and, 354--355 interpersonal effectiveness
skills and, 269, 278--279 orienting to skills training and, 136--137
pretreatment sessions and, 53 Attendance, 133. See also Missing sessions
Attending to others, 276--278 Attention emotion regulation skills and,
337 mindfulness skills and, 162 validation and, 298
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 19, 20t, 21t
Attention-seeking behavior, 33--34 Attitudes, 272 Authenticity, 82f
Authority, 265 Avoidance contingency management and, 92--93 emotion
dysregulation and, 10f emotion regulation skills and, 364--365, 379,
384--385, 388 mindfulness skills and, 163 understanding and naming
emotions and, 320 Awareness, 151, 337. See also Mindfulness skills

B Balanced opposites, 291 Balancing mind, 157. See also Mindfulness
skills Beginner's mind, 152, 182, 224. See also Mindfulness skills
Behavior change skills, 12f. See also Interpersonal effectiveness skills

493

494 • Index Behavioral activation, 320, 362 Behavioral analysis, 77,
78--79. See also Problem solving Behavioral assessment, 82f Behavioral
burst, 311--312 Behavioral contagion, 135 Behavioral rehearsal, 69
Behavioral skills. See also Skills training contingency management and,
92--93 DBT treatment program and, 16 dialectical perspectives and, 4--5
interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 285 orienting to skills training
and, 127--128 radical acceptance and, 463 skills training behavioral
targets and, 61--65, 62, 63t Behavioral skills training, 25 Behavioral
therapy, 15--16 Behaviors emotion regulation skills and, 10f, 340, 344
orienting to skills training and, 134--135, 145--146 Being mind. See
also Mindfulness skills mindfulness skills and, 213 overview, 157
skillful means and, 222--225 wise mind and, 226 Beliefs emotion
regulation skills and, 334, 351--352 validation and, 297 versus wise
mind, 84 Benefit of the doubt, 279 Between-session consulting, 71
Between-session practicing. See Practicing between sessions
Between-session skills coaching, 13, 13f Binge eating disorder (BED),
20t. See also Eating disorders Biological factors, 332, 339--340, 347
Biological processes, 340 Biological vulnerabilities. See also Biosocial
theory emotion dysregulation and, 10f orienting to skills training and,
138--143, 142f overview, 7 Biosocial theory. See also Biological
vulnerabilities development of emotion dysregulation, 5--9, 10f
orienting to skills training and, 126, 138--143, 142f overview, 3--4
Bipolar disorder, 6, 20t Black-or-white thinking, 291 Bodily sensations
emotion regulation skills and, 405 radical acceptance and, 465 sleep
hygiene protocol, 402 wise mind ACCEPTS (Activities, Contributions,
Comparisons, Emotions, Pushing away, Thoughts, Sensations), 442 Body
language, 342--343, 367 Body scan meditation, 444--445. See also
Meditation Borderline personality disorder (BPD) emotion dysregulation
and, 5, 9, 10f heterogeneous versus homogeneous groups and, 33 social
environment and, 7 standard DBT program and, 20t

Boredom, 45t Brain functioning, 339--340 Brainstorming, 376 Breathing
techniques. See also Mindfulness skills distress tolerance and, 435--436
overview, 152 wise mind and, 174, 175 Broken record strategy contingency
management and, 93 DEAR MAN skills and, 252--253 Buddhism, 157 Building
relationships and ending destructive ones, 128, 232--234, 236, 270. See
also Ending relationships; Interpersonal effectiveness skills;
Relationships Bulimia nervosa (BN), 20t. See also Eating disorders
Burning bridges and building new ones, 418, 486--489

C Calmness, 460--461 Capability, 13f, 265 Case management determining
the type of skills training needed, 45t dialectical strategies and, 81f
overview, 97--98 providers' roles and, 36 in the standard DBT program,
13, 15 Case managers, 36, 37 Catastrophe, 355--356 Catastrophizing
emotion regulation skills and, 404 mindfulness of current thoughts and,
475 sleep hygiene protocol, 401 Causes of things invalidation and, 305
nonjudgmentalness and, 202--203 radical acceptance and, 456--457, 464
validation and, 300--301 Centering prayer, 165 Chain analysis combining
with a missing-links analysis, 148--150 how to do, 144--146 orienting to
skills training and, 129, 143--146, 148--150 overview, 126, 144 Change
changing behavior, 234, 306--316 changing emotional responses, 12f, 129,
349--350. See also Emotion regulation skills compared to radical
acceptance, 463 dialectics and, 289--290, 293--294 Change skills DBT
treatment program and, 14, 14f dialectical strategies and, 81f, 82f
orienting to skills training and, 136 therapeutic balance and, 83f wise
mind and, 226 Check the facts. See also Emotion regulation skills
emotion regulation skills and, 359--361, 362--365, 407 overview, 349,
350--359 problem solving and, 375 Check-ins, 45t Checkups, 45t
Cheerleading strategies, 90. See also Validation Clean mind, 482,
483--484

Clear mind, 418, 482--484 Clients. See also Therapeutic relationship
developing a collaborative commitment to do skills training and, 48
difficult clients and, 63--64 orienting to skills training, 47--48
relationship problem solving and, 99--105 Closed DBT groups, 32 Closing
wind-down, 56--57. See also Format of skills training sessions Coaching,
45t, 70--71 Cognitive functioning, 10f Cognitive modification
procedures, 82f, 94--95 Cognitive restructuring, 94 Cognitive therapy,
15--16 Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), 15--16, 320 Co-leader,
34--35, 87, 104. See also Group leader; Skills trainer Collaboration,
48, 50--51 Commitment, 47--48, 137 Communication emotion regulation
skills and, 329--332 orienting to skills training and, 142 relationship
problem solving and, 101--102 validation and, 295, 300--301 Community
reinforcement, 418, 484--486 Comparisons, 441 Compassion compared to
radical acceptance, 462 invalidation and, 305 loving kindness and,
219--222 mindfulness skills and, 218 relationship problem solving and,
103 Compliance, 79--80, 92--93 Confidence, 253--254 Confidentiality, 51,
133, 135 Conflict, 171 Connection to the universe interpersonal
effectiveness skills and, 287 mindfulness skills and, 163--164, 215--217
Consequences of a problem behavior distress tolerance and, 428
interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 239, 313--314, 316
nonjudgmentalness and, 204--205 orienting to skills training and, 149
Consultation. See also DBT teams consultation between DBT individual
providers and skills trainers, 37 DBT treatment program and, 13f
determining the type of skills training needed, 45t dialectical
strategies and, 81f overview, 26 providers' roles and, 35 in the
standard DBT program, 13 Consultation-to-the-client strategies, 97--98.
See also Case management Contagious behaviors, 135 Contemplative prayer,
165, 219 Content of skills training program planning a skills training
curriculum and, 26--27, 27t, 28 versus process of skills training,
86--87 Contingency clarification, 94--95 Contingency management
procedures, 82f, 90--94 Continuous reinforcement, 310--311. See also
Reinforcement

Index • 495 Contributing, 441 Controlling action, 182--183 Conversation
groups, 275 Conversation skills, 272--275 Cope ahead emotion regulation
skills and, 392--396, 393f radical acceptance and, 465 turning the mind
and, 467 Coping skills contingency management and, 93 emotion regulation
skills and, 356, 382, 392--396, 393f ending relationships and, 283
nightmare protocol, 399 radical acceptance and, 465 reducing
vulnerability to emotion mind and, 321 standard DBT program and, 19 Core
acceptance, 87 Core interpersonal effectiveness skills, 128, 231--232,
241--242. See also DEAR MAN skills; FAST (\[be\] Fair, \[no\] Apologies,
Stick to values, and \[be\] Truthful); GIVE (Gentle, \[act\] Interested,
Validate, and \[use an\] Easy manner); Interpersonal effectiveness
skills; Obtaining objectives skillfully Core mindfulness skills, 12f,
128, 151, 153--155, 166. See also Mindfulness skills Core strategies.
See Problem solving; Validation Corrective feedback, 302--303 Corrosive
invalidation, 303--304. See also Invalidation Couple sessions, 75 Covert
rehearsal, 250 Covert response practice, 69 Credibility, 50--51
Criminality, 20t, 21t Crisis. See also Crisis survival skills; Suicide
distress tolerance and, 420 knowing a crisis, 422--424 providers' roles
and, 38 Crisis planning, 40f--41f Crisis strategies, 99, 100t Crisis
survival skills. See also Crisis; Distress Tolerance skills distress
tolerance and, 421--422, 450 emotion regulation skills and, 408 knowing
a crisis, 422--424 orienting to skills training and, 129 overview, 12f,
416--417 when the crisis is addiction, 418 Criticism, 45t, 91 Curious
mind, 277

D Dark night of the soul metaphor, 219 DBT PTSD protocol, 45t DBT skills
apps. See Smartphone coaching apps DBT skills trainers. See Skills
trainer DBT skills training in general. See also Skills training;
Structure of skills training sessions emotion dysregulation and, 11--12,
12f heterogeneous versus homogeneous groups, 32--34 incorporating into
psychotherapy, 39, 42 individual versus group skills training, 29--32

open versus closed groups, 32 outside of standard DBT, 37--42, 39f,
40f--41f overview, 3, 107--109 planning a skills training curriculum
and, 26--29, 27t providers' roles and, 34--37 schedules for, 107--109,
110--122 working with clients of non-DBT individual therapists, 38--39,
39f, 40f--41f, 42 DBT Suicidal Behavior Strategies Checklist, 15 DBT
teams. See also Consultation determining the type of skills training
needed, 45t dialectical strategies and, 81f forming or joining, 25--26
planning a skills training curriculum and, 26--29, 27t selecting skills
training members of, 26 DEAR MAN skills. See also Interpersonal
effectiveness skills contingency management and, 93 DBT treatment
program and, 14 difficult clients and, 64 ending relationships and,
283--284 overview, 232, 242, 248--256 Depression heterogeneous versus
homogeneous groups and, 33 mindfulness skills and, 162 standard DBT
program and, 19, 20t Describing skills DEAR MAN skills and, 249 distress
tolerance and, 428 emotion regulation skills and, 345--349, 348--349
interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 278--280 overview, 154, 166,
188--192, 190f, 194 problem solving and, 374--375 review of homework
and, 76--77 therapeutic balance and, 83f Destructive relationships, 270,
280--285. See also Building relationships and ending destructive ones;
Relationships Destructive urges. See Urges Devil's advocate, 292
Diagnostic interviewing, 47--48 Dialectical abstinence distress
tolerance and, 418, 478--481 overview, 478--479 wise mind and, 227
Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT) in general, 3, 13--19, 13f, 14f,
17t--18t, 20t, 21t, 25 Dialectical strategies, 81--87, 81f, 82f, 83f
Dialectical tensions, 85--87, 479 Dialectics, 233, 285, 286--294. See
also Interpersonal effectiveness skills Dialects, 4--5, 12f, 16. See
also Interpersonal effectiveness skills Dialogue rehearsal, 250 Diary
cards. See also Homework DBT treatment program and, 16 evaluating
progress with, 44 format and organization of skills training sessions,
55 generalization of skills and, 72--75, 73f, 74t orienting to skills
training and, 125--126, 137--138 overview, 137--138 Dichotomous
thinking, 5

Diet, 396--397 Difficult clients, 63--64. See also Clients Difficult
emotions, 403 Difficulties, 297 Dime Game, 266 Disappointment, 465
Discrimination, 200--201 Disgust determining the type of skills training
needed, 45t emotion regulation skills and, 354--355, 357, 369, 380
overview, 328 Disorganization, 10f Disrespect, 258 Dissociation, 10f
Distracting methods, 408, 417, 422, 439--442 Distractions, 222 Distress
Tolerance Handout 1: Goals of Distress Tolerance, 420 Distress Tolerance
Handout 2: Overview: Crisis Survival Skills, 421 Distress Tolerance
Handout 3: When to Use Crisis Survival Skills, 422 Distress Tolerance
Handout 4: The STOP Skill, 425 Distress Tolerance Handout 5: Pros and
Cons, 427 Distress Tolerance Handout 6: TIP Skills: Changing Your Body
Chemistry, 431 Distress Tolerance Handout 6a: Using Cold Water, Step by
Step, 431 Distress Tolerance Handout 6b: Paired Muscle Relaxation, Step
by Step, 431 Distress Tolerance Handout 6c: Effective Rethinking and
Paired Relaxation, Step by Step, 431 Distress Tolerance Handout 7:
Distracting, 439--440 Distress Tolerance Handout 8: SelfSoothing, 442
Distress Tolerance Handout 8a: Body Scan Meditation, Step by Step, 442
Distress Tolerance Handout 9: Improving the Moment, 445 Distress
Tolerance Handout 9a: Sensory Awareness, Step by Step, 446 Distress
Tolerance Handout 10: Reality Acceptance Skills, 450 Distress Tolerance
Handout 11: Radical Acceptance, 451--452 Distress Tolerance Handout 11a:
Radical Acceptance: Factors That Interfere, 452 Distress Tolerance
Handout 11b: Practicing Radical Acceptance, Step by Step, 452 Distress
Tolerance Handout 12: Turning the Mind, 466 Distress Tolerance Handout
13: Willingness, 468 Distress Tolerance Handout 14: HalfSmiling and
Willing Hands, 471 Distress Tolerance Handout 14a: Practicing
Half-Smiling and Willing Hands, 471 Distress Tolerance Handout 15:
Mindfulness of Current Thoughts, 473 Distress Tolerance Handout 15a:
Practicing Mindfulness of Thoughts, 473 Distress Tolerance Handout 16:
Overview: When the Crisis Is Addiction, 477

496 • Index Distress Tolerance Handout 16a: Common Addictions, 477
Distress Tolerance Handout 17: Dialectical Abstinence, 478 Distress
Tolerance Handout 17a: Planning for Dialectical Abstinence, 478 Distress
Tolerance Handout 18: Clear Mind, 482 Distress Tolerance Handout 18a:
Behavior Patterns Characteristic of Addict Mind and of Clean Mind, 482
Distress Tolerance Handout 19: Community Reinforcement, 484 Distress
Tolerance Handout 20: Burning Bridges and Building New Ones, 486
Distress Tolerance Handout 21: Alternate Rebellion and Adaptive Denial,
489 Distress Tolerance module. See also Distress tolerance skills
planning a skills training curriculum and, 26--29, 27t providers' roles
and, 35--36 Distress tolerance skills. See also Addiction; Crisis
survival skills; Reality acceptance skills alternate rebellion and
adaptive denial, 489--490 burning bridges and building new ones,
486--489 clear mind and, 482--484 community reinforcement and, 484--486
core interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 231--232 crisis survival
skills and, 416--417, 421--422 DBT treatment program and, 14f
dialectical abstinence and, 478--481 emotion regulation skills and, 407
goals of, 416, 420--421 half-smiling and willing hands and, 471--473
IMPROVE (Imagery, Meaning, Prayer, Relaxing, One thing in the moment,
Vacation, self-Encouragement and rethinking the situation) skills,
445--450 improving the moment, 445--450 knowing a crisis, 422--424
managing extreme arousal, 431--439, 437f mindfulness of current thoughts
and, 473--476 orienting to skills training and, 129, 130 overview, 12f
planning a skills training curriculum and, 26--29 pros and cons skill,
427--431, 429f radical acceptance and, 451--466 reality acceptance
skills and, 417--418, 450--451 selecting material to teach, 418--419
self-soothing and, 442--445 STOP (Stop, Take a step back, Observe, and
Proceed mindfully) skill and, 424--427 therapeutic balance and, 83f TIP
(Temperature, Intense exercise, Paced breathing, and Paired muscle
relaxation) skills, 431--439, 437f turning the mind and, 466--468 when
the crisis is addiction, 418, 477--490

willingness and, 468--471 wise mind ACCEPTS (Activities, Contributions,
Comparisons, Emotions, Pushing away, Thoughts, Sensations), 439--442
Distress Tolerance Worksheet 1: Crisis Survival Skills, 421 Distress
Tolerance Worksheet 1a: Crisis Survival Skills, 421 Distress Tolerance
Worksheet 1b: Crisis Survival Skills, 421 Distress Tolerance Worksheet
2: Practicing the STOP Skill, 425 Distress Tolerance Worksheet 2a:
Practicing the STOP Skill, 425 Distress Tolerance Worksheet 3: Pros and
Cons of Acting on Crisis Urges, 427 Distress Tolerance Worksheet 3a:
Pros and Cons of Acting on Crisis Urges, 427 Distress Tolerance
Worksheet 4: Changing Body Chemistry with TIP Skills, 431 Distress
Tolerance Worksheet 4a: Paired Muscle Relaxation, 431 Distress Tolerance
Worksheet 4b: Effective Rethinking and Paced Relaxation, 431--432
Distress Tolerance Worksheet 5: Distracting with Wise Mind ACCEPTS, 440
Distress Tolerance Worksheet 5a: Distracting with Wise Mind ACCEPTS, 440
Distress Tolerance Worksheet 5b: Distracting with Wise Mind ACCEPTS, 440
Distress Tolerance Worksheet 6: SelfSoothing, 442 Distress Tolerance
Worksheet 6a: SelfSoothing, 442 Distress Tolerance Worksheet 6b:
SelfSoothing, 442 Distress Tolerance Worksheet 6c: Body Scan Meditation,
Step by Step, 442--443 Distress Tolerance Worksheet 7: IMPROVE the
Moment, 446 Distress Tolerance Worksheet 7a: IMPROVE the Moment, 446
Distress Tolerance Worksheet 7b: IMPROVE the Moment, 446 Distress
Tolerance Worksheet 8: Reality Acceptance Skills, 450--451, 466 Distress
Tolerance Worksheet 8a: Reality Acceptance Skills, 450--451, 466
Distress Tolerance Worksheet 8b: Reality Acceptance Skills, 450--451,
466 Distress Tolerance Worksheet 9: Radical Acceptance, 452 Distress
Tolerance Worksheet 9a: Practicing Radical Acceptance, 452 Distress
Tolerance Worksheet 10: Turning the Mind, Willingness, Willfulness, 466,
468 Distress Tolerance Worksheet 11: HalfSmiling and Willing Hands, 471
Distress Tolerance Worksheet 11a: Practicing Half-Smiling and Willing
Hands, 471 Distress Tolerance Worksheet 12: Mindfulness of Current
Thoughts, 473 Distress Tolerance Worksheet 12a:

Practicing Mindfulness of Thoughts, 473 Distress Tolerance Worksheet 13:
Skills When the Crisis Is Addiction, 477 Distress Tolerance Worksheet
14: Planning for Dialectical Abstinence, 478 Distress Tolerance
Worksheet 15: From Clean Mind to Clear Mind, 482 Distress Tolerance
Worksheet 16: Reinforcing Nonaddictive Behaviors, 484 Distress Tolerance
Worksheet 17: Burning Bridges and Building New Ones, 486 Distress
Tolerance Worksheet 17: Practicing Alternate Rebellion and Adaptive
Denial, 489 Doing mind mindfulness skills and, 213 skillful means and,
222--225 wise mind and, 226 Domestic violence, 284--285 Dreams, 398--400
Dropping out of skills training, 51, 132 Drug use, 52, 134. See also
Substance use or abuse Duration of skills training program, 28, 28--29
Dynamic systems perspectives, 4--5 Dysregulated clients, 102

E Eating disorders determining the type of skills training needed, 45t
emotion dysregulation and, 6 standard DBT program and, 19, 20t
Effectiveness, 232 Effectiveness practice, 83f, 155, 166, 210--213
Efficacy, 50. See also Self-efficacy Effortful control, 7, 193 Embracing
confusion, 292 Emotion diary, 326--327 Emotion dysregulation. See also
Emotion regulation skills biosocial theory and, 5--9, 10f consequences
of, 9, 11 DBT skills training and, 11--12, 12f determining the type of
skills training needed, 45t dialectics and, 289--290 orienting to skills
training and, 138--143, 142f overview, 6 standard DBT program and, 19
Emotion mind. See also Wise mind decreasing vulnerability to, 325
distress tolerance and, 423 ending relationships and, 281--282
interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 281--282 overview, 153, 167--169
reducing vulnerability to, 320--321, 381--382 wise mind and, 226 Emotion
myths, 334, 410 Emotion regulation, 6 Emotion Regulation Handout 1:
Goals of Emotion Regulation, 323 Emotion Regulation Handout 2: Overview:
Understanding and Naming Emotions, 325 Emotion Regulation Handout 3:
What Emotions Do for You, 326

Index • 497 Emotion Regulation Handout 4: What Makes It Hard to Regulate
Your Emotions, 332 Emotion Regulation Handout 4a: Myths about Emotions,
332 Emotion Regulation Handout 5: A Model for Describing Emotions, 335
Emotion Regulation Handout 5a: A Brief Model for Describing Emotions,
335 Emotion Regulation Handout 6: Ways to Describe Emotions, 335, 345
Emotion Regulation Handout 7: Changing Emotional Responses, 349 Emotion
Regulation Handout 8: Check the Facts, 350 Emotion Regulation Handout
8a: Examples of Emotions That Fit the Facts, 350 Emotion Regulation
Handout 9: Opposite Action and Problem Solving: Deciding Which to Use,
359 Emotion Regulation Handout 10: Opposite Action, 361 Emotion
Regulation Handout 11: Figuring Out Opposite Action, 361 Emotion
Regulation Handout 12: Problem Solving, 372 Emotion Regulation Handout
13: Reviewing Opposite Action and Problem Solving, 378 Emotion
Regulation Handout 14: Overview: Reducing Vulnerability to Emotion
Mind---Building a Live Worth Living, 381 Emotion Regulation Handout 15:
Accumulating Positive Emotions: Short Term, 382 Emotion Regulation
Handout 17: Accumulating Positive Emotions: Long Term, 386 Emotion
Regulation Handout 18: Values and Priorities List, 386 Emotion
Regulation Handout 19: Build Mastery and Cope Ahead, 392 Emotion
Regulation Handout 20: Taking Care of Your Mind by Taking Care of Your
Body, 396 Emotion Regulation Handout 20a: Nightmare Protocol, Step by
Step, 398 Emotion Regulation Handout 20b: Sleep Hygiene Protocol, 400
Emotion Regulation Handout 21: Overview: Managing Really Difficult
Emotions, 403 Emotion Regulation Handout 22: Mindfulness of Current
Emotions: Letting Go of Emotional Suffering, 403 Emotion Regulation
Handout 23: Managing Extreme Emotions, 407 Emotion Regulation Handout
24: Troubleshooting Emotion Regulation Skills, 409 Emotion Regulation
Handout 25: Review of Skills for Emotion Regulation, 410 Emotion
Regulation module, 26--29, 27t. See also Emotion regulation skills
Emotion regulation skills. See also Emotion dysregulation; Managing
really difficult emotions; Reducing vulnerability to emotion mind;
Understanding and naming emotions accumulating positive emotions,
382--391

building mastery and coping skills, 392--396, 393f changing emotional
responses and, 349--350 check the facts and, 350--359 contingency
clarification and, 95 DBT treatment program and, 14f determining the
type of skills training needed, 45t extreme emotions and, 321, 407--408
goals of, 323--325 heterogeneous versus homogeneous groups and, 33
managing difficult emotions, 403 mindfulness skills and, 161--162,
403--407 model of emotions, 335--345 nightmare protocol, 398--400
observing, describing, and naming emotions, 345--349 opposite action
and, 361--372, 378--381 orienting to skills training and, 128--129,
134--135 overview, 11--12, 12f, 318, 323 planning a skills training
curriculum and, 26--29 preparing for opposite action and problem
solving, 359--361 problem solving and, 372--381, 377f reducing
vulnerability to emotion mind and, 320--321, 381--382 relationship
problem solving and, 101--102 review of, 410 schedules for skills
programs and, 107--108, 115 selecting material to teach, 321--322 sleep
hygiene protocol, 400--402 taking care of your body, 396--398
therapeutic balance and, 83f troubleshooting, 409--410 understanding and
naming emotions and, 318--319, 325--326, 345--349 what emotions do for
you, 326--332 what makes it hard to regulate emotions, 332--334 Emotion
Regulation Worksheet 1: Pros and Cons of Changing Emotions, 323 Emotion
Regulation Worksheet 2: Figuring Out What My Emotions Are Doing for Me,
326--327 Emotion Regulation Worksheet 2b: Emotion Diary, 326--327
Emotion Regulation Worksheet 3: Myths about Emotions, 332 Emotion
Regulation Worksheet 4: Observing and Describing Emotions, 335, 346
Emotion Regulation Worksheet 4a: Observing and Describing Emotions, 335,
346 Emotion Regulation Worksheet 5: Checking the Facts, 350 Emotion
Regulation Worksheet 6: Figuring Out How to Change Unwanted Emotions,
359 Emotion Regulation Worksheet 7: Opposite Action to Change Emotions,
361--362 Emotion Regulation Worksheet 8: Problem Solving to Change
Emotions, 372 Emotion Regulation Worksheet 9:

Steps for Reducing Vulnerability to Emotion Mind, 381--382 Emotion
Regulation Worksheet 10: Pleasant Events Diary, 382--383 Emotion
Regulation Worksheet 11: Getting from Values to Specific Action Steps,
387 Emotion Regulation Worksheet 11a: Getting from Values to Specific
Action Steps, 387 Emotion Regulation Worksheet 11b: Diary of Daily
Actions on Values and Priorities, 387 Emotion Regulation Worksheet 12:
Building Mastery and Coping Ahead, 392 Emotion Regulation Worksheet 13:
Putting ABC Skills Together Day by Day, 392 Emotion Regulation Worksheet
14: Practicing PLEASE Skills, 396 Emotion Regulation Worksheet 14a: Set
of Three Forms for Nightmares (Target Nightmare Experience Form, Changed
Dream Experience Form, Dream Rehearsal and Relaxation Record, 398
Emotion Regulation Worksheet 14b: Sleep Hygiene Practice Sheet, 400
Emotion Regulation Worksheet 15: Mindfulness of Current Emotions, 403
Emotion Regulation Worksheet 16: Troubleshooting Emotion Regulation
Skills, 409 Emotion Regulation Worksheet 16: Troubleshooting Problems in
Emotion Regulation, 332 Emotional intensity, 19 Emotional overload, 334
Emotional responses, 130, 205--206 Emotional vulnerability, 139
Emotions. See also Understanding and naming emotions characteristics of,
335--336 components of, 336--345 DBT model of, 6 decreasing the
frequency of unwanted emotions, 324--325 interpersonal effectiveness
skills and, 239, 268--269 nonjudgmentalness and, 202 radical acceptance
and, 463 validation and, 297 wise mind ACCEPTS (Activities,
Contributions, Comparisons, Emotions, Pushing away, Thoughts,
Sensations), 441 Empathy, 103 Employment functioning, 45t Emptiness,
45t, 215 Encouragement, 448 End of life issues, 45t Ending
relationships, 280--285. See also Building relationships and ending
destructive ones; Relationships Entering the paradox, 292 Environmental
factors. See also Social environment caregiving environment, 7--9, 10f
DBT treatment program and, 13f dialectics and, 81f, 289--290 emotion
regulation skills and, 409 format and organization of skills training
sessions, 54--55

498 • Index Environmental factors (cont.) generalization of skills and,
75 interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 239--240, 269--270
invalidation and, 305 orienting to skills training and, 140--142, 142f
when the skills did not help, 77 Environmental intervention strategies,
75, 77, 81f, 98 Envy determining the type of skills training needed, 45t
emotion regulation skills and, 354--355, 357--358, 369, 380 overview,
329 Equality, 82f, 301--302 Evaluating your options, 242. See also
Interpersonal effectiveness skills Evaluation, 200--202 Exclusion, 193
Exercise, 397--398, 434--435 Expanding awareness practice, 175-- 176
Expectations, 134--135 Experiences determining the type of skills
training needed, 45t emotion regulation skills and, 341--342, 382--391
mindfulness skills and, 209 validation and, 297 Experiential hunger,
181--182 Expertise, 50 Exposure techniques determining the type of
skills training needed, 45t dialectical strategies and, 82f emotion
regulation skills and, 362 problem solving and, 94 radical acceptance
and, 461 understanding and naming emotions and, 320 Expressions,
250--251, 342--344, 347 Extinction, 92--93, 311 Extreme arousal,
431--439, 437f Extreme emotions dialectics and, 291 emotion regulation
skills and, 403, 407--408 heterogeneous versus homogeneous groups and,
33 reducing vulnerability to emotion mind and, 321 Extreme thinking, 5

F Facial expression emotion regulation skills and, 329--330, 342,
343--344, 367 understanding and naming emotions and, 320 Facial feedback
hypothesis, 343--344 Fact checking. See Check the facts Fading
principles, 75 Fairness, 260 Family factors, 7--9, 10f, 21t Family
sessions, 75 FAST (\[be\] Fair, \[no\] Apologies, Stick to values, and
\[be\] Truthful). See also Interpersonal effectiveness skills difficult
clients and, 64 ending relationships and, 283--284 overview, 232, 242,
260--263

Fear determining the type of skills training needed, 45t emotion
regulation skills and, 354--355, 357, 368, 380 overview, 328 Feedback
describing skills and, 189 orienting to skills training and, 133 skills
training procedures and, 70--71 Feelings emotion regulation skills and,
341 validation and, 297 versus wise mind, 84 Focusing the mind type of
practice, 153, 180. See also Mindfulness skills Format of skills
training sessions, 53--57, 54t, 129 Freedom distress tolerance and,
420--421 emotion regulation skills and, 404 mindfulness of current
thoughts and, 475--476 mindfulness skills and, 217--218 radical
acceptance and, 460 Friendships, 270--276 Functional validation, 90. See
also Validation Functioning, 19

G General Handout 1: Goals of Skills Training, 127 General Handout 1a:
Options for Solving Any Problem, 127, 129 General Handout 2: Overview:
Introduction to Skills Training, 131 General Handout 3: Guidelines for
Skills Training, 131, 132 General Handout 4: Skills Training
Assumptions, 132 General Handout 5: Biosocial Theory, 138 General
Handout 6: Overview: Analyzing Behavior, 143 General Handout 7: Chain
Analysis, 144, 145 General Handout 7a: Chain Analysis, Step by Step.,
144, 145 General Handout 8: Missing-Links Analysis, 146, 147--148
General Worksheet 1: Pros and Cons of Using Skills, 127, 132 General
Worksheet 2: Chain Analysis of Problem Behavior, 144, 145--146 General
Worksheet 2a: Example: Chain Analysis of Problem Behavior, 144 General
Worksheet 3: Missing-Links Analysis, 146 Generalization of skills DBT
treatment program and, 13f relationship problem solving and, 104--105
skills training behavioral targets and, 64 skills training procedures
and, 65--66, 71--75, 73f, 74t Gentleness, 256--257 GIVE (Gentle, \[act\]
Interested, Validate, and \[use an\] Easy manner). See also
Interpersonal effectiveness skills contingency management and, 93
difficult clients and, 64 ending relationships and, 283--284

interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 276 overview, 232, 242,
255--260, 270 Giving up or giving in, 462--463 Goal identification, 232
Goals clarifying goals in interpersonal situations, 242--248, 244f
determining the type of skills training needed, 45t distress tolerance
and, 416, 420--421 goals of skills training, 127--131 interpersonal
effectiveness skills and, 239, 265 mindfulness skills and, 161--164
problem solving and, 375 skillful means and, 223--224 values and,
390--391 "Going home," 219 Going with the flow, 280 Good guy versus bad
guy dialectical tension, 85--87 Goodness, 164 Grieving, 45t, 465 Group
behavior, 103 Group leader. See also Co-leader; Skills trainer
relationship acceptance and, 49--50 relationship problem solving and,
100--103 role of, 34--35 Group skills training. See also Skills training
compared to individual skills training, 29--32 difficult clients and,
63--64 heterogeneous versus homogeneous groups, 32--34 modeling of
behavior from other members, 68--69 observing limits and, 60 open versus
closed groups, 32 relationship acceptance and, 49--50 relationship
problem solving and, 99--105 in the standard DBT program, 13 validation
and, 88 Guidelines for skills training, 131--138 Guilt determining the
type of skills training needed, 45t emotion regulation skills and,
354--355, 359, 371, 381 overview, 328 radical acceptance and, 463

H Half-smiling, 417--418, 470, 471--473. See also Reality acceptance
skills Handouts DEAR MAN skills and, 254 distress tolerance and, 420,
421, 422, 427, 431, 439--440, 442, 445--446, 450, 451--452, 466, 468,
471, 473, 477, 478, 480, 484, 486, 489 emotion regulation skills and,
323, 325, 326, 332, 335, 345, 347, 350, 359, 361, 368, 378, 381, 382,
386, 388, 392, 396, 398, 400, 403, 405, 407, 409, 410 factors reducing,
237 format and organization of skills training sessions, 55 goals of
skills training, 127 interpersonal effectiveness skills and,

Index • 499 234, 235, 241, 242, 248, 256, 263, 270--271, 276, 280,
280--281, 285, 286, 294, 306--307, 311, 314 mindfulness skills and, 161,
166, 167, 176, 188, 199, 210--211, 213--214, 214, 218, 222, 225
orienting to skills training and, 125, 131--132, 138, 143, 144, 146, 147
planning a skills training curriculum and, 28 skills training procedures
and, 68 Happiness emotion regulation skills and, 354--355 mindfulness
skills and, 161--162 overview, 329 skills for finding friends and, 271
Harm reduction approach, 479, 480-- 481. See also Dialectical abstinence
Hatred, 219 Hearing, 185, 186 Help, accepting, 133--134 Helpful
invalidation, 302--303. See also Invalidation Helplessness, 246
Heterogeneous groups, 32--34 Holding on to experiences, 181--182
Homework. See also Diary cards contingency clarification and, 95
contingency management and, 92--93 difficulty with, 77--78 failure to
complete, 78--79 generalization of skills and, 72--75, 73f, 74t
instructions for completing the DBT diary card, 74t interpersonal
effectiveness skills and, 266 review of, 71, 75--80 sharing in group,
76--77 skills training procedures and, 70 Homogeneous groups, 32--34
Hopelessness, 10f, 19, 270 Hostility, 102--103, 219 "How" skills. See
also Effectiveness practice; Mindfulness skills; Nonjudgmentalness;
One-mindfully practice effectiveness practice, 210--213 interpersonal
effectiveness skills and, 276 nonjudgmentally, 199--208 one-mindfulness,
208--210 overview, 154--155, 166, 177

I Ignoring attacks and diversions strategy, 253 Imagery burning bridges
and building new ones and, 489 IMPROVE skills, 446--447 loving kindness
and, 220 nightmare protocol, 399 Immune response, 162 IMPROVE (Imagery,
Meaning, Prayer, Relaxing, One thing in the moment, Vacation,
self-Encouragement and rethinking the situation) skills, 417, 445--450
Improving the moment, 422, 445--450 Improvisation, 195 Impulse control,
5 Impulsivity distress tolerance and, 427--428 emotion dysregulation
and, 10f

heterogeneous versus homogeneous groups and, 33 orienting to skills
training and, 139--140 standard DBT program and, 19 STOP (Stop, Take a
step back, Observe, and Proceed mindfully) skill and, 425 In vivo
behavioral rehearsal, 72 Incompleteness, 45t Indecision, 45t, 238
Individual skills training. See also Skills training compared to group
skills training, 29--32 consultation between DBT individual providers
and skills trainers, 37 DBT treatment program and, 13f determining the
type of skills training needed, 45t providers' roles and, 35--36 in the
standard DBT program, 13 Individual therapist consultation between DBT
individual providers and skills trainers, 37 incorporating skills
coaching into psychotherapy and, 39, 42 role of, 35--36, 37 working with
clients of non-DBT individual therapists, 38--39, 39f, 40f--41f, 42
Individual therapy. See also Individual skills training DBT treatment
program and, 13f, 15 incorporating skills coaching into psychotherapy
and, 40f--41f non-DBT individual therapy, 38--39, 39f, 42 in the
standard DBT program, 13 Indulgence, 225 Infant temperament, 7
Information processing, 10f Inpatient treatment incorporating DBT skills
training into psychotherapy, 42 providers' roles and, 36 schedules for
skills programs and, 108, 118 In-session modeling, 68--69. See also
Modeling of skills Instructional material, 27--28 Instructions, 67--68,
74t Integrative experience, 82 Integrative strategies, 98--105, 100t,
101t Integrity, 5 Intensity of treatment, 44, 45t Intentions, 190--191,
279 Interest, 277 Intermittent reinforcement, 311, 312. See also
Reinforcement Interpersonal dysregulation, 11 Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 1: Goals of Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills,
235 Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 2: Factors in the Way of
Interpersonal Effectiveness, 235 Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 2a:
Myths in the Way of Interpersonal Effectiveness, 235 Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 4: Clarifying Goals in Interpersonal Situations,
242 Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 5: Guidelines for Objectives

Effectiveness: Getting What You Want (DEAR MAN), 248 Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 5a: Applying DEAR MAN Skills to a Difficult
Current Interaction, 248 Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 6:
Guidelines for Relationship Effectiveness: Keeping the Relationship,
255--256 Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 6a: Expanding the V in
GIVE: Levels of Validation, 256 Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 7:
Guidelines for Self-Respect Effectiveness: Keeping Respect for Yourself,
260 Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 8: Evaluating Options for
Whether or How Intensely to Ask or Say No, 263, 265--266 Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 9: Troubleshooting: When What You Are Doing Isn't
Working, 235, 266 Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 10: Overview:
Building Relationships and Ending Destructive Ones, 270 Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 11: Finding and Getting People to Like You,
270--271 Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 11a: Identifying Skills to
Find People and Get Them to Like You, 271 Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 12: Mindfulness of Others, 276 Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 12a: Identifying Mindfulness of Others, 276 Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 13: Ending Relationships, 280--281 Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 13a: Identifying How to End Relationships, 281
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 14: Overview: Walking the Middle,
285 Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 15: Dialectics, 286
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 16: How to Think and Act
Dialectically, 286 Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 16a: Examples of
Opposite Sides That Can Both Be True, 286 Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 16b: Important Opposites to Balance, 286 Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 16c: Identifying Dialectics, 286 Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 17: Validation, 294 Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 18: A "How To" Guide to Validation, 294 Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 18a: Identifying Validation, 294 Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 19: Recovering from Invalidation, 294
Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 19a: Identifying Self-Validation,
294--295 Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 20: Strategies for
Increasing the Probability of Desired Behaviors, 306 Interpersonal
Effectiveness Handout 21: Strategies for Decreasing or Stopping
Undesired Behaviors, 306

500 • Index Interpersonal Effectiveness Handout 22: Tips for Using
Behavior Change Strategies Effectively, 306 Interpersonal Effectiveness
Handout 22a: Identifying Effective Behavior Change Strategies, 307
Interpersonal Effectiveness module, 26--29, 27t. See also Interpersonal
effectiveness skills Interpersonal effectiveness skills. See also
Behavior change skills; Building relationships and ending destructive
ones; Core interpersonal effectiveness skills; Dialects; Obtaining
objectives skillfully; Supplementary interpersonal effectiveness skills;
Validation asking or saying "no" and, 263--266, 264f building
relationships and ending destructive ones and, 270 changing behavior
and, 306--316 clarifying goals in interpersonal situations, 242--248,
244f DBT treatment program and, 14f DEAR MAN skills, 248--256 dialectics
and, 286--294 ending relationships and, 280--285 factors reducing,
237--241 GIVE (Gentle, \[act\] Interested, Validate, and \[use an\] Easy
manner) and, 255--260 goals of, 231, 235--237 loving kindness and, 221
mindfulness of others and, 276--280 orienting to skills training and,
128 overview, 12f planning a skills training curriculum and, 26--29
skills for finding friends, 270--276 therapeutic balance and, 83f
troubleshooting, 266--270 validation and, 294--306 walking the middle
path skills and, 285 Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 1: Pros and
Cons of Using Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills, 235, 281 Interpersonal
Effectiveness Worksheet 2: Challenging Myths in the Way of Interpersonal
Effectiveness, 235 Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 3: Clarifying
Priorities in Interpersonal Situations, 242 Interpersonal Effectiveness
Worksheet 4: Writing Out Interpersonal Effectiveness Script, 261
Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 4: Writing Out Interpersonal
Effectiveness Scripts, 248, 256 Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 5:
Tracking Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills, 261 Interpersonal
Effectiveness Worksheet 5: Tracking Interpersonal Effectiveness Skills
Use, 248--249, 256 Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 6: The Dime
Game: Figuring Out How Strongly to Ask or Say No, 263, 266 Interpersonal
Effectiveness Worksheet 7: Troubleshooting Interpersonal Effectiveness
Skills, 235, 266 Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 9: Mindfulness of
Others, 276 Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 10: Ending
Relationships, 281

Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 11: Practicing Dialectics, 286
Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 11a: Dialectics Checklist, 286
Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 11b: Noticing When You're Not
Dialectical, 286 Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 12: Validating
Others, 295 Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 13: Self-Validation
and Self-Respect, 261, 295 Interpersonal Effectiveness Worksheet 14:
Changing Behavior with Reinforcement, 307 Interpersonal Effectiveness
Worksheet 15: Changing Behavior by Extinguishing or Punishing It, 307
Interpersonal Handout 3: Overview: Obtaining Objectives Skillfully, 241
Interpersonal myths, 240--241 Interpersonal relationships, 5, 11. See
also Interpersonal effectiveness skills Interpersonal sensitivity, 299
Interpretations of events, 337--338, 347, 351--352, 354, 379--380
Interrupting, 273 Intimate partner violence, 20t, 21t, 284--285. See
also Violence Intuition, 170--171 Invalidation interpersonal
effectiveness skills and, 294--306 orienting to skills training and,
140, 142 recovering from, 302--306 social environment and, 8--9, 10f
Irreverent communication strategies, 81f, 96--97 Irritability, 162

J Jealousy determining the type of skills training needed, 45t emotion
regulation skills and, 354--355, 358, 370, 380 overview, 329 Joining
conversations, 275. See also Conversation skills Judgments emotion
regulation skills and, 373--374 interpersonal effectiveness skills and,
257, 278 orienting to skills training and, 133 validation and, 298--299

L Lapses, 480--481 Lateness contingency management and, 94 guidelines
for skills training and, 52 orienting to skills training and, 134
Learning, 316, 321 Length of skills modules, 129 Life-threatening
behavior, 45t Liking selectively, 274--275 Limits contingency management
and, 93--94 observing, 57--60 radical acceptance and, 454--456 Line
staff, 36 Listening, 185, 186 Loneliness, 45t Long-term goals, 239, 265,
268. See also Goals

Long-term positive events, 383, 386--391 Love compared to radical
acceptance, 462 emotion regulation skills and, 354--355, 358, 370, 381
mindfulness skills and, 218 overview, 329 Loving kindness, 128, 219--222

M Major depressive disorder, 6, 20t, 33 Managing really difficult
emotions, 12f, 129. See also Emotion regulation skills Manipulation,
256--257 Marital distress, 45t. See also Relationships Mastery emotion
regulation skills and, 382, 392--396, 393f overview, 392 reducing
vulnerability to emotion mind and, 321 Meaning dialectics and, 288--289
IMPROVE (Imagery, Meaning, Prayer, Relaxing, One thing in the moment,
Vacation, self-Encouragement and rethinking the situation) skills, 447
Meditation. See also Mindfulness skills body scan meditation, 444--445
distress tolerance and, 444--445 overview, 152--153, 165 sleep hygiene
protocol, 402 Mental disorders, 301 Mental visualizations. See Imagery
Metaphors, 292 Milieu staff, 42 Mindfulness Handout 1: Goals of
Mindfulness Practice, 161 Mindfulness Handout 1a: Mindfulness
Definitions, 161 Mindfulness Handout 2: Overview: Core Mindfulness
Skills, 166 Mindfulness Handout 3: Wise Mind: States of Mind, 167
Mindfulness Handout 3a: Ideas for Practicing Wise Mind, 167 Mindfulness
Handout 4: Taking Hold of Your Mind: "What" Skills, 176, 188 Mindfulness
Handout 4a: Ideas for Practicing, 176 Mindfulness Handout 4b: Ideas for
Practicing Describing, 188 Mindfulness Handout 4c: Ideas for Practicing
Participating, 188 Mindfulness Handout 5: Taking Hold of Your Mind:
"How" Skills, 199, 208, 210 Mindfulness Handout 5a: Ideas for Practicing
Nonjudgmentalness, 199 Mindfulness Handout 5b: Ideas for Practicing
One-Mindfulness, 208 Mindfulness Handout 5c: Ideas for Practicing
Effectiveness, 211 Mindfulness Handout 6: Overview: Other Perspectives
on Mindfulness Skills, 211 Mindfulness Handout 7: Goals of Mindfulness
Practice: A Spiritual Perspective (Optional). This is an optional
handout. Depending on the group you, 214 Mindfulness Handout 7a: Wise
Mind from a Spiritual Perspective, 218 Mindfulness Handout 8: Practicing

Index • 501 Loving Kindness to Increase Love and Compassion, 220
Mindfulness Handout 9: Skillful Means: Balancing Doing Mind and Being
Mind, 222 Mindfulness Handout 9a: Ideas for Practicing Balancing Doing
Mind and Being Mind, 222 Mindfulness Handout 10: Walking the Middle
Path: Finding the Synthesis between Opposites, 225 Mindfulness module,
26--27, 27t, 28--29. See also Mindfulness skills Mindfulness movement,
165. See also Mindfulness skills Mindfulness of thoughts, 473--476
Mindfulness skills. See also Core mindfulness skills; Supplementary
mindfulness skills burning bridges and building new ones and, 488--489
core mindfulness skills, 166 DBT treatment program and, 14f, 16 DEAR MAN
skills and, 252--253 determining the type of skills training needed, 45t
distress tolerance and, 416, 425 effectiveness practice, 210--213
emotion regulation skills and, 385--386, 403--407, 408 extreme emotions
and, 321 goals of, 161--164 "how" skills, 199--213 interpersonal
effectiveness skills and, 233 loving kindness and, 219--222 mindfulness
of current thoughts and, 474--476 mindfulness of others and, 276--280
nonjudgmentalness and, 199--208 observing skills and, 176--187, 183f
one-mindfulness, 208--210 orienting to skills training and, 128
overview, 11, 12f, 151--153, 164--165, 213--214 planning a skills
training curriculum and, 26--29 schedules for skills programs and, 108,
120 skillful means and, 222--225 for skills trainers, 158--160 spiritual
perspective and, 214--219 supplementary mindfulness skills, 155--158
therapeutic balance and, 83f validation and, 88 "what" skills and, 154,
187--192, 190f, 192--199 wise mind and, 167--171, 170f, 172--176,
218--219, 225--227 Mindfulness Worksheet 1: Pros and Cons of Practicing
Mindfulness, 161 Mindfulness Worksheet 2: Mindfulness Core Skills
Practice, 166, 167, 177, 188, 199, 208, 211 Mindfulness Worksheet 2b:
Mindfulness Core Skills Practice, 166, 167, 177, 188, 199, 208, 211
Mindfulness Worksheet 2c: Mindfulness Core Skills Calendar, 166, 167,
177, 188, 199, 208, 211 Mindfulness Worksheet 2c: Mindfulness Core
Skills Practice, 166, 167, 177, 188, 199, 208, 211 Mindfulness Worksheet
3: Wise Mind Practice, 167

Mindfulness Worksheet 4: Mindfulness "What" Skills: Observing,
Describing, Participating, 176--177, 188 Mindfulness Worksheet 4a:
Observing, Describing, Participating Checklist, 176--177, 188
Mindfulness Worksheet 4b: Observing, Describing, Participating Calendar,
176--177, 188 Mindfulness Worksheet 5: Mindfulness "How" Skills:
Nonjudgmentalness, One-Mindfulness, Effectiveness, 200, 208, 211
Mindfulness Worksheet 5a: Nonjudgmentalness, OneMindfulness,
Effectiveness Checklist, 200, 208, 211 Mindfulness Worksheet 5b:
Nonjudgmentalness, OneMindfulness, Effectiveness Calendar, 200, 208, 211
Mindfulness Worksheet 5c: Nonjudgmentalness Calendar, 200 Mindfulness
Worksheet 6: Loving Kindness, 220 Mindfulness Worksheet 7: Balancing
Being Mind with Doing Mind, 222 Mindfulness Worksheet 7a: Mindfulness of
Being and Doing Calendar, 222--223 Mindfulness Worksheet 8: Mindfulness
of Pleasant Events Calendar, 222--223 Mindfulness Worksheet 9:
Mindfulness of Unpleasant Events Calendar, 222--223 Mindfulness
Worksheet 10: Walking the Middle Path to Wise Mind, 225 Mindfulness
Worksheet 10a: Analyzing Yourself on the Middle Path, 225--226
Mindfulness Worksheet 10b: Walking the Middle Path Calendar, 226
Mindlessness, 163 Missing sessions. See also Attendance contingency
management and, 92--93 guidelines for skills training and, 51, 52
orienting to skills training and, 132, 134 relationship problem solving
and, 102 Missing-links analysis combining with a chain analysis,
148--150 orienting to skills training and, 129, 143, 146--150 overview,
126, 147 Modeling of skills, 68--69, 77, 96 Modification, 238 Mood
disorders, 18, 45t Moodiness, 333 Morality, 245--246 Motivation DBT
treatment program and, 13f emotion regulation skills and, 333 homework
and, 79 interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 238, 279 orienting to
skills training and, 136 Multifamily DBT skills training, 108, 116--117
Multitasking, 209, 210, 278 Muscle relaxation, 436--439, 437f Myths, 269

N

Naming emotions. See Understanding and naming emotions Natural
consequences, 316 Natural reinforcers, 91--92. See also Reinforcement
Negative affectivity, 7 Negative reinforcement, 309. See also
Reinforcement Negotiation, 254 Nervous system, 340 Nightmare protocol,
398--400 Noncompliance, 78--79 Nonjudgmentalness, 83f, 155, 166,
199--208 Nonverbal expression of emotion, 330--331, 367 Nurses, 36

O

Objectives effectiveness, 248--256, 263, 267--268. See also DEAR MAN
skills "Observe and describe" wind down technique, 57 Observing
emotions, 345--349. See also Emotions Observing limits, 93--94 Observing
skills distress tolerance and, 425 emotion regulation skills and,
348--349 interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 238, 276--278
mindfulness of current thoughts and, 474--476 overview, 154, 166,
176--187, 183f, 194 therapeutic balance and, 83f willfulness and, 469
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 320 Obtaining objectives
skillfully, 12f. See also Interpersonal effectiveness skills
One-mindfully practice IMPROVE (Imagery, Meaning, Prayer, Relaxing, One
thing in the moment, Vacation, self-Encouragement and rethinking the
situation) skills, 447--448 overview, 155, 166, 208--210 therapeutic
balance and, 83f Open DBT groups, 32 Opening the mind type of practice,
153, 180. See also Mindfulness skills Opinions, 297 Opposite action
emotion regulation skills and, 349, 359--361, 361--372 ending
relationships and, 284 interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 268,
286--294 problem solving and, 378--381 radical acceptance and, 465
skills trainers and, 158 understanding and naming emotions and, 319--320
Oppositional defiant disorder (ODD), 19, 21t Order of skills modules,
129 Organization of skills training sessions, 53--57, 54t Organized
groups, 275--276 Organizing DBT skills training in your practice forming
or joining a DBT team, 25--26 orienting to skills training and, 129
overview, 25, 25t

502 • Index Orientation to skills training. See also Skills training
analyzing behavior, 143 biosocial theory of emotion dysregulation and,
138--143, 142f chain analysis and, 143--146 goals of skills training
and, 127--131 guidelines for skills training and, 131--138 introducing
skills training, 131 missing-links analysis and, 146--150 overview,
125--126 Outcomes, 16 Out-of-session relationships between clients, 52.
See also Relationships Overfocusing on self, 277

P Paced breathing, 435--436. See also Breathing techniques; TIP
(Temperature, Intense exercise, Paced breathing, and Paired muscle
relaxation) skills Pain, 459--460, 465 Paired muscle relaxation,
436--439, 437f. See also Muscle relaxation; TIP (Temperature, Intense
exercise, Paced breathing, and Paired muscle relaxation) skills
Parenting orienting to skills training and, 140--141 schedules for
skills programs and, 108, 119 social environment and, 7--9, 10f
Participants, 29--32 Participating skills interpersonal effectiveness
skills and, 280 overview, 154, 166, 193--199 therapeutic balance and,
83f Passivity, 33, 462--463 Paying attention, 82f "Personal" calls,
texts, or e-mails to skills training leaders, 58 Perspective, 295
Pharmacological interventions, 18 Pharmacotherapists, 36, 37 Physical
disorders, 301 Physical illness, 396 Playing devil's advocate, 292
Pleasant events, 382--391 PLEASE skills, 321, 396--398 Positive
emotions, 320--321, 382--391 Positive experiences, 382--391
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) determining the type of skills
training needed, 45t emotion regulation skills and, 339 exposure
techniques, 94 radical acceptance and, 461 Practicing between sessions
nonjudgmentalness and, 207 observing skills and, 182, 187, 192 orienting
to skills training and, 133 wise mind and, 176 Praise, 91, 274 Prayer,
447 Preferences, 205 Presentation of new material, 56. See also Format
of skills training sessions Pretreatment sessions, 43--53, 43t, 45t--47t
Primary care providers, 36 Primary emotions, 345. See also Emotions
Priorities, 242, 265

Problem behaviors, 52 Problem solving determining the type of skills
training needed, 45t dialectical strategies and, 81f emotion regulation
skills and, 349, 353, 356, 359--361, 372--381, 377f homework and, 76
interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 232, 282 orienting to skills
training and, 127, 129--131 overview, 76, 90--95 relationship problem
solving, 99--105 steps in, 374--378, 377f understanding and naming
emotions and, 319 validation and, 296 when the skills did not help, 77
Process of skills training, 86--87 Process-observing wind-down, 57
Progress tracking, 44 Progressive muscle relaxation, 436--439, 437f
Prolonged exposure, 45t Prompting events to a problem behavior,
336--337, 347, 353--354 Pros and cons skill dialectical abstinence and,
479 distress tolerance and, 416--417, 421, 427--431, 429f emotion
regulation skills and, 409 orienting to skills training and, 127 problem
solving and, 377, 377f radical acceptance and, 466 Providers' roles
overview, 34--37 working with clients of non-DBT individual therapists,
38--39, 39f, 40f--41f, 42 Proximity, 271--272 Psychodynamic conflict, 5
Psychopathology, 10f, 19 Punishment, 92--93, 313--314 Pushing away, 181,
441

Q Quality of life determining the type of skills training needed, 45t
emotion regulation skills and, 387--392 ending relationships and, 282
quality-of-life interfering behaviors, 62

R Radical acceptance. See also Acceptance skills; Reality acceptance
skills distress tolerance and, 417, 451--466, 473--474 emotion
regulation skills and, 356 mindfulness of current thoughts and, 473--474
willfulness and, 469--470 Rapid rehearsal, 250 Reactivity, 162, 489
Reading the unsaid, 82f, 299 Reality acceptance skills. See also
Acceptance skills; Allowing the mind; Distress Tolerance skills;
Halfsmiling; Radical acceptance; Turning the mind; Willing hands;
Willingness determining the type of skills training needed, 45t distress
tolerance and, 417--418, 450--451 orienting to skills training and, 129

overview, 4--5, 12f when to use, 461--462 Reasonable mind, 153,
167--169, 226. See also Wise mind Reciprocal communication strategies,
95--96 Reciprocity, 81f, 265 Reducing vulnerability to emotion mind,
12f, 129. See also Emotion regulation skills Reflecting back, 82f,
298--299 Reinforcement addiction and, 485--486 community reinforcement
and, 418, 484--486 contingency management and, 91--92 DEAR MAN skills
and, 252 emotion regulation skills and, 333 homework and, 79--80
interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 307--311, 315 reinforcers, 70
skills training procedures and, 69--70 Reinforcement schedules, 310--311
Relapse prevention plan, 480--481 Relationship acceptance, 49--50
Relationship effectiveness, 255--256, 263 Relationship enhancement
strategies, 50--51 Relationship problem solving strategies, 99--105
Relationships. See also Building relationships and ending destructive
ones; Interpersonal effectiveness skills; Therapeutic relationship
clarifying goals in interpersonal situations, 243--245 core
interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 231--232 determining the type of
skills training needed, 45t between group members, 31--32 guidelines for
skills training and, 52 interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 265
mindfulness skills and, 209 nonjudgmentalness and, 202 orienting to
skills training and, 142 outside skills training sessions, 135 skills
for finding friends, 270--276 Relaxation, 399, 436--439, 437f Relaxing
actions, 447 Residential units, 36, 42, 108 Resiliency, 7
Respectfulness, 258 Review of homework, 55--56. See also Format of
skills training sessions Rewards, 80, 308 Rights, 265 Risk factors, 10f.
See also Vulnerability Role playing DEAR MAN skills and, 250, 251
interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 277 skills training procedures
and, 68--69 Routine, 400--402 Rule following, 87, 134--135 Rumination,
402

S Sadness determining the type of skills training needed, 45t emotion
dysregulation and, 10f emotion regulation skills and, 354--355, 358,
370, 381

Index • 503 overview, 328 radical acceptance and, 460--461, 463, 465
Safety, 284--285 Satiation, 312 Saying "no," 263--266, 264f Schedules
for skills programs, 107--109, 110--122 Schizophrenia, 6 Scripts for
exercises, 173--174 Secondary emotions, 345, 348--349. See also Emotions
Self-acceptance, 306. See also Acceptance skills Self-care, 321,
396--398 Self-consciousness, 193 Self-control, 158--159 Self-denial,
226--227 Self-disclosure, 16, 96, 273 Self-efficacy, 10f, 45t
Self-esteem, 45t Self-hatred, 10f, 220 Self-image, 5 Self-indulgence,
226--227 Self-injury determining the type of skills training needed, 45t
emotion dysregulation and, 10f providers' roles and, 38 standard DBT
program and, 21t Self-regulation, 11, 75, 101--102. See also Emotion
regulation skills Self-respect clarifying goals in interpersonal
situations, 245--246 core interpersonal effectiveness skills and,
231--232 interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 260--263, 265
Self-soothing distress tolerance and, 417, 422, 442--445 emotion
regulation skills and, 408 interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 268
invalidation and, 305 Self-validation, 5, 306 Sensations distress
tolerance and, 449--450 emotion regulation skills and, 341, 405 sleep
hygiene protocol, 402 wise mind ACCEPTS (Activities, Contributions,
Comparisons, Emotions, Pushing away, Thoughts, Sensations), 442 Sensory
awareness distress tolerance and, 449--450 emotion regulation skills
and, 408 observing skills and, 178, 184--186 radical acceptance and, 465
self-soothing and, 443 Session room, 54--55 Session times, 54
Session-beginning ritual, 55. See also Format of skills training
sessions Sexual relationships, 135 Shame determining the type of skills
training needed, 45t emotion dysregulation and, 10f emotion regulation
skills and, 354-- 355, 358--359, 370--371, 381 overview, 328 radical
acceptance and, 463

Shaping contingency management and, 91, 92 interpersonal effectiveness
skills and, 309--310 relationship problem solving and, 101--102 Sharing
in group, 76--77 Short-term goals, 239, 265, 268. See also Goals
Short-term positive events, 382--386 Should statements, 203--204, 205
Similarity, 272 Skillful means, 157, 213, 222--225. See also Mindfulness
skills Skills, 333 Skills deficit model of dysregulation, 47--48 Skills
group leaders, 34--35 Skills trainer consultation between DBT individual
providers and skills trainers, 37 difficult clients and, 63--64
guidelines for validation, 88--90 individual versus group skills
training and, 29--32 judgmentalness and, 158--159 mindfulness skills
and, 158--160 observing limits and, 59--60 providers' roles and, 34--37
relationship enhancement strategies and, 50--51 relationship problem
solving and, 99--105 roles of in the DBT treatment program, 14--15
Skills training. See also DBT skills training in general; Distress
tolerance skills; Emotion regulation skills; Group skills training;
Interpersonal effectiveness skills; Mindfulness skills; Orientation to
skills training; Structure of skills training sessions behavioral
targets, 61--65, 63t DBT treatment program and, 13f determining the type
of skills training needed, 44, 45t dialectical perspectives and, 4--5
dialectical strategies and, 82f format and organization of skills
training sessions, 53--57, 54t guidelines for, 51--53 incorporating into
psychotherapy, 39, 42 individual versus group skills training, 29--32
integrative strategies, 98--105, 100t, 101t observing limits and, 57--60
outside of standard DBT, 37--42, 39f, 40f--41f overview, 3, 11--12, 12f,
107--109 planning a skills training curriculum and, 26--29, 27t
pretreatment sessions and, 43--53, 45t, 46t--47t problem solving and,
90--95 procedures, 65--75, 73f, 74t review of homework and, 75--80
schedules for, 107--109, 110--122 selecting skills training members for
the DBT team, 26 in the standard DBT program, 13 stylistic strategies,
95--97 validation and, 87--90 working with clients of non-DBT individual
therapists, 38--39, 39f, 40f--41f, 42

Sleep hygiene protocol, 397, 398--400, 400--402 Small talk, 273
Smartphone coaching apps, 37, 72 Smells, observing skills and, 185, 186
Sobriety during sessions, 134 Social adjustment coping, 19 Social
environment, 7--9, 10f. See also Environmental factors Social isolation,
10f Social skills, 232 Solution analysis, 376--378, 377f. See also
Problem solving Sounds, 185, 186 Spacious mind, 214--215, 224 Spiritual
perspective determining the type of skills training needed, 45t
mindfulness skills and, 152--153, 155--157, 213 orienting to skills
training and, 128 overview, 214--219 Stages of treatment DBT treatment
program and, 16 determining the type of skills training needed, 44, 45t
Statements of fact, 206 Stickers, 70, 79--80 STOP (Stop, Take a step
back, Observe, and Proceed mindfully) skill, 416, 421, 424--427
Storytelling, 292 Strengthening of skills, 64, 65--66, 69--71 Structure
of skills training sessions, 43--53, 43t, 45t--47t Stylistic strategies,
81f, 95--97 Substance use or abuse. See also Alcohol use; Drug use
emotion regulation skills and, 397 guidelines for skills training and,
52 orienting to skills training and, 134 substance use disorders, 6
Suffering emotion regulation skills and, 325, 404--405 extreme emotions
and, 321 mindfulness skills and, 161--162 radical acceptance and,
459--460 validation and, 297 Suicidal behavior strategies, 99, 101t
Suicide. See also Crisis DBT treatment program and, 15 determining the
type of skills training needed, 45t emotion dysregulation and, 5
guidelines for skills training and, 52--53 heterogeneous versus
homogeneous groups and, 33 providers' roles and, 38 relationship problem
solving and, 102 skills training behavioral targets and, 62--63 standard
DBT program and, 16, 18 Supplementary distress tolerance skills when the
crisis is addiction. See Addiction Supplementary interpersonal
effectiveness skills, 12f. See also Interpersonal effectiveness skills
Supplementary mindfulness skills, 12f. See also Mindfulness skills
Support guidelines for skills training and, 51--52 orienting to skills
training and, 133, 134--135

504 • Index Supporting materials, 72 Suppressing emotions, 366, 405

T Task difficulty, 392--393, 393f Tastes, 184--186 Teams, DBT. See DBT
teams Technology, 37, 72 Tensions, dialectical, 85--87 Therapeutic
balance, 82--87, 83f Therapeutic relationship DBT treatment program and,
16 developing a collaborative commitment to do skills training and, 48
individual versus group skills training and, 32 limits of skills
training and, 57--60 pretreatment sessions and, 48--53 Therapists,
14--15 Therapy-interfering behaviors, 62--64, 63t, 65 Thoughts distress
tolerance and, 418 emotion regulation skills and, 351--352, 379--380
mindfulness of current thoughts and, 475 validation and, 297 wise mind
ACCEPTS (Activities, Contributions, Comparisons, Emotions, Pushing away,
Thoughts, Sensations), 442 Timeliness, 266 Timing, 310 TIP (Temperature,
Intense exercise, Paced breathing, and Paired muscle relaxation) skills
distress tolerance and, 417, 421, 431--439, 437f emotion regulation
skills and, 408 interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 268 sleep
hygiene protocol, 402 Tipping the temperature, 433--434. See also TIP
(Temperature, Intense exercise, Paced breathing, and Paired muscle
relaxation) skills Tolerance for distress, 130, 239 Touch, 186
Transactional view dialectics and, 289--290, 294 orienting to skills
training and, 142--143, 142f social environment and, 9, 10f Trauma, 339
Traumatic invalidation, 304. See also Invalidation Treatment planning,
97--98 Trust, 51, 279--280 Truth, 5, 288--289, 295 Tuneups, 45t Turning
the mind. See also Reality acceptance skills distress tolerance and,
417, 466--468 willfulness and, 470

U Understanding and naming emotions. See also Emotion regulation skills;
Emotions emotion regulation skills and, 344, 345--349, 365 orienting to
skills training and, 129 overview, 12f, 318--319, 323--324, 325--326
Understanding the causes, 82f. See also Causes of things Unwanted
emotions, 324--325. See also Emotions Unwanted relationships, 270 Urge
surfing, 488--489 Urges distress tolerance and, 427--429, 430 emotion
regulation skills and, 342, 365 observing skills and, 186

V Vacation, 448 Validation. See also Interpersonal effectiveness skills
dialectical strategies and, 5, 81f guidelines for, 88--90 homework and,
76 interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 233--234, 259--260, 285,
294--306 orienting to skills training and, 133 overview, 12f, 87--90
Validity, 164 Values clarifying goals in interpersonal situations,
245--246 emotion regulation skills and, 388--391 interpersonal
effectiveness skills and, 262 nonjudgmentalness and, 205--206 Verbal
expression of emotion, 330--331 Video recordings of sessions, 71--72
Violence. See also Intimate partner violence ending relationships and,
284--285 standard DBT program and, 19, 20t, 21t Visual observing, 186
Visualization, 220. See also Imagery Vocational rehabilitation, 19, 20t
Vulnerability biological vulnerabilities, 7 emotion dysregulation and,
10f emotion mind and, 168, 325 emotion regulation skills and, 320--321,
338--339

W Walking the middle path interpersonal effectiveness skills and,
233--234, 237 mindfulness skills and, 213 orienting to skills training
and, 128 overview, 225--227, 285 Web-based resources, 72 "What" skills.
See also Describing skills;

Mindfulness skills; Observing skills; Participating skills interpersonal
effectiveness skills and, 276 overview, 154, 166, 177, 187--192, 190f,
192--199 "What's the threat?" question, 470--471 Willfulness, 84--85,
468--471 Willing hands, 417--418, 471--473. See also Reality acceptance
skills Willingness. See also Reality acceptance skills distress
tolerance and, 417, 468--471 overview, 468--469 versus willfulness,
84--85 Wisdom, 217 Wise mind. See also Emotion mind; Mindfulness skills;
Reasonable mind dialectical abstinence and, 480 distress tolerance and,
417, 439--442 emotion regulation skills and, 365 ending relationships
and, 281--282 versus feelings and beliefs, 84 interpersonal
effectiveness skills and, 281--282 mindfulness skills and, 213 orienting
to skills training and, 128 overview, 153--155, 157--158, 166, 167--171,
170f, 225--227 practicing, 172--176 problem solving and, 377 spiritual
perspective and, 218--219 Withdrawal, 10f, 102--103 Work environments,
141 Worksheets distress tolerance and, 421, 427, 431--432, 439--440,
442--443, 446, 450--451, 452, 458, 466, 468, 471, 473, 477, 478, 480,
484, 486, 489 emotion regulation skills and, 323, 325, 326--327, 332,
335, 346, 350, 359, 361--362, 381--382, 382--383, 387, 392, 396, 398,
400, 403, 407, 409 factors reducing, 237 format and organization of
skills training sessions, 55 goals of skills training, 127 homework and,
79--80 interpersonal effectiveness skills and, 235, 242, 248--249, 256,
263, 271, 276, 281, 286, 294--295, 307 mindfulness skills and, 160, 161,
166, 167, 176--177, 188, 199--200, 211, 213--214, 222--223, 225--226
orienting to skills training and, 125, 132, 144, 145, 146 planning a
skills training curriculum and, 28 Worries, 269, 385--386, 402

Y "Yes, but" barrier, 349--350

Z Zen, 157


