Formulation in Psychology and Psychotherapy

The first edition of Formulation in Psychology and Psychotherapy caught
the wave of growing interest in formulation in a clinical context. This
completely updated and revised edition summarises recent practice,
research, developments and debates while retaining the features that
made the first a leading text in the field. It contains new chapters on
personal construct formulation, formulation in health settings and the
innovative practice of using formulation in teams. The book sees
formulation as a dynamic process which explores personal meaning
collaboratively and reflectively, taking account of relational and
social contexts. Two case studies, one adult and one child, illustrate
the use of formulation from the perspectives of expert clinicians from
six different theoretical positions. The book encourages the reader to
take a constructively critical perspective on the many philosophical,
professional and ethical debates raised by the process of formulating
people's problems. Among the issues explored are: • • • •

the social and political context of formulation; formulation in relation
to psychiatric diagnosis; the limitations of formulation; controversies
and debates about formulation.

This readable and comprehensive guide to the field provides a clear,
up-to-date and thought-provoking overview of formulation from a number
of perspectives, essential for clinicians working in all areas of mental
health and social care, psychology, therapy and counselling. Lucy
Johnstone is a consultant clinical psychologist and a former Programme
Director of the Bristol Clinical Psychology Doctorate. She has worked in
adult mental health settings for many years. Rudi Dallos is the Research
Director on the Clinical Psychology training programme at the University
of Plymouth. He also works as a clinical psychologist specialising in
work with adolescents and their families.

This page intentionally left blank

Formulation in Psychology and Psychotherapy

Making sense of people's problems Second edition

Edited by Lucy Johnstone and Rudi Dallos

First published 2014 by Routledge 27 Church Road, Hove, East Sussex BN3
2FA Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada by Routledge 711
Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017 Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor &
Francis Group, an informa business © 2014 Lucy Johnstone and Rudi Dallos
The right of the editors to be identified as the authors of the
editorial material, and of the authors for their individual chapters,
has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. All rights reserved. No part of
this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by
any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
publishers. Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be
trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for
identification and explanation without intent to infringe. British
Library Cataloguing in Publication Data A catalogue record for this book
is available from the British Library Library of Congress Cataloging in
Publication Data Formulation in psychology and psychotherapy :
understanding people's problems / edited by Lucy Johnstone and Rudi
Dallos. -- Second edition. pages cm Includes bibliographical references
and index. 1. Psychology--Methodology. 2. Psychotherapy--Methodology. I.
Johnstone, Lucy, editor of compilation. II. Dallos, Rudi, 1948editor of
compilation. BF38.5.J64 2013 616.89'14--dc23 2012048131 ISBN:
978-0-415-68230-5 (hbk) ISBN: 978-0-415-68231-2 (pbk) ISBN:
978-0-203-38057-4 (ebk) Typeset in Garamond 3 by Saxon Graphics Ltd,
Derby

This book is dedicated to the memory of the Bristol Clinical Psychology
Doctorate 2001--2010 and the staff, trainees and supervisors who
contributed to its critical and reflective ethos.

This page intentionally left blank

Contents

List of figures and tables List of contributors Preface to the second
edition 1

Introduction to formulation L UC Y J OH NS T ONE AND RUDI DALLOS

Formulation in psychology and psychotherapy 1 What do we mean by
formulation? 4 Team formulation 5 Differences and common factors in
formulation 5 What is the purpose of a formulation? 6 Psychodynamic 7
Cognitive-behavioural 7 Systemic 7 Integrative 8 How did the concept of
formulation arise? 9 Psychodynamic approaches 9 Cognitive-behavioural
approaches 10 Systemic approaches 11 Other therapeutic traditions 12
Best practice in formulation 12 Conclusion 13 Jack 13 Janet 15
References 16

xv xvii xx 1

viii

Contents

2

Case formulation in cognitive behavioural therapy: a principle-driven
approach

18

R O B ER T DU DLE Y AND WI LLE M KUYKE N

A principled approach to CBT case conceptualisation 18 Jack 20 Principle
1: levels of conceptualisation 20 Presenting issues 20 Perpetuating
factors 23 Precipitating factors 27 Predisposing factors: quantity of
events 30 Predisposing factors: quality of events 30 Principle 2:
collaborative empiricism 33 Principle 3: include client strengths and
conceptualise resilience 34 Janet 37 Levels of conceptualisation 37
Collaborative empiricism 38 Strengths and resilience 38 Reflections 40
Conclusions 41 Key characteristics of CBT formulation 42
Acknowledgements 42 References 42 3

Psychodynamic formulation: looking beneath the surface R O B L EI P ER

What is a psychodynamic approach? 45 Core features of a psychodynamic
approach 46 The dynamic perspective 46 The developmental perspective 49
The structural perspective 52 The adaptive perspective 54 Jack: a
psychodynamic formulation 57 A prince betrayed and disinherited 57
Reflection on the formulation 59 Towards intervention 59 Janet: a
psychodynamic formulation 61 A girl unheld 61 Reflections 62 Key
characteristics of a psychodynamic formulation 64 References 65

45

Contents

4

Systemic formulation: mapping the family dance

ix

67

R U DI DA L LO S AND JAC QUI ST E DM ON

The systemic approach 67 Symptoms and family processes 67 Core systemic
concepts 68 Formulation in systemic practice 69 Exploration of the
problem 70 Progressive hypothesising 71 Family therapy and social
constructionism 72 Use of self-reflective formulation 73 A proposed
model of systemic formulation 73 Jack: a systemic formulation 74
Deconstructing the problem 74 Problem-maintaining patterns and feedback
loops 76 Beliefs and explanations 77 Transitions, emotions, attachments
79 Contextual factors 82 Summary 83 Synthesis: a systemic formulation
for Jack 83 Janet: a systemic formulation 85 Deconstructing the problems
85 Problem-maintaining patterns and feedback loops 87 Beliefs and
explanations 87 Transitions, emotions and attachments 88 Contextual
factors 89 Synthesis: a systemic formulation for Janet 90 First
formulation 90 Second formulation 91 Comments 91 The politics of
formulation 93 Key characteristics of a systemic formulation 94
References 94 5

Formulation and narrative therapy: telling a different story D A V I D
HA R P ER AND DAVE SP E LLM AN

Formulation and narrative therapy 96 Theoretical influences on the
development of narrative therapy 96 Relating these ideas to social
constructionism 97 The assumptions of narrative therapy 98

96

x

Contents

Stretching the notion of formulation 100 Preamble to the case examples
101 Jack: a narrative therapy formulation 102 Externalising
conversations: naming the problem 102 Tracing the history of the problem
104 Exploring the effects of the problem 105 Situating the problem in
context: deconstruction 105 Unique outcomes 106 Tracing the history and
meaning of the unique outcomes and naming an alternative story 107
Re-membering conversations 108 Therapeutic documents 108 Expanding the
conversation: leagues and teams 109 Outsider-witness groups and
definitional ceremonies 110 To formulate or not to formulate? 110 Janet:
a narrative therapy formulation 112 The context of the referral 112
Collaboration 112 Externalisation 114 Key characteristics of a narrative
therapy approach to formulation 116 Acknowledgements 116 Notes 117
References 117 6

Reformulating the impact of social inequalities: power and social
justice L Y NN M C C L ELLAND

What is a social inequalities approach? 121 What are social
inequalities? 122 Social inequalities and mental health 122 Critical
evaluation of the 'evidence base' 124 Power and inequality 126
Reflecting real-life diversity and recognising difference 127 Making
Jack more visible: critical formulation 128 Collaborative formulation:
situating Jack's experiences 129 Dialogue: 'A few lines about a world of
trouble' 129 Critical reflections on the discussion 131 Masculinity as
problematic 131 Formulating power 132 Social justice and empowerment
potentials 133

121

Contents

xi

Making Janet more visible: critical formulation 134 Femininity as
problematic 134 Formulating power 135 Restoring meaning through making
socio-cultural context visible 136 Reflexive practice 138 Key
characteristics of formulation from a social inequalities perspective
139 Acknowledgements 139 References 139 7

Formulation in personal and relational construct psychology: seeing the
world through clients' eyes D A V I D WI N T ER AND HARRY P ROC T E R

Personal Construct Psychology 145 Personal construct formulation 147
Diagnostic constructs 148 Covert construing 148 Structure of construing
149 Strategies of construing 149 Control 150 'Emotions' 150 Dependency
151 Content of construing 151 Developments in the personal construct
view of disorder 151 Relational extension of PCP 152 Relationality and
levels of interpersonal construing 153 Personal construct assessment
methods 153 Interviews 153 Self-characterisation 154 Repertory grid
technique 154 Qualitative grids and the 'bowtie' 155 Tracing of
construct implications 155 Jack and Janet 155 Jack 156 Validational
history 156 Jack's constructs 156 Structure and process of construing
157 Constructs of transition 157 Towards intervention 158

145

xii

Contents

Janet 161 Monadic construing 161 Dyadic construing 164 Triadic
construing 167 Discussion 167 Key characteristics of Personal Construct
Psychology formulation 168 Acknowledgements 169 References 169 8

Integrative formulation in theory

173

R U DI DA L LOS, JAC QUI ST E DM ON AND LUC Y JOH NSTO NE

Integrative formulations 173 Eclecticism 175 Conceptual synthesis 176
Some reflections: implicit integration in practice 178 Weerasekera's
framework 179 Jack: formulation using Weerasekera's framework 180
Assessment 180 Advantages and limitations of the Weerasekera framework
and the 4 Ps 181 Integrative formulating: towards some principles in
practice 184 Integration through formulating in the therapeutic
relationship 186 Formulating as an active process 186 Personal meaning
as the central integrating factor in formulation 186 Personal
development and integration 187 Checklist of best practice integrative
formulation 187 Summary 187 References 188 9

Integrative formulation in practice: a dynamic, multi-level approach R U
DI DA L LOS AND JAC QUI ST E DM ON

Formulating and the therapeutic relationship 191 Hypothetical
conversation with Jack 193 Attachment Narrative Therapy (ANT)
formulation 199 Integration based on a conceptual synthesis of
complementary models 200 Connections and differences between systemic,
attachment and narrative therapeutic models 201 ANT formulation for Jack
204

191

Contents

xiii

Jack 205 Attachments and systemic processes 208 Cultural contexts and
narratives 209 Integration 210 Implications for interventions 211 The
context in which we practise 212 Summary 214 Key characteristics of
integrative formulation 214 References 215 10 Using formulation in teams
L UC Y J OH NS T ONE

Defining the team formulation approach 217 Co-constructing a team
formulation in response to a particular request 217 Facilitating regular
formulation meetings for the whole team 218 Integrating formulation into
the work of the team and the service at every level 218 What do we know
about the benefits of team formulation? 219 Jack: a tentative team
formulation 222 Comment on the team formulation 223 Intervention plan
based on the team formulation 224 Team formulation letter to Jack 225
Reflection on the team formulation and intervention plan 227 Essential
characteristics of a team formulation 228 Transference and
counter-transference between service user and team 229 An attachment
perspective on the way the client uses/interacts with the psychiatric
service as a whole 229 Psychological framing of medical interventions
230 Psychological framing of 'symptoms' including 'psychosis' 230
Awareness of social factors, such as class, gender, housing, employment
etc 230 Influence of the 'mental patient' role 231 Possible role of
trauma and abuse 231 Possible re-traumatising role of services 233 Team
formulation in practice 233 Useful concepts in team formulation 234
Facilitating a formulation meeting 234 Team formulation for culture
change 236

216

xiv

Contents

Summary 239 Acknowledgements 239 References 239 11 Using integrative
formulation in health settings

243

S A M A NT H A C OLE

Challenges and considerations in formulation in health settings 243
Additional theoretical influences on health formulation 247 Health
beliefs and illness representations 248 Coping theory 249
Cultural/societal context 249 Cognitive development and health-related
understanding 250 Janet: a perspective from the health context 251
Towards intervention 255 Reflections 256 Key characteristics of
formulation in health settings 257 References 257 12 Controversies and
debates about formulation

260

L UC Y J OH NST ONE

Jack and Janet: the formulations 260 Formulations: are they
evidence-based? 260 Formulations: truth versus usefulness 263
Formulations: useful to whom? 264 Useful to the client? 264 Harmful to
the client? 266 Useful to the therapist? 270 Useful to professions? 271
Formulation versus psychiatric diagnosis 272 Are formulations
individualising? 277 What would a formulation-based system look like?
279 Can anyone construct formulations? Do we need them at all? 281 So
what are formulations then? 282 Summary 283 Jack and Janet: an update
285 Acknowledgements 285 References 285 Index

290

Figures and tables

Figures 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 3.1 3.2 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6
4.7 4.8 4.9 4.10 4.11 4.12 4.13 4.14

Illustration of an initial cognitive model 23 Jack's presenting problems
mapped onto a simple descriptive formulation 24 Perpetuating factors 25
Jack's perpetuating factors 26 An illustration of a longitudinal
formulation 28--29 Jack's longitudinal formulation 32 Use of cognitive
framework to identify use of strengths to overcome difficulties 35
Mary's perpetuating factors 40 The triangle of conflict 48 The triangle
of person combined with the triangle of conflict (adapted from Molnos,
1984) 51 Attempted solutions 70 Genogram of Jack's family system 76
Circularity indicating core pattern maintaining the problems 77 Scaling
technique to explore family members' positions on core family dimensions
78 Sculpt with shapes indicating pattern of emotional relationships
before dad left the family 80 Sculpt with shapes indicating pattern of
emotional relationships after dad left the family 80 The transition to a
family--hospital system 81 Process maintaining the definition of Jack as
'ill' 82 Family therapy and reflecting teams -- sharing formulations 83
Janet's family tree 86 Problem-maintaining cycle between Janet and Mary
87 Sculpt: when Janet's father Colin was with the family 89
Professional--family dependency cycle 90 Escalating pattern of distrust
between Mary and social services 92

xvi

6.1 7.1 7.2 7.3 7.4 8.1 8.2 9.1 9.2

Figures and tables

Map of social inequalities Hypothetical repertory grid analysis for Jack
Perceiver element grid: Janet's family (hypotheses in italics) Perceiver
dyad grid: Janet's family (hypotheses in italics) Hypothetical 'bowtie'
diagram of construing between Mother and Janet Weerasekera's grid
Illustration of the use of Weerasekera's grid for Jack and his family
Family patterns, attachments and narratives A contextual dynamic view of
integrative formulation

123 160 162 165 166 180 182 209 213

Table 2.1

The five Ps of CBT formulation

21

Contributors

Samantha Cole is a clinical psychologist working across the lifespan in
acute hospitals in Bristol. Her main interests are in psychological
approaches to pain management, health-related appearance concerns,
procedural anxiety and end-of-life issues. She has conducted research in
formulation and contributed to conferences, workshops and professional
guidelines related to integrated formulation with healthcare teams. Rudi
Dallos is Professor and Research Director on the Plymouth University
Doctorate in Clinical Psychology. He works as a clinical psychologist
and family therapist in an early intervention family therapy service. He
has developed an integrative therapeutic model combining systemic,
attachment and narrative frameworks (Attachment Narrative Therapy,
2006). His research includes explorations of family dynamics and
attachment themes and process of triangulation in families. He has also
authored several books, including 'Reflective Practice in Psychotherapy
and Counselling' with Jacqui Stedmon. Robert Dudley is the Degree
Programme Director for the Doctorate of Clinical Psychology course at
Newcastle University, and a Consultant Clinical Psychologist and he also
works in an Early Intervention in Psychosis service. As a researcher he
is interested in improving our understanding of the processes that lead
a person to experience distressing psychotic symptoms like voices or
visual hallucinations, and in using CBT formulation to aid the selection
of the optimal interventions. This work on formulation has been shaped
by a rewarding collaboration with colleagues Willem Kuyken and Christine
Padesky. David Harper worked as a clinician in the NHS for a decade
before moving, in 2000, to the University of East London where he is
currently Reader in Clinical Psychology. He has published a number of
articles and book chapters. In addition he co-authored Deconstructing
Psychopathology (Sage, 1995), co-edited Qualitative Research Methods in
Mental Health and Psychotherapy (Wiley, 2012) and co-authored
Psychology, Mental Health and

xviii

Contributors

Distress (Palgrave MacMillan, 2013). He also works as a Consultant
Clinical Psychologist in Newham as part of the Systemic Consultation
Service. Lucy Johnstone is a consultant clinical psychologist in an
Adult Mental Health service in South Wales and former Programme Director
of the Bristol Clinical Psychology Doctorate. She is the author of Users
and Abusers of Psychiatry: A critical look at psychiatric practice
(Routledge 2000) and a number of other articles and chapters taking a
critical perspective on psychiatric practice. She is lead author of the
Division of Clinical Psychology Good Practice Guidelines on the Use of
Psychological Formulation (DCP, 2011) and a regular trainer and
conference speaker. Willem Kuyken works as a researcher, trainer and
clinician at the Mood Disorders Centre in Exeter. His research and
clinical work specialise in CBT approaches to recurrent depression. A
particular theme of his work is exploring how therapists develop and
share conceptualisations. After completing his PhD and clinical training
he worked as a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Center for Cognitive Therapy,
University of Pennsylvania for two years with Aaron T. Beck
(1997--1999). Since 1999 he has worked in Exeter, England where he
co-founded the Mood Disorders Centre, a research, clinical and training
centre. He has published widely on case conceptualisation, including
co-authoring the book Collaborative Case Conceptualization with
Christine Padesky and Rob Dudley. Rob Leiper is a Consultant Clinical
Psychologist and Psychoanalytic Psychotherapist. His career has focussed
clinically on the development of integrative specialist psychotherapy
services. He has recently retired from leading a pilot project on the
treatment of personality disordered offenders in Oxleas NHS Trust and is
in private practice in Scotland and South Africa. Lynn McClelland is a
Clinical Psychologist working in Torbay CAMHS and teaching on the Exeter
DClinPsy programme. She teaches and supervises clinical and research
work in the area of critical community psychology, diversity, and
reflexive organisational practice. Harry Procter retired from the NHS
seven years ago; he has continued to devote his time to developing and
teaching his constructivist approach to working with children and adults
and their families, teams and organisations. Recently he has completed
papers on the nature of the construct, reflective practice, developing
the theory underlying Qualitative Grids and their application in
different settings and different clinical problems as well as in
exploration of poetry and drama. He is interested in the philosophical
background of constructivism and is researching the work of Charles S.
Peirce whose work provides a fascinating metaframework for looking at
and understanding constructivist approaches.

Contributors

xix

Dave Spellman is a Consultant Clinical Psychologist with Lancashire Care
NHS Foundation Trust. He qualified in Liverpool in 1988 and works in a
multi-agency team with children who are looked after, adopted and their
families and carers across East Lancashire. Jacqui Stedmon is Programme
Director for the Doctoral Training Programme in Clinical Psychology at
the University of Plymouth. She has a clinical interest in paediatric
psychology and bereavement in children and young people. As well as
working with systems and families she is keen to promote reflective
practice in clinical psychology. David Winter is Professor of Clinical
Psychology and Programme Director of the Doctorate in Clinical
Psychology at the University of Hertfordshire. He has applied personal
construct psychology in National Health Service settings for many years,
and has published extensively in this area and on psychotherapy
research. His books include Personal Construct Psychology in Clinical
Practice (Routledge, 1992) and Personal Construct Psychotherapy:
Advances in Theory, Practice and Research (with Linda Viney, Whurr,
2005). He is a Fellow of the British Psychological Society, and has
chaired its Psychotherapy Section, as well as the Experiential
Constructivist Section and Research Committee of the UK Council for
Psychotherapy.

Preface to the second edition

A formulation draws upon psychological theory in order to create a
working hypothesis or 'best guess' about the reasons for a client's
difficulties, in the light of their relationships and social contexts
and the sense they have made of the events in their lives. Formulations
are co-constructed with clients, and their main purpose is to inform the
intervention. Formulation has become one of the central emerging issues
in psychotherapy and mental health practice, and the contributors are
all experienced clinicians who are at the leading edge of developments
in theory and practice. The first edition has become a standard text for
clinical psychologists and widely read by other professionals, both in
training and qualified. This new edition formulates two client stories
from six different theoretical traditions: CBT, systemic, psychodynamic,
narrative and social inequalities, as before, with personal construct
psychology as an addition. The two completely revised chapters on
Integrative Formulation explore the issue of combining models through
the framework of the evolving therapeutic relationship. This edition is
the first book to provide an overview of the innovative practice of
using formulation in teamwork. There is a new chapter on formulating in
physical health settings. The final chapter is a thought-provoking
update and overview of emerging issues such as formulation and culture,
formulation and research, benefits and limitations of formulation, and
formulation in relation to psychiatric diagnosis. Feedback from the
first edition suggests that it has succeeded in its aim of being
accessible and comprehensive while encouraging the reader to take a
constructively critical perspective on the many philosophical,
professional, clinical and ethical debates raised by formulation. It
provides a lively, challenging and clinically informed overview of the
subject, enabling both experienced and novice clinicians to enhance
their knowledge and skills.

Chapter 1

Introduction to formulation Lucy Johnstone and Rudi Dallos

Formulation in psychology and psychotherapy Formulation is a topic that
is continuing to attract attention in psychology, psychotherapy,
counselling and psychiatry. It is a defining competency of the
profession of clinical psychology (Division of Clinical Psychology,
2010), which has recently published best practice guidelines for its
members (DCP, 2011.) It is also listed as a skill in the Health and Care
Professions Council regulations for health, educational, forensic,
counselling, and sports and exercise psychologists (Health Professions
Council, 2009), and in the curriculum for psychiatrists' training in the
UK (Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2010). However, although it is
arguably central to the implementation of any psychological
intervention, its conceptual and empirical basis remains to be firmly
established. It has until recently been a neglected area of research,
training and publication, especially in the areas of complex and
integrative formulation. The most relevant early publications are
Persons (1989) Cognitive Therapy in Practice; Bruch and Bond (1998)
Beyond Diagnosis: Case Formulation Approaches in Cognitive Behaviour
Therapy; Eells (2006a) Handbook of Psychotherapy Case Formulation;
Weerasekera (1996) Multiperspective Case Formulation; and Lombardo and
Nezu (2004) Cognitive-Behavioral Case Formulation and Treatment Design.
Since the first edition of this book, they have been joined by other
texts including Clinical Case Formulations (Ingram, 2006); Case
Formulation in Cognitive Behaviour Therapy (Tarrier, 2006); Assessment
and Case Formulation in Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (Grant et al.,
2008); Behavioural Case Formulation and Intervention (Sturmey, 2008);
Collaborative Case Conceptualization (Kuyken et al., 2009); and
Constructing Stories, Telling Tales (Corrie and Lane, 2010). All of
these are useful texts, but are written by psychiatrists with a medical
readership in mind (Weerasekera); are oriented towards an American
audience and healthcare system (Eells, Weerasekera, Ingram); or are
written from a CBT perspective only (Bruch and Bond; Persons; Tarrier;
Sturmey; Kuyken et al.). With the exception of Corrie and Lane, none of
them covers the newer therapeutic traditions, and nor do they give a
critical overview of the wider issues raised by the theory and practice
of formulation. This book is an attempt

2

Lucy Johnstone and Rudi Dallos

to fill those gaps. Feedback from the first edition suggests that it has
been useful to trainee and qualified clinicians from a wide range of
helping professions and therapeutic orientations. We have organised the
book around a number of central themes which run through the various
chapters, and are brought together in the chapter on Integration and in
the final overview and reflection. The themes are detailed below.
Formulation and collaboration. Is formulation something that we do to,
or with, clients? If formulation is the starting point for the whole
process of therapy, this has crucial implications for the whole way in
which the therapy proceeds. How important is it to ensure the client's
genuine involvement right from the start, and how can we promote this in
the process of formulation? Formulation and reflective practice. The
notion of reflective practice is becoming increasingly important in all
therapeutic traditions; that is, the necessity of being aware of one's
own thoughts, feelings and reactions as a therapist as well as one's own
position in terms of professional status, gender, class, ethnicity and
so on, and how these impact upon the therapeutic process. How might
these ideas be taken on board in formulation? What kind of biases is
formulation open to, and how can we minimise them? How much overlap is
there between formulation and reflective practice? Formulation and the
therapeutic relationship. Linked to the above are general questions
about power and control in therapy, and in whose interests the therapy,
or the formulation, operates. This leads us to ask questions such as who
has the 'problem', how and when we share formulations with clients, and
whether it is advisable to do so or perhaps not to do so in particular
clinical situations. It also highlights an important distinction between
formulation as an object or event, and formulating as a process which is
embedded within the therapeutic relationship itself. Formulation and
ethical practice. Questions about power, bias, confidentiality and so on
raise the issue of ethics and best practice. They imply that
formulations can be harmful, as well as simply not helpful. How can we
take steps to avoid this possibility, and what best practice guidelines
might we draw up in relation to both formulation and formulating?
Formulation and integration. As the following chapters will show, there
are as many different approaches to formulation as there are therapies,
although there is also a recent trend towards therapeutic integration,
with all traditions being more open to borrowing ideas and concepts from
each other. Is it possible to combine the strengths of various different
approaches in order to develop integrated formulations, and how might
this be done? Formulation and psychiatric diagnosis. There is an ongoing
debate about how formulation differs from psychiatric diagnosis. Is it a
replacement for, or an addition to, the more traditional way of matching
clients to treatments? Or is it trying to achieve something rather
different, perhaps a more individualised and tentative working
hypothesis?

Introduction to formulation

3

Formulation and context. Different therapies take different positions on
what is included in the formulation. Do we refer mainly to individual
thoughts, feelings and behaviours; do we include family and
institutional settings as well; and/or do we also look at much broader
social and political contexts? And if the latter, how do we integrate
these into our understandings of our clients' difficulties? Where does
the 'problem' reside, and how can we come to a shared view about this
which will allow constructive work to be carried out? Formulation and
culture. One aspect of formulation is, of course, ethnicity and culture.
How can we ensure that cultural identities and values are fully
incorporated into the process of formulation? What constitutes a
'problem' as opposed to a cultural variation in acceptable behaviour?
More generally, formulation is itself a concept that has arisen within a
particular culture. To what extent does this limit its usefulness beyond
that culture, and is there any way of compensating for this?
Formulation, evaluation and evidence. This brings us on to some more
fundamental debates about the nature and scientific status of
formulations. Can they in some sense be described as 'correct' or
'true', or are they best viewed in terms of their usefulness to the
client? In either case, how might we evaluate this, and whose view
(therapist or client) counts most? What kind of research has been
carried out to date and what kind is needed in the future? Do we need
formulation at all? Finally, we should not be afraid to ask fundamental
questions about the value and place of formulation. As will be seen in
the chapters on social inequalities and social constructionism, not
everyone is convinced that formulation is an essential part of
therapeutic work. Is it simply rhetoric, politically useful as part of a
claim to expertise and professional status? Could any non-professional
do as well -- or perhaps better? Indeed, is it possible not to formulate
-- in our work and in our everyday lives? Can we take anything
meaningful and valuable from the debates that all parties would be able
to agree with, and if so what might that be? Our themes, then, are
threads running throughout the chapters, which are organised around the
stories of two clients -- Jack, a young man in his mid-twenties, and
Janet, a child aged nine. Their difficulties are formulated from a
number of different perspectives in turn: CBT, psychodynamic and
systemic, which represent mainstream therapeutic approaches; and social
inequality and social constructionist viewpoints, which are more recent
developments. This edition also includes a chapter on formulating within
Personal Construct Therapy, which emerged from within the constructivist
tradition, or in other words 'the study of how human beings create
systems of meaning in making sense of and acting in the world'. Readers
will be able to gain a clear sense of how to formulate within each
tradition, and the respective strengths and limitations of the different
approaches. There then follows a chapter on the general principles
underpinning integrated formulations. Integration is a key theme in two
other new chapters, one on 'Using integrative formulation in health
settings' and one on an

4

Lucy Johnstone and Rudi Dallos

innovative use of formulation which is rapidly growing in popularity,
'Using formulation in teams'. Finally, we present a summary and critical
overview of the themes of the book, in order to come to some tentative
conclusions about the place of formulation in therapeutic work. What do
we mean by formulation? Approaches such as CBT, psychodynamic theory and
so on, are broad, general sets of explanations that draw on their own
characteristic ideas and concepts; for example, negative automatic
thoughts in CBT or the unconscious in psychodynamic therapy. A
formulation takes these general theories and applies them to a
particular individual and their difficulties. As already discussed, the
term 'formulation' can be understood as both an event and a process. In
the former sense, which is commonly assumed on training programmes and
in the literature, the formulation is an 'object' or event that often
takes a concrete form -- for example, a written assignment, a letter to
the referrer, or a diagram given to the service user. Most of the
research into formulation is based on this understanding (see chapter
12). However, formulation as a recursive process of suggestion,
discussion, reflection, feedback and revision that is part of the
moment-to-moment process of therapy may be the more common clinical
reality. Most of the definitions are, like the ones below, based on the
assumption of 'formulation-as-an-event'. (See Corrie and Lane, 2010:
10--12 for a fuller list.) It may be useful to bear in mind the themes
outlined above as we reflect on them: Formulation is ... a provisional
explanation or hypothesis of how an individual comes to present with a
certain disorder or circumstance at a particular point in time.
(Weerasekera, 1996: 4) A formulation is the tool used by clinicians to
relate theory to practice ... It is the lynchpin that holds theory and
practice together ... Formulations can best be understood as hypotheses
to be tested. (Butler, 1998: 2, 4) A psychotherapy case formulation is a
hypothesis about the causes, precipitants and maintaining influences of
a person's psychological, interpersonal and behavioral problems. (Eells,
2006b: 4) Psychological formulation is the summation and integration of
the knowledge that is acquired by the assessment process that may
involve psychological, biological and systemic factors and procedures.
The

Introduction to formulation

5

formulation will draw on psychological theory and research to provide a
framework for describing a client's problems or needs, how it developed
and is being maintained. (Division of Clinical Psychology, 2010: 5) A
psychodynamic formulation: makes a statement about the nature of the
patient's problems or difficulties, usually in terms of repeated
maladaptive patterns occurring in relationships ... Makes an inference
as to how these are related to the patient's internal world, including
unconscious conflicts ... Links the above (if possible) with historical
information in an explanatory model. (McGrath and Margison, 2000: 2)
Thus, the common elements are that a formulation provides a hypothesis
about a person's difficulties, which draws from psychological theory. We
may wish to note that what seems to be missing from these definitions is
the viewpoint and role of the service user in developing the formulation
-- in other words, formulation as a shared production that is based on
personal meaning. These aspects, along with the sense of
'formulation-as-a-process', are captured by Harper and Moss's phrase 'a
process of ongoing collaborative sense-making' (2003: 8); and by Corrie
and Lane's phrase 'the co-construction of a narrative that provides a
specific focus for a learning journey' (2010: 24). The Division of
Clinical Psychology Good Practice Guidelines have a similar definition
(DCP, 2011: 2): Formulation ... summarises and integrates a broad range
of biopsychosocial causal factors. It is based on personal meaning and
constructed collaboratively with service users and teams. Team
formulation

A recent development is the use of formulation in teamwork, in order to
facilitate a group or team of professionals to develop a shared
understanding of a service user's difficulties. Team formulations can,
like individual ones, be based either on specific therapeutic approaches
or on an integrative model. The slightly different emphases and uses of
this approach are discussed further in chapter 10. Differences and
common factors in formulation Formulations from the various therapeutic
traditions differ in terms of: •

the factors they see as most relevant (thoughts, feelings, behaviours,
social circumstances, etc.)

6

Lucy Johnstone and Rudi Dallos

•

the explanatory concepts they draw on (schemas, the unconscious,
discourses, etc); the emphasis they place on reflexivity; the degree to
which they adopt an expert as opposed to a collaborative stance; their
position in relation to psychiatric diagnosis; their position about the
'truth' versus 'usefulness' of the formulation; the way that the
formulation is developed, shared and used within therapy.

• • • • •

These differences are explored more fully in the subsequent chapters,
each of which concludes with a bullet-point summary of the
characteristic features of formulation within that particular
therapeutic tradition. However, all formulations have the following
features in common, in that they: • • • • •

summarise the client's core problems; indicate how the client's
difficulties may relate to one another, by drawing on psychological
theories and principles; suggest, on the basis of psychological theory,
why the client has developed these difficulties, at this time and in
these situations; give rise to a plan of intervention which is based in
the psychological processes and principles already identified; are open
to revision and re-formulation.

In addition, as already noted, the DCP (2011) guidelines emphasise that
'These unique individual stories are centrally concerned with the
personal meaning to the service user of the events and experiences of
their lives'. As well as drawing on the evidence, formulations 'require
a kind of artistry that also involves intuition, flexibility and
critical evaluation of one's experience'. The clinician is thus required
to balance 'psychological theory/principles/ evidence on the one hand,
and personal thoughts, feelings and meanings on the other ... in order
to develop a shared account that indicates the most helpful way forward'
(DCP, 2011: 7). The assumption is that this process will demonstrate
that however unusual, distressing, overwhelming or confusing a service
user's experiences are, 'at some level it all makes sense' (Butler,
1998: 2). What is the purpose of a formulation? Again, there are a
number of different but complementary views on this.

Introduction to formulation

7

Psychodynamic

The formulation explains how and why the patient's equilibrium has
become disturbed and how the problems or symptoms have arisen and are
maintained. From it, a logical course of therapy can be deduced, taking
into account the probable consequences of change (losses and gains) and
the likelihood of achieving change. The formulation, therefore, serves
both as a map for therapy and a guide to which map to choose (Aveline,
1999: 202). Cognitive-behavioural

A formulation ... 1. relates all the client's complaints to one another,
2. explains why the individual developed these difficulties, and 3.
provides predictions concerning the client's behaviour given any
stimulus. (Meyer and Turkat, 1979: 261) (Case formulation's) purpose is
both to provide an accurate overview and explanation of the patient's
problems that is open to verification through hypothesis testing, and to
arrive collaboratively with the patient at a useful understanding of
their problem that is meaningful to them ... The case formulation is
then used to inform treatment or intervention by identifying key targets
for change. (Tarrier and Calam, 2002: 312) Systemic

By hypothesising we refer to the formulation by the therapist of a
hypothesis based upon the information he possesses regarding the family
he is interviewing. The hypothesis establishes a starting point for his
investigation as well as his verification of the validity of the
hypothesis. If the hypothesis is proved false, the therapist may form a
second hypothesis based upon the information gathered during the testing
of the first. (Palazzoli et al., 1980: 4) Formulation ... is not seen as
something that the therapist does to the family but as something that
they do with the family ... a co-constructional process whereby the
therapist, supervision team and the family members come to jointly
develop new formulations of their problems. The process of formulation
itself is seen not as an objective process, but as a perturbation which
starts to change the family system. The process of how formulation is
undertaken, the questions that are asked, when and how they are asked,
are all seen as having the potential to bring about significant changes.
(Dallos and Stedmon, this book, chapter 4)

8

Lucy Johnstone and Rudi Dallos

Integrative

Formulation ... is defined as a provisional explanation or hypothesis of
how an individual comes to present with a certain disorder or
circumstances at a particular point in time. A number of factors may be
involved in understanding the etiology of the disorder or condition.
These include biological, psychological and systemic factors ... All
these variables interact under certain conditions to produce a specific
condition or phenomenon ... A comprehensive formulation then needs to
examine all three models carefully. (Weerasekera, 1996: 4) Butler (1998:
9) gives a detailed summary of the purposes of formulation: •

• •

• •

• •

•

Clarifying hypotheses and questions: 'Therapists should work with a
formulation in mind right from the start ... they guide questioning, and
open the therapist's mind to the kind of understanding from which
effective treatment strategies can be derived, applied, and evaluated.'
Understanding: 'Providing an overall picture or map: formulations, just
like maps, provide an overall view ... of something that it is not
possible to see all at once.' Prioritising issues and problems:
'Formulation ... helps to differentiate what is essential from what is
secondary in a general sense. It also helps in a more particular sense
to decide which issues or problems should be prioritised.' Planning
treatment strategies and selecting specific interventions: 'The way in
which a problem is formulated determines what should be done about it.'
Predicting responses to strategies and interventions: predicting
difficulties. 'Formulation ... helps to predict the effect of the
intervention ... and to predict the stumbling blocks and difficulties
that will be encountered during therapy.' Determining criteria for
successful outcome: 'A formulation provides the basis for hypotheses
about what needs to change for someone to feel better, or the goals of
therapy in the broad sense of the term.' Thinking about lack of
progress; trouble-shooting: 'When lack of progress lead to frustration,
and the reactions of both the patient and the therapist interfere with
subsequent progress, including these factors in the reformulation can
reveal ways of overcoming them.' Overcoming bias: 'Working with a
formulation that can be explained to others provides a check on the use
of too much speculation and too many far-fetched inferences.'

Introduction to formulation

9

The essential elements here would seem to be helping to select and guide
the interventions. Again, this raises the questions of who draws up the
formulation and in whose interests it operates. Is formulation something
done by the therapist to the client, and how does this fit in with the
broader therapeutic relationship? We might also want to ask about the
role of reflexivity -- the therapist's awareness of their own process
and position -- and the wider social context within which the client
lives and the problem is construed. We should also remember that a
formulation may indicate that no intervention is required -- or that the
identified client is not the location of the 'problem'. Formulation can
also be a powerful intervention in its own right, and may be sufficient
to enable a client to move forward with a richer understanding of their
dilemmas and difficulties and without professional support. Recent work
suggests that formulation may serve other purposes including: • • • • •
• • • • •

Noticing gaps in the information Framing medical interventions Ensuring
that a cultural understanding has been incorporated Helping the service
user (and carer) to feel understood and contained Helping the therapist
to feel contained Strengthening the therapeutic alliance Encouraging
collaborative work with the service user (and carer) Emphasising
strengths as well as needs Normalising problems; reducing service user
(and carer) self-blame Increasing the service user's sense of agency,
meaning and hope (DCP, 2011:8)

Additional benefits have been reported from the use of formulation in
teamwork, including achieving a consistent team approach to
intervention; drawing on the expertise of all team members; minimising
disagreement and blame within teams; raising staff morale; and
facilitating culture change (DCP, 2011: 9; and see chapter 10). How did
the concept of formulation arise? The answer to this question varies
according to the therapeutic tradition in question. Psychodynamic
approaches

The earliest psychotherapy formulations originate from Freud's case
studies, and draw on the psychoanalytic concepts of the unconscious, the
transference, defence mechanisms, and the id, ego and superego (Bateman
and Holmes, 1995). Although Freud did not use the term formulation, this
was a way of

10

Lucy Johnstone and Rudi Dallos

explaining symptoms in psychological terms as having both a meaning
(often symbolic) and a function (classically, meeting instinctual
needs). 'Psychodynamic' is a general term for approaches that draw on
psychoanalytic ideas and assumptions, but the field is a very wide one,
and includes significant later developments such as object relations
theory, self psychology and attachment theory (see chapter 3). Each of
these brings its own characteristic emphasis, which is reflected in the
process of formulation. During the initial assessment interview, which
is seen as being of crucial importance, the psychodynamic therapist will
be gathering information and looking for the client's ability to form a
good working alliance, to make use of interpretations, and to be in
touch with their feelings (Bateman and Holmes, 1995). He or she will be
looking for important factors in the past, for patterns in
relationships, and for the key defences used by the client. From this, a
psychodynamic formulation of the client's difficulties, which would
typically be based on the 'triangle of person' (see chapter 3) -- that
is, the links between the client's current relationships, the
relationship with their parents, and the relationship with the therapist
-- will be developed. Elements of this may be shared with the client at
the end of the first meeting in order to assess their response and hence
their ability to work psychodynamically. The scientific status of
psychoanalysis and its derivatives has been a subject of heated debate
for many years, and was part of the impetus for the emergence of the
more experimentally verifiable behavioural schools of therapy. For the
purposes of this book, it is worth noting that a number of recent
attempts have been made to evaluate psychodynamic formulations
scientifically (see chapter 12). Cognitive-behavioural approaches

Most current writing and research on formulation comes from the
cognitivebehavioural tradition, where it is usually referred to as 'case
formulation'. Bruch and Bond (1998) describe how the approach was
pioneered at the Maudsley Hospital from the 1950s onwards by clinical
psychologists such as Hans Eysenck, Victor Meyer, Monte Shapiro and Ira
Turkat (who coined the term 'case formulation'), key figures in the
development of the then new approach of behaviour therapy. In its
earlier form of functional analysis, case formulation was seen as a more
useful alternative to psychiatric diagnosis, aiming to describe problem
behaviour in terms of environmental stimuli and response contingencies
(Hayes and Follette, 1992). For example, agoraphobia might serve the
purpose, or function, of helping someone to avoid anxietyprovoking
situations, or alleviating the possessive jealousy of an insecure
partner. This kind of analysis was said to provide a much more useful
guide to treatment than psychiatric diagnosis. Cognitive therapists such
as Aaron Beck (1976) have, from the 1970s onwards, made significant
additions to early behavioural analysis by including

Introduction to formulation

11

the role of thought processes in the development and maintenance of
mental distress, and there is now a very large literature on the subject
(see chapter 2). The term 'formulation' first appears in the regulations
governing the profession of clinical psychology, which traditionally
specialises in CBT, in 1969 (Crellin, 1998). Crellin has argued that the
concept of formulation (and its earlier versions of functional analysis)
played a crucial political role in establishing the expert status and
independence of the fledgling profession, which was at that time
over-shadowed by psychiatry and also in competition with a number of
other professions with a claim to alleviate mental distress. Indeed the
profession still claims, contrary to Health Professions Council (2009)
regulations, that 'this activity (is) unique to clinical psychologists'
(Division of Clinical Psychology, 2010: 6). In CBT, formulation is
located firmly within a scientific, experimental framework as 'a central
process in the role of the scientific practitioner' (Tarrier and Calam,
2002: 311). It is 'an elegant application of science' (Kinderman, 2001:
9). Similarly, clinical psychologists are described as using
'psychological science to help solve human problems' (Division of
Clinical Psychology, 2010: 3). Systemic approaches

The concept of working hypotheses has been central to the practice of
family therapy from the late 1970s (Palazzoli et al., 1980). In the
early years of family therapy there was an emphasis on making
'objective' and 'scientific' assessments and formulations of a family
'out there', and mapping their dysfunctions (Dallos and Draper, 2000).
The 'symptoms' displayed by one member were seen as part of an attempted
solution that was serving a function for the whole family. More recently
there has been a recognition that the therapist's values and assumptions
are inevitably part of the process of formulating, and that there is no
such thing as 'the truth' about a given family. This represented a shift
from a position of certainty, from which the families were assessed in
terms of their 'dysfunctions', to one in which it is recognised that
there are multiple realities in any given situation; there is no one way
of viewing a family and thus the therapist holds 'working hypotheses'
not truths. This frees the therapist to allow new and different ideas to
enter their thinking. Later still, the emphasis moved towards the
holding of a position of 'curiosity' rather than hypotheses or
formulations. Systemic formulations, or working hypotheses, must
therefore retain an 'as if' quality, and be constantly open to revision
('progressive hypothesising'). Their worth is best judged not in terms
of 'truth' but by their usefulness in helping to bring about change. A
social constructionist perspective is influential in current systemic
thinking, leading to an increasing awareness of the wider socio-cultural
context in which therapists and clients exist, and the variety of
assumptions

12

Lucy Johnstone and Rudi Dallos

that shape our understandings of what, and whose, the problem is.
Systemic approaches have always drawn on social and relational, rather
than medical, factors for their hypotheses. The process of hypothesising
might nowadays include questions about the role of social inequalities;
of competing views of the problem that may be held by agencies such as
social services, psychiatry, the school and so on; the role of
therapists as employees of the state; and the more general cultural
assumptions about how families 'should be'. Other therapeutic traditions

As noted above, not all therapeutic approaches use formulation as a
starting point. Humanistic therapists have been reluctant to engage in a
process that Carl Rogers (1951) saw as an unhelpful imposition of an
expert view on the client's experience, a theme that has been taken up
in different ways by social constructionist and social inequality
writers (see chapters 5 and 6). In the case of social constructionist
and social inequalities perspectives, the distinctive characteristic is
a reluctance to engage in a traditional process of psychological
formulation and a preference for alternative ways of generating useful
ideas or narratives. Further possibilities are introduced by the
increasing tendency for therapists to work integratively; that is, to
draw from a number of different models in their formulation and
intervention, as described in chapter 8. Best practice in formulation As
already noted, any therapeutic practice or procedure can be harmful as
well as helpful depending on how it is used, and formulation is no
exception. The issue of potential damage is discussed further in chapter
12. It is also addressed in the DCP Guidelines (2011), which includes
checklists of best practice for formulation (as an event) and
formulating (as a process). The former list specifies that formulation
should, along with serving the purposes listed by Butler (1998), meet
the following criteria: • • • • • • • •

Grounded in an appropriate level and breadth of assessment (chapters 2,
3 and 7); Culturally sensitive (chapters 4, 5, 6 and 12); Expressed in
accessible language (chapters 5 and 10); Considers the possible role of
trauma and abuse (chapters 6 and 10); Includes the impact and personal
meaning of medical and other healthcare interventions (chapters 4, 6,10
and 11); Considers possible role of services in compounding the
difficulties (chapters 4, 5, 6 and 10); Informed by
service/organisational factors (chapters 4, 10 and 11); Informed by
awareness of social/societal factors (chapters 5 and 6).

Introduction to formulation

13

These aspects are discussed in more detail in the DCP Guidelines. They
are also explored throughout this book, especially in the indicated
chapters. In addition, the Guidelines include two criteria which may be
controversial outside the particular profession for which they were
developed (and to some extent within it). These are: 'Informed by a
range of models and causal factors' and 'Is not premised on a functional
psychiatric diagnosis', which are discussed in depth in chapters 10 and
12 respectively. The checklist of best practice in formulating
(formulation-as-a-process) specifies that the clinician: • • • • • • • •

is clear about who the formulation is for (individual, family, team,
etc;) is clear about who has the 'problem'; is clear about who are the
stakeholders and their interests; is respectful of the service
user's/team's view about what is accurate/ helpful; constructs the
formulation collaboratively with the service user/team; paces the
development and sharing of the formulation appropriately; can provide a
rationale for choices within formulation (integrative, single model or
partial); is reflective about their own values and assumptions.

These aspects are also explored in more detail throughout the book.
Conclusion Psychological formulation has been used under various
synonyms for many years, but has recently attained new prominence. The
editors of this book see formulation as having many strengths, but at
the same time take a constructively critical view of its limitations.
Both viewpoints will be explored thoroughly in the following chapters,
which illustrate the very different, although sometimes overlapping,
formulations that could be relevant to our two clients, Jack and Janet.
Their stories are outlined below. Jack Jack is 25 and was referred to a
clinical psychology department shortly after his admission to an acute
inpatient unit, because nursing staff felt that unresolved issues in his
life were contributing to his distress. He was quite 'high' in mood for
much of the time, talking non-stop about music, but at other times would
lapse into tears and say that he and his life were a hopeless mess. Jack
was born and brought up in Swindon. His father, who came to England in
1979 from Southern Italy, had worked his way up from humble origins to
become head of a chain of shops, and the family was well off and
comfortably

14

Lucy Johnstone and Rudi Dallos

settled as part of the community. His mother stayed at home to bring up
the family, which consisted of Jack and his three younger sisters. Jack
did well at school and was popular and sociable, with a talent for
music, and there were strong expectations that as the only son he would
carry on the family business. Jack's father was an alcoholic and was
violent to his wife and children. Both the drinking and the violence
worsened as his business began to run into trouble, when Jack was about
10. When Jack was 14, he took on a Saturday delivery job and was
sexually abused on several occasions by the male boss. He felt unable to
confide in his family and was still very reluctant to discuss these
events at the time of referral; no other details are known. Jack himself
started drinking from the age of 15, and failed his GCSEs. Around this
time his parents divorced and his father moved back to Italy and has not
kept in contact. Jack has very mixed feelings of love and hate towards
his father, although his sisters seem to believe they are better off
without him. The effect on the family was disastrous; they had to sell
their comfortable house, lose contact with the Italian community in
Swindon and move to central Bristol, where Jack's mother tried to make
ends meet by various low-paid jobs. The family were harassed and burgled
on a number of occasions. Meanwhile, Jack continued to go off the rails,
drinking, taking drugs and becoming involved in petty theft. A pattern
developed in which he would hold down a job for a few months, but
invariably slip back into drinking. Eventually, after some violent rows
at home, his mother threw him out and he slept rough for a few months.
At around this time he was first referred to the psychiatric services
for outpatient appointments and was diagnosed as depressed. He was put
in touch with a project for the homeless and appeared to settle for a
while. About two years later, Jack's mother developed some serious
health problems and finances became even more stretched. At around the
same time Jack began to develop the first signs of what was diagnosed
variously as 'paranoia' and 'persistent delusional disorder', when he
started to complain that Robbie Williams (the pop singer) had stolen his
songs and his royalties and that Robbie's friends were out to beat him
up or kill him. He also believed that Robbie had raped one of his
sisters. He described the frightening experience of looking in the
mirror and seeing his father's face reflected back at him. Eventually
Jack was admitted to hospital at his family's request, where he became a
little more settled, but still convinced of the truth of his ideas and
reluctant to address the problem of how he was going to put his life
back on track, because he was anticipating a huge royalty cheque any
day. He was compliant with medication and said he found it helpful. It
was hard for the psychologist to get a clear agreement about what to
work on, given Jack's tendency to escape into fantasy. Problem areas
identified by Jack were:

Introduction to formulation

• • • •

15

He was desperate to get hold of the royalties that were, he believed,
due to him. He was afraid to go out in case he was attacked by Robbie
Williams' minders. He was very concerned about and protective of his
family, especially the sister who, he believed, had been raped (although
the sister said that no such event had taken place). He missed his
father and was confused about his feelings for him. When he saw his
father's face in the mirror he was filled with fear and self-loathing.

Janet Janet, aged 9, was referred by a school nurse to the primary care
therapy service serving GPs in an inner city locality. Social services
had previously been alerted about a number of contacts with the Accident
and Emergency department of the local hospital, although no evidence of
abuse had been found. Mary, Janet's mother, had also contacted social
services for various reasons including a request for a wheelchair to
help with Janet's mobility problems. She was concerned that Janet was
not developing properly and wondered if this was linked to Janet's
reluctance to travel or use public transport. In addition, Mary and the
school nurse had concerns about Janet's low weight. Janet was already
being reviewed at yearly intervals by the paediatric consultant because
of worries about her development as an infant. On assessment, no
physical problems were evident. Mary, in her late forties, separated
from Janet's father, Colin, when Janet was 3. He still lives nearby, and
was until recently having overnight contact with Janet at his home.
Janet has now said she does not want this to continue, although she
still sees her father. Colin is a heavy drinker and was violent towards
Mary. Colin and Mary's older child, Andrew, aged 12, is doing well at
school, both academically and socially. He also lives with Mary and
Janet, and hopes to join the police force when he grows up. Mary says
that she found it 'hard to bond' with Janet when she was born, and felt
sad and depressed for a long time after the birth. At times she wished
Janet could be taken away, although she did not feel this way about her
other children. This is hard for her to understand, and makes her feel
guilty. Mary has four older children from an earlier relationship, two
of whom live in the same street, and Mary is very involved with her two
infant grandchildren. She is particularly proud of the son who has done
well educationally and become a schoolteacher. Mary is also close to her
sister, Cindy, who lives locally and has no children of her own, but has
a special relationship with Janet and takes a close interest in her. The
family have always lived in a very socially deprived location in local
authority accommodation, alongside some of the most 'difficult' families
in

16

Lucy Johnstone and Rudi Dallos

the area. The estate is due for demolition and the family has been
waiting to be re-housed for the last two years. They are a Romany family
and this is a central part of their identity, expressed in a strong
interest in spiritualism and clairvoyance. A clairvoyant had told Mary
about a 'white car', which Mary connected with Janet's nightmare about a
'white van' and her fear of using any form of transport. At the time of
referral, Mary was awaiting a heart operation, having suffered from
angina and arrhythmia for a number of years. This means that she easily
becomes exhausted. The referral letter documented Mary's many concerns
about Janet, including her weight loss, behaviour at home and refusal to
use transport, although she will walk to school, town and therapy
sessions. This is paralleled by her mother's limited mobility, which is
resulting in them both becoming more withdrawn and isolated, especially
from their extended family. Mary describes Janet as being a prisoner in
her own home. Janet was also described as being unable to sleep in her
own bed because of night terrors, so that she often ends up sharing
Mary's bed; losing her temper (including once setting the dog on her
mother); and refusing to eat food prepared for her by Mary, so that she
is now seriously underweight. However, she has friends at school, joins
in quite enthusiastically, and is achieving adequately for her age.
References Aveline, M. (1999) 'The advantages of formulation over
categorical diagnosis in explorative psychotherapy and psychodynamic
management', European Journal of Psychotherapy, Counselling and Health,
2 (2), 199--216. Bateman, A. and Holmes, J. (1995) Introduction to
Psychoanalysis: Contemporary Theory and Practice. London, New York:
Routledge. Beck, A. T. (1976) Cognitive Therapy and Emotional Disorders.
New York: Meridian. Bruch, M. and Bond, F.W. (1998) Beyond Diagnosis:
Case Formulation Approaches in Cognitive -- Behavioural Therapy. London:
Wiley. Butler, G. (1998) 'Clinical formulation' in A.S. Bellack and M.
Hersen (eds) Comprehensive Clinical Psychology. Oxford: Pergamon,
pp. 1--23. Corrie, S. and Lane, D. (eds) (2010) Constructing Stories,
Telling Tales: A Guide to Formulation in Applied Psychology. London:
Karnac Books. Crellin, C. (1998) 'Origins and social contexts of the
term "formulation" in psychological case reports', Clinical Psychology
Forum, 112, 18--28. Dallos, R. and Draper, R. (2000) Introduction to
Family Therapy: Systemic Theory and Practice. Maidenhead: Oxford
University Press. Division of Clinical Psychology (2010) The Core
Purpose and Philosophy of the Profession. Leicester: The British
Psychological Society. ------(2011) Good Practice Guidelines on the Use
of Psychological Formulation. Leicester: The British Psychological
Society.

Introduction to formulation

17

Eells, T.D. (2006a) (ed.) Handbook of Psychotherapy Case Formulation,
2nd edn, New York, London: The Guilford Press. ------(2006b) 'History
and current status of psychotherapy case formulation' in T.D. Eells
(ed.) Handbook of Psychotherapy Case Formulation, 2nd edn, New York,
London: The Guilford Press, pp. 3--32. Grant, A., Townend, M., Mill, J.
and Cockx, A. (2008) Assessment and Case Formulation in Cognitive
Behavioural Therapy. London: Sage. Harper, D. and Moss, D. (2003) 'A
different kind of chemistry? Re-formulating formulation', Clinical
Psychology, 25, 6--10. Hayes, S.C. and Follette, W.C. (1992) 'Can
functional analysis provide a substitute for syndromal classification?',
Behavioral Assessment, 14, 345--365. Health Professions Council (2009)
Standards of Proficiency: Practitioner Psychologists. London: Health
Professions Council. Ingram, B.L. (2006) Clinical Case Formulations:
Matching the Integrative Treatment Plan to the Client. Hoboken, New
Jersey: John Wiley and Sons. Kinderman, P. (2001) 'The future of
clinical psychology training', Clinical Psychology, 8, 6--10. Kuyken,
W., Padesky, C. and Dudley, R. (2009) Collaborative Case
Conceptualization: Working Effectively with Clients in
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy. New York, London: The Guilford Press.
Lombardo, E. and Nezu, A.M. (2004) Cognitive-Behavioral Case Formulation
and Treatment Design. New York: Springer Publishing Company. McGrath, G.
and Margison. M. (2000) 'The dynamic formulation'. Online. Available
http://www.geocities.com/\~nwidp/course/dyn_form.htm (accessed 19
October 2004). Meyer, V. and Turkat, I.D. (1979) 'Behavioural analysis
of clinical cases', Journal of Behavioural Assessment, 1, 259--269.
Palazzoli, M.S., Boscolo, L., Cecchin, G. and Prata, G. (1980)
'Hypothesising -- circularity -- neutrality: three guidelines for the
conductor of the session', Family Process, 19, 3--12. Persons, J.B.
(1989) Cognitive Therapy in Practice: A Case Formulation Approach. New
York, London: W.W. Norton & Company. Rogers, C. (1951) Client-Centered
Therapy: Its Current Practice, Implications and Theory. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin. Royal College of Psychiatrists (2010) A Competency-based
Curriculum for Specialist Core Training in Psychiatry. Available
www.rcpsych.ac.uk/training/curriculum2010.aspx (accessed 5 August 2012).
Sturmey, P. (2008) Behavioural Case Formulation and Intervention: A
Functional Analytic Approach. Chichester: John Wiley and Sons. Tarrier,
N. (2006) (ed.) Case Formulation in Cognitive Behaviour Therapy: The
Treatment of Challenging and Complex Cases. Hove, New York: Routledge.
Tarrier, N. and Calam, R. (2002) 'New developments in
cognitive-behavioural case formulation', Behavioural and Cognitive
Psychotherapy, 30, 311--328. Weerasekera, P. (1996) Multiperspective
Case Formulation: A Step Towards Treatment Integration, Malabar,
Florida: Krieger.

Chapter 2

Case formulation in cognitive behavioural therapy A principle-driven
approach Robert Dudley and Willem Kuyken

A principled approach to CBT case conceptualisation Case formulation is
described as the 'lynchpin' of Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT)
(Butler, 1998). This is because it improves practice by explaining
clients' presentations in a theoretically informed, coherent and
meaningful way which leads to effective interventions. Essentially
formulation helps marry the unique experience of the client with the
skills, theory and knowledge we bring as therapists to help us
understand and alleviate the client's presenting issues. Given this, it
is understandable why formulation is seen as one of the key elements of
CBT (Beck, 2011). In this chapter we describe principles that underpin
effective CBT case formulation. We illustrate this process with
reference to the cases of Jack and Janet. CBT has an established
evidence base for helping a wide variety of presenting issues.
Consequently, there is now an abundance of treatment manuals for
clinicians to base their therapy on. However, this can leave the
clinician with the daunting challenge of drawing on a vast range of
resources whilst at the same time attending to the very human and
important task of engaging with, understanding and helping the
individual client. A second challenge is that clients rarely present
with one single disorder (Dudley et al., 2010). Co-morbidity is the norm
but the evidence base demonstrating the effectiveness of CBT largely
reflects the results of research on single disorders. In such instances
there may not be a treatment manual that fits the client's unique
presenting features. So whilst CBT prides itself on its scientific
foundations there is considerable art in its application. For these
reasons we advocate a principle-based approach to formulation rather
than recommending a specific template or manual. This ensures that the
formulation is tailored to the client rather than vice versa. Kuyken,
Padesky and Dudley (2008, 2009) use the metaphor of a crucible to
illustrate the process of CBT case conceptualisation. A crucible is a
robust vessel for combining different substances so that they are
synthesised into something new. In the same way, the case
conceptualisation process synthesises

Case formulation in cognitive behavioural therapy

19

a person's presenting issues and experiences with CBT theory and
research to form a new understanding, personal and specific to the
client. CBT theory and research are key ingredients in the crucible. The
crucible metaphor further illustrates three defining principles of case
conceptualisation. First, the process of change is facilitated by
heating the vessel to drive the reactions. In our model, collaborative
empiricism produces the heat that encourages the process of
conceptualisation and accelerates the transformation. In a collaborative
approach, the perspectives of therapist and client are combined to
develop a shared understanding that accounts for the development and
maintenance of the presenting issues. Working together increases the
likelihood that the outcome is acceptable and useful to the client, and
informs the selection of helpful interventions. Second, like the
reaction in a crucible, a conceptualisation develops over time.
Typically it begins at more descriptive levels (e.g. describing
presenting issues in cognitive and behavioural terms), moves to include
explanatory models (e.g. a theory-based understanding of how the
symptoms are maintained or perpetuated) and, if necessary, develops
further to include a historical explanation of how pre-disposing and
protective factors played a role in the development of the issues
(e.g. the developmental history). In this way formulations can be built
up layer upon layer over the course of therapy. Third, what is formed in
the crucible depends on the properties of the ingredients placed into it
-- including the client's experiences and CBT theory and research.
Historically there has been an emphasis on clients' problems and
distress, but while these are naturally included in our model it also
incorporates client strengths at every stage. This helps both to
alleviate distress and build client resilience. Their personal and
social resources are protective factors which have prevented problems
from escalating; have enabled clients to build up a repertoire of
resources and successes; and suggest an intervention strategy of 'least
resistance' that builds on strengths. Protective factors can be
described as 'all that is right with a person', including personal
resources (e.g. intellectual ability, physical health, hobbies and
interests, financial resources, etc.) and social resources (e.g. a close
and confiding friendship or relationship). Accordingly, client strengths
are an essential part of the crucible's ingredients. We illustrate the
three key principles of case conceptualisation, which are levels of
conceptualisation, collaborative empiricism and incorporation of client
strengths, with particular reference to the case of Jack. In this way we
demonstrate how the principles help inform the decision as to which
cognitive model to select as the basis of the formulation, how to
develop the understanding with the client and then how to utilise this
shared understanding to help the client optimally. Before we do this, it
is important to note that the authors of this chapter have not spoken to
the real Jack (or Janet). Normally within CBT there would be detailed
eliciting of the client's perspective and the thoughts, feelings and
behaviours associated with the presenting issues. Moreover,
collaboration means that conceptualisations are co-created by client

20

Robert Dudley and Willem Kuyken

and therapist which clearly has not been possible in this instance.
However, in the spirit of the book we will illustrate the process of
cognitive formulation for Jack using the available material. Jack
Principle 1: levels of conceptualisation

As a starting point it is helpful to understand that a CBT formulation
is developed from the cognitive model. The cognitive model is based on
the deceptively simple idea that how we view ourselves, the world and
the future shapes our emotions and behaviours. People are thought to
develop emotional disorders when they are locked into unhelpful patterns
of interpretation and behaviours (Beck, 2011). These moment-to-moment
appraisals or interpretations of current experience are shaped by more
enduring beliefs that we hold about ourselves, other people and the
world around us. From this comes the idea that if we evaluate and modify
unrealistic or unhelpful thinking, we can profoundly affect our
emotional wellbeing. Lasting changes occur when people are able to
modify dysfunctional beliefs and learn healthier and more adaptive
beliefs. This helps prevent relapse and enables people to remain well in
the future. We suggest a framework for CBT formulation that helps link
the person's experiences to the cognitive model using the five Ps:
presenting issues, precipitating, perpetuating, predisposing, and
protective factors. We examine the Ps in turn, outlining how each
relates to therapy (Table 2.1). They are presented as we might typically
expect them to unfold in the course of therapy, from description to
inference. We begin with the presenting issues, as preliminary
conceptualisations are usually quite descriptive and should be closely
mapped onto the experiences and difficulties that clients report.
Presenting issues

When people come to therapy they are usually looking for help with
specific problems, even if these may not initially be well articulated
in their own minds. They may feel sad, lack energy or be anxious when
around people. The assessment phase seeks to generate a list of
presenting issues that is specific, clear and useful to the client and
therapist. For instance, instead of writing the problem as 'depression',
the person might be asked, 'In what way does depression show itself in
your day, or your life?' This may indicate very specific and individual
problems like not getting out of bed. A comprehensive assessment in
terms of cognition, affect and behaviour in the context of relevant
psychosocial factors helps us better understand the needs of the client
and address the question of where to start working when faced with a
multitude of presenting problems. A

Case formulation in cognitive behavioural therapy

21

Table 2.1 The five Ps of CBT formulation The five Ps

Relationship to therapy

Presenting issues. Statement of the client's presenting problems in
terms of emotions, thoughts and behaviours.

This process goes beyond diagnosis in that we begin to define the
current problems the person faces. This introduces specificity and
individualisation. We also define short-, medium- and long-term goals
that can help identify the likely end point of therapy. This process
helps to develop the therapeutic relationship, clarifies problems and
instils hope. Introduces the cognitive model and provides initial focus
for CBT interventions. If successful builds clients' confidence in
themselves, therapy and therapist. Provides a focus for intervention by
breaking the maintenance cycle.

Precipitating factors. The proximal external and internal factors that
triggered the current presenting issues. Perpetuating factors. The
internal and external factors that maintain the current problems.
Predisposing factors. The distal external and internal factors that
increased the person's vulnerability to their current problems.
Protective factors. The person's resiliency and strengths that help
maintain emotional health.

Provides a longitudinal understanding of the problems and a focus for
more in-depth interventions that aim to maintain change and prevent
relapse. Provides a path of least resistance by suggesting interventions
that build on existing resiliency and strengths. Also provides pathways
to long-term recovery.

clear description of the issues helps establish the goals of treatment.
Agreement of goals is a key process in the development of an effective
therapeutic alliance, which is a robust predictor of outcome (Martin et
al., 2000). Despite the initial focus on current problems and goals, CBT
is also interested in the developmental origins of the difficulties.
Hence, an initial assessment would normally include relevant background
and context to the presenting issues (onset of the problems, family,
educational, occupational and psychiatric history, personal and social
resources and so on), which in the later stages of formulation enable a
more in-depth understanding. While the assessment process is not
strictly formulation, it is essential groundwork for a CBT formulation.
Jack is described as experiencing a number of problems including periods
of mania and low mood, anger and anxiety that seems to result from
persistent delusional beliefs with both persecutory and grandiose
themes. He has had problems with substance misuse and had a period of
inpatient admission. We would ask Jack for concrete and specific
examples of how his presenting problems affect him. He may identify his
difficulties as feeling low, lacking in motivation, feeling afraid when
out or having no money. From this initial

22

Robert Dudley and Willem Kuyken

description, goals of treatment are articulated (Greenberger and
Padesky, 1995). Jack and his therapist may agree to focus on trying to
feel better in mood, to have more money and to be able to go out without
fear of being beaten up. If he were more able to go out, we would ask
how he would like to spend his time and with whom (which may reveal
something about his strengths and his values; see principle three).
Having constructed a list of presenting issues and goals the therapist
would work collaboratively with Jack to identify the area that caused
greatest distress or had greatest impact on his life. Thus, low mood or
his fear of being attacked may become the initial focus of therapy.
Generating a presenting issues list that is collaboratively reviewed and
prioritised is an important initial task of treatment. The next level of
CBT formulation involves articulating the external and internal factors
that tend to trigger the presenting issues. On closer questioning it is
usually the case that people experience some variation in their
presenting problems according to time and place. As already described,
the cognitive model emphasises that it is not the events themselves, but
a person's view of the events, that explains their reaction. When people
are asked what has led to them being anxious or sad they often describe
events: 'I am unhappy because I am divorced/bankrupt/out of a job'. It
goes without saying that these situations can be distressing to us all.
However, it is also obvious we do not all respond to stressful events in
the same way. To begin the process of socialisation to the cognitive
model we might draw upon a simple four factor version that
differentiates situation, thoughts, feelings and behaviour. This helps
separate out the original event from the interpretation and
consequences. The person may say 'I am sad because I spilled my coffee'.
The simplified model helps illustrate the importance of thoughts (or
Negative Automatic Thoughts as they are referred to) and images
(Hackmann et al., 2011) in determining distress by explicitly
introducing the notion of an appraisal between the situation and the
emotion (see Figure 2.1). Such specific and personalised examples help
illustrate the fact that there may be different ways of seeing any
situation and that thoughts and images are not necessarily facts or
truths, but points of view. Using the collaborative but questioning
style of CBT we can ask whether everyone would feel sad on spilling
coffee, would others react differently, would the person him or herself
have thought and reacted differently before they became depressed. Jack
seems to meet the diagnostic criteria for a psychotic illness
characterised by persecutory beliefs. Whilst disorder-specific
approaches exist for such difficulties (Freeman, 2007), the common
starting point is to map the presenting issues, and develop an initial
understanding that is not limited by a specific model. The key point is
that the model is not pre-selected and the client is not fitted to the
model. In Jack's case (Figure 2.2), a simple descriptive model may help
to reveal that his low mood, anger and anxiety are intimately tied to
his persecutory

Case formulation in cognitive behavioural therapy

23

Situation Spill coffee

Thoughts I cannot do anything right, I am useless

Emotions

Behaviours

Sad

Go to bed

Figure 2.1 Illustration of an initial cognitive model

concerns. We may initially build up a series of such descriptive
formulations using recent examples from Jack's life. In this way we can
identify common triggering factors, common appraisals and common
reactions that help us understand his experience. These could be
summarised as in the last example in Figure 2.2. Perpetuating factors

Although the descriptive model is a useful heuristic device it does not
really explain what maintains the issues in the long term. Hence, we
draw on an expanded model that articulates the relationship between the
elements, and helps to show the reinforcing nature of the problems. This
model often includes more explicit information about the physiological
responses to a situation (Greenberger and Padesky, 1995). This
cross-sectional or maintenance model emphasises the perpetuating
features that add inferential hypotheses about how the problem is
maintained by cognitive and behavioural factors (see Figure 2.3). This
is the classic maintenance or vicious cycle of Cognitive Therapy. In
such a model, the direction of the arrows is important and the initial
phase of therapy must provide a defensible rationale for the links
between components. For instance, we need to consider the way that
behaviour in a given model might maintain an appraisal. Within the CBT
research literature there is an increasing emphasis on understanding the
specific and key features unique to each different disorder (see Wells,
1996). However, there are several core cognitive and behavioural
mechanisms that are common to a range of different types of
psychopathology (Harvey et al., 2004). These include various forms of
emotional and behavioural

24

Robert Dudley and Willem Kuyken Example 1

Situation Listening to music

Thoughts

Emotions

Robbie stole my music, it is unfair, I have let my family down

Angry Sad

Example 2

Behaviours Dwell Ruminate

Situation Go outside, see Robbie Williams merchandise

Thoughts Emotion

His men are out to get me

Vigilant Avoid going out

Fearful

Example 3

Behaviour

Situation Music/Robbie Williams merchandise

Thoughts

Emotions Fearful Angry Sad

I am at risk I have been treated badly I have failed

Behaviour Vigilant Ruminate Avoid going out

Figure 2.2 Jack's presenting problems mapped onto a simple descriptive
formulation

Case formulation in cognitive behavioural therapy

25

Situation Spill coffee on shirt

Thoughts I cannot do anything right, I am useless

Behaviour Go to bed, avoid work

Feelings Sad

Physiology Tearful

Figure 2.3 Perpetuating factors

avoidance, attentional processes such as vigilance for threat, and
cognitive processes like rumination and worry (Dudley et al., 2010). An
important perpetuating mechanism in many CBT formulations is avoidance,
which prevents the person finding out whether a feared consequence will
occur. In the case above (Figure 2.3), by avoiding going to work the
person may actually confirm a view of him or herself as useless.
Avoiding situations can also lead to a loss of rewarding and pleasurable
behaviours, and thus help to maintain problems like depression. However,
problems may continue even without avoidance. It seems that when people
do go into difficult situations, they may engage in subtle behaviours
that serve to keep them safe, or 'safety-seeking behaviours' (Salkovskis
et al., 1996). For instance, Jack may be worried about being noticed and
attacked when he leaves home, and so he may keep his sweatshirt hood up
to stop people recognising him. These behaviours, intended to help,
prevent disconfirmation of the belief, and maintain it. Paradoxically,
they can even make things worse; for instance, by masking his face Jack
may be more scrutinised by shop staff or security guards when he goes
out, thereby increasing his belief that he is being watched.

26

Robert Dudley and Willem Kuyken

A cognitive behavioural model of maintenance provides a rationale for a
number of interventions, since change in any of the maintenance elements
will create change in the others. Clients will be encouraged to
identify, evaluate and challenge their thoughts, which in turn means
that they are likely to appraise situations differently and thus feel
and behave differently. Behavioural methods may help overcome avoidance
and prompt change in feeling and thoughts. The main behavioural
approaches involve increasing positively reinforcing behaviours
(e.g. behaviours that are pleasurable and generate a sense of mastery in
people diagnosed with depression) and extinguishing or replacing
negative behaviours (e.g. 'safety behaviours'). Maintenance formulations
or cross-sectional formulations capture the reinforcing and spiralling
nature of Jack's current difficulties (Figure 2.4) in which avoidance
and vigilance seem to be important factors.

Situation Listening to music

Thoughts Robbie's friends are going to beat me up, it is unfair, I am a
failure

Feelings

Behaviour

Fear, anxiety, anger, low mood

Avoid going out, stay at home and dwell or ruminate. Be vigilant for
Robbie merchandise, records, fans etc. Physiology Heart races, sweaty

Figure 2.4 Jack's perpetuating factors

Case formulation in cognitive behavioural therapy

27

Jack also reports using rumination and this would be incorporated into
the developing conceptualisation as well. This provides a strong
rationale for targeting these processes with specific interventions for
overcoming avoidance, and rumination (Watkins et al., 2007).
Precipitating factors

Although cross-sectional or maintenance models help us understand what
may be perpetuating a problem we may still be unclear what led to the
onset of the difficulties. To understand this we introduce the notion of
a longitudinal or historical formulation that identifies a precipitant
or trigger to the onset of the difficulties, which commonly turns out to
be a particularly stressful event or time. Quantity of stressors

Stress-vulnerability models help us to understand the onset of
difficulties (e.g. Neuchterlain and Dawson, 1984) by emphasising that we
are all susceptible to stressors in our lives and our vulnerability
specifies the point at which we can no longer function or cope. Although
this broad model specifies the likelihood that a breakdown will occur,
it is less specific on what may lead one person to develop depression
and another anxiety. Here, we need to consider the meaning of the events
to the person and whether there were specific risks for that person that
made those events particularly stressful; in other words, the quality
rather than the quantity of events, their particular and unique meaning
to the person, and whether they carried a specific vulnerability or
predisposition. Quality of stressors

To account for potential predisposition or vulnerabilities we draw upon
a longitudinal model (see Figure 2.5). In this (Beck 2011; Persons
2008), precipitating factors trigger access to a deeply seated view of
oneself (core beliefs or schema, or internal predisposing factors) that
was learned through formative developmental experiences (external
predisposing factors). For instance, a person may see him or herself as
fundamentally unlovable (core belief) owing to early experiences of
neglect. This basic belief is highly emotionally charged and deeply
ingrained. Before the triggering event occurred, the person has managed
or coped by employing a rule or assumption of some sort that has
prevented accessing this affect-laden view of oneself (e.g. 'If I am in
a relationship then I am OK'). Rules, assumptions or conditional beliefs
are often phrased in this style of 'if ... then'; or sometimes as
imperatives such as 'I must', 'I should'; or as 'I ought'; for example,
'I must always be in a relationship'. The rules, assumptions and
conditional beliefs in turn are

28

Robert Dudley and Willem Kuyken

directly linked to a repertoire of compensatory strategies that keep the
person living within their belief system (e.g. working hard to maintain
relationships and avoid perceived abandonment, perhaps by being
unfailingly attentive and loyal to their partner). Here we can see that
the developmental experiences, core beliefs, conditional assumptions and
compensatory strategies are related to each other in understandable
ways. At the end of the relationship the rule is broken and accesses the
very affect-laden core belief. This event acts as the trigger or
precipitant for the presentation. Once started, the presentation is
perpetuated through the patterns of relationships outlined in the
maintenance models. a.

Developmental Experiences: Abandoned by biological parents Raised by a
series of foster parents, and care institutions

Core Beliefs: I am unlovable Predisposing Factors Rules and Assumptions
or Conditional Beliefs: If I am in a relationship, then I am ok.

Compensatory Strategies: Work hard to avoid relationship ending.

Triggering events End of the relationship

Precipitating Factors

Case formulation in cognitive behavioural therapy b.

29

Maintenance Cycles Perpetuating factors Spill coffee on shirt

I am useless

Sad

Go to bed

Tearful

c.  

Problems

Presenting issues

Difficulty concentrating, Problems attending work Feeling lonely Not
ringing people to arrange to go out Not answering the phone Avoiding
people in case I cry Not being able to sleep Feeling sad and low
Resilience and strengths Supportive adoptive mother and sister Good
friend Good job, well paid Interest in sports, and plays badminton every
week Good sense of humour

Figure 2.5 An illustration of a longitudinal formulation

Protective factors

30

Robert Dudley and Willem Kuyken

In the middle and later stages of CBT, conceptualisations increasingly
draw on theory and inference to explain how predisposing and protective
factors contribute to clients' presenting issues. Each disorder-specific
model indicates the key processes, beliefs and assumptions that are
thought to help account for the particular disorder. Predisposing
factors: quantity of events

When working with people with psychosis a very common process is to
generate an understanding of the events leading to the emergence of the
first psychotic symptoms, using a stress-vulnerability model (Brabban
and Turkington, 2002). The particular stressors for Jack appeared to
consist of a series of difficult life events, perhaps precipitated by
sexual abuse. Trauma experiences are increasingly being recognised as
important in the onset and maintenance of psychosis (Callcott et al.,
2010; Dudley et al., 2010). For Jack, the trauma seemed to have led to
drinking and drug taking, and resulted in him failing his GCSEs. These
experiences, combined with moving house to a less affluent area where
the family was burgled, his father leaving following the parental
separation, and loss of contact with his friends, left Jack increasingly
isolated. This is very much a quantity model, in that we can see Jack
was under considerable stress in the time preceding the development of
his depression and eventual psychotic breakdown. Understanding the
precipitants would allow the provision of information about the role of
sleep deprivation, trauma, drug use and so on in the onset of
persecutory beliefs. This could help normalise the onset of psychosis
(Dudley and Turkington, 2010) and help Jack to identify triggers and
risk factors. Thus, a longitudinal formulation may help us understand
Jack's particular vulnerabilities and what it was about the triggering
events that was so very upsetting for him. Predisposing factors: quality
of events

Jack's history indicates that he was subject to physical and presumably
verbal abuse when his father was drunk. He may have seen himself as to
blame for his father's anger, and may have believed that he was a
disappointment in his father's eyes: 'not good enough'. He may also have
internalised the notion that men cope with their distress by drinking
alcohol. Hence, we have a hypothetical and provisional core belief, as
well as some possible rules. Jack's early experiences may also have led
him to internalise a view of himself as having to provide for and
protect his sisters and mother. This is the role his father undertook,
and possibly a view shared by the community he comes from. This would
probably give Jack a view of success as consisting of working hard,
being financially successful and fulfilling the roles expected of a man.
As a result Jack may once again see himself as weak or as not good
enough. Also, given his experiences of abuse he may well view others as
untrustworthy, cruel

Case formulation in cognitive behavioural therapy

31

and unkind. Negative beliefs about others are characteristic of people
with paranoia in the context of psychosis (Freeman, 2007). His
compensatory strategies are to cope with difficult emotions with drugs,
and to work hard to achieve success and financial security. However,
alcohol abuse eventually led to losing his job. This increased the
pressure on him to succeed, and hence increased the pressure to cope by
drinking. Trauma such as sexual abuse can manifest itself as a
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), or as a damaged view of self
(Callcott et al., 2010). In the absence of overt PTSD symptomatology we
would consider the possible meaning of these events for Jack: perhaps he
concluded that he is in some way a bad person; or that he should not
have let this happen; or he may have questioned his own sexuality. Given
the role of masculinity in Jack's community, an experience like this
would probably be difficult to discuss, thus denying him the opportunity
to consider alternative perspectives on abuse. All of these hypotheses
would be examined by questioning Jack gently about what he understood to
have happened to him, what this says about him as a person and what it
means about other people. These experiences and beliefs help us
understand the importance of the triggering events: Jack's parents'
relationship deteriorating and his father leaving and losing contact.
Faced with this pressure, Jack began to drink as presumably this was his
model of how men coped with stress. He failed his GCSEs, the family
moved, and his mother had to go to work, further reminding Jack that he
was not providing for the family. It is likely that he was depressed
from around this time. His mother's ill health presumably increased the
pressure on Jack even more, and he began to develop psychotic and
persecutory beliefs. People with paranoia have a tendency to blame
others for negative events (Freeman, 2007) and consequently when Jack
was trying to make sense of his lack of success he may have been drawn
to an explanation that blamed another person rather than himself or the
situation. Jack's lifestyle of sleeping rough and using drink and drugs
will have dysregulated his basic self-care (e.g. sleep, diet),
increasing the chance of abnormal ideation and experiences such as
seeing his father's face in the mirror (Collerton et al., 2012). At this
level of conceptualisation, a number of interventions may help to
interrupt the maintenance processes and also encourage Jack to consider
the usefulness of his strategies and the helpfulness of his beliefs
about himself and other people (Beck, 2011). Owing to the speculative
nature of this formulation (see Figure 2.6) there is no way in which we
can determine its accuracy. However, in the clinical setting we would
use the principle of collaborative empiricism to help us establish its
accuracy and utility. The therapist and client would work together to
co-create the formulation using the questioning style of cognitive
therapy (see Kuyken et al., 2009: 193--195 for illustrations of this
process). Hence we now consider the second principle of collaborative
empiricism.

32

Robert Dudley and Willem Kuyken Early Experiences: Father physically and
verbally abusive when drunk Only son in a family in which the
expectations are men will provide for the family Successful father works
hard and provides a high standard of living Core Beliefs: I am not good
enough/I am a failure/weak Others are cruel and rejecting Rules and
Assumptions or Conditional Beliefs: If I work hard and provide for
others then I am ok and not a failure If I show my emotions others will
be cruel and reject me Compensatory Strategies: Work hard to achieve and
provide for others through work Do not show emotions, mask them with
drink or drugs Triggering events: Sexual abuse, end of the parental
relationship, social changes, change in house and lifestyle

Situation Listening to music

Thoughts Robbie's friends are going to beat me up, I am not a man

Thoughts Robbie stole my songs, and raped my sister, I am useless,

Feelings Fear Anxiety Sad

Feelings Sadness Depression

Behaviour Avoid going out, Vigilant for Robbie records, drink, drugs

Physiology Heart races Sweaty

Physiology Tearful

Protective factors: Music, school, previous community, mother and
sisters

Figure 2.6 Jack's longitudinal formulation

Behaviour Withdraw, Avoid family drink, drugs, ruminate

Case formulation in cognitive behavioural therapy

33

Principle 2: collaborative empiricism

Collaboration refers to both therapist and client bringing their
respective knowledge and expertise together in the joint task of
describing, explaining and helping ameliorate the client's presenting
issues. The therapist brings his/ her relevant knowledge and skills of
CBT theory, research and practice. The client brings his/her in-depth
knowledge of the presenting issues, relevant background and the factors
that he or she feels contribute to vulnerability and resilience.
Empiricism within therapy is evident in two main ways. First, the
therapist draws on the research on CBT to determine its appropriateness
for the particular presenting issue. Cognitive therapy was first
developed to help people with mood disorders (Clark and Beck, 1999), but
has been increasingly applied to a range of presenting problems and
disorders. The breadth of application results from a commitment to
empiricism, and the careful observation of specific diagnostically based
disorders. This has helped to elucidate the cognitive and behavioural
processes that characterise and maintain each presentation. These unique
differences are empirically tested between people with the disorder and
those without and are targeted with specific interventions (Wells, 1996)
which are in turn evaluated using manualised treatments in Randomised
Controlled Trials (RCTs). CBT has thus established an evidence base for
a range of psychological and emotional difficulties (Butler et al.,
2006; Wykes et al., 2008). CBT therapists use conceptualisation to adapt
these manualised disorder-specific models and treatments and incorporate
client-specific information and direct treatment with real world impact,
equivalent to that seen in RCTs (Kuyken, 2006; Persons, 2008). Given the
substantial evidence base for many disorder-specific CBT approaches, a
relatively straightforward mapping of client experience and theory may
be possible with many clients. Nonetheless, it is always important to
derive the case conceptualisation collaboratively so the client
understands the applicability of the model to his or her issue. When
clients experience multiple or more complex presenting issues it is
often helpful to attend to trans-diagnostic processes like rumination,
vigilance and avoidance (see Figures 2.1 and 2.2). Another aspect of
empiricism in therapy is the emphasis on observation and evaluation of
experience. Therapists and clients develop hypotheses, devise adequate
tests for these hypotheses and then adapt the hypotheses based on
feedback from therapy interventions. This makes CBT an active and
dynamic process, in which the conceptualisation guides and is corrected
by feedback. Since clients often do not have experience of CBT, in the
early stages it can help to offer a rationale for collaborative working
and to follow this up with actual experience of working together on a
task. For instance the therapist may say to Jack: 'I find it best if we
can work together to try and understand

34

Robert Dudley and Willem Kuyken

and help your problems. It helps if we combine our efforts, so I need
you to tell me what is important for you to cover, and I will have some
ideas about what I think we should cover in our sessions together. How
does that sound?' This would then be followed up by asking Jack what
particular questions or issues he would like to work on in the session.
This openness about collaboration would also be extended to the process
of developing a formulation. The therapist may say: 'You know a lot
about your situation and what has helped or not helped in the past, and
I know what has helped other people. Perhaps if we can put this together
we will find that we can share some ideas that may help you. How does
that sound?' Similarly, the therapist may introduce an element of a
model, such as the potential maintaining role of vigilance, rumination
or use of safety-seeking behaviours and then encourage Jack to gather
evidence of whether this plays a contributory role in his case. The
therapist may ask Jack to record over the coming week how often he finds
himself dwelling on the idea that his music has been stolen and to note
what effect it has on his mood. By jointly reviewing the outcome of this
task using Socratic questioning, the therapist could establish whether
vigilance has a legitimate role in the emerging conceptualisation of his
concerns. Disorder-specific models of paranoia (Freeman, 2007) emphasise
that people with delusions may have a tendency to 'jump to conclusions',
blame others for negative events, or find it difficult to generate or
consider alternative explanations for their experiences. These processes
may be introduced and tested with Jack as well. This curiosity acts as a
check and balance on the development of the formulation and to ensure
its accuracy and usefulness. Principle 3: include client strengths and
conceptualise resilience

As discussed, we argue that a strengths-focused approach at every stage
of conceptualisation helps to alleviate client distress and builds a
person's resilience (Kuyken et al., 2008). For example, goals may
include not just reducing distress (e.g. for Jack, to feel less anxious
being around people) but increasing strengths or positive values
(e.g. to be more able to enjoy time with my mother and sisters) as well.
Accordingly, clinicians can routinely ask in early therapy sessions
about positive goals and aspirations and add these to the client's
presenting issues and goals list. Specific discussion of positive areas
of a person's life may reveal alternative coping strategies to those
used in problem areas. These presumably more adaptive coping strategies
can be identified as part of the same process that identifies triggers
and maintenance factors for problems. Owing to Jack's low mood it is
possible that he easily overlooks or undervalues his strengths, but in
the early stages of assessment and treatment the therapist can
purposefully ask about those areas of his life which he

Case formulation in cognitive behavioural therapy

35

manages more effectively, and even enjoys, and how he copes with his low
mood and persecutory ideas. For example, Jack may notice that he becomes
less upset when he spends time with his family. His love of music could
be utilised to help interrupt maintenance processes and to help increase
positively valued activities and interests (Beck, 2011) and to disrupt
the maintenance cycle as illustrated in Figure 2.7. It is also important
to enquire about cultural values or identity that can serve as potential
sources of strength (Padesky and Mooney, 2012). People's values may
derive from their faith, sexual orientation, or other cultural, leisure
or sporting activities, and can help us to understand some of the
vulnerability for the onset of the difficulties (in Jack's case that men
are valued for their ability to provide for others, and that men do not
show emotions) as well as indicating resources for change. Throughout
therapy, client values, longer-term goals and positive qualities can
serve as a foundation to build toward long-term recovery and full
participation in life. Jack's ruminations may be a key maintaining
factor of his low mood and persecutory ideation. However, the content of
these thoughts reveals much about the areas he invests in, and about his
strengths and values. These beliefs about what is most important in life
are typically relatively enduring across situations and shape a person's
choices and behaviours. Incorporating values into conceptualisations
enables us to better understand clients' reactions across different
situations. People may worry about work, family, attractiveness

Situation Listening to music

Thoughts Robbie stole my music, it is unfair Emotions

Behaviours

A little sad

Spend time with my sisters, ask them about how they are

Figure 2.7 Use of cognitive framework to identify use of strengths to
overcome difficulties

36

Robert Dudley and Willem Kuyken

or health according to how these are valued. Jack is worried about not
providing for and not protecting his sisters as it represents an
important domain in which he is heavily invested, in part owing to the
abandonment of the family by his father. Discussion of the events
leading to the person seeking help often reveals a person trying to
achieve important and valued goals by utilising previously helpful
strategies to an excessive degree and/or in the context of too many
additional demands (Neuchterlain and Dawson, 1984). Clearly, one goal of
successful treatment is to find more adaptive ways to engage
constructively with these valued domains. For Jack, this was defined as
his ability to take care of his family, but without the crippling
paranoia and sadness that this was causing. A second important goal for
Jack was to remain well even if faced with further potentially excessive
demands. In short, the goal was to help Jack be more resilient.
Resilience is a broad concept referring to how people negotiate
adversity. It describes the processes of psychological adaptation
through which people draw on their strengths to respond to challenges
and thereby maintain their well-being (Padesky and Mooney, 2012). It has
multiple dimensions, and people do not need strengths in all areas to be
resilient. Masten (2007) draws an important distinction between
strengths and resilience. Strengths refer to attributes such as good
problem-solving abilities or protective circumstances such as a
supportive partner. Resilience refers to the processes whereby these
strengths enable adaptation during times of challenge. Thus, once
therapists help clients to identify strengths, they can be incorporated
into conceptualisations to help understand client resilience. Among
Jack's strengths are his ability to form and make good use of a number
of family relationships in the past, notably with his sisters; and his
positive engagement with mental health services, which bodes well for
considering integrated interventions. In Jack's case we might try and
encourage him to revisit some of his previous strengths such as playing
music, rebuilding his relationship with his sisters, and other
activities that indicate he is a good person. Such approaches have been
shown to both increase self esteem and reduce psychotic symptoms (Hall
and Tarrier, 2003). Clearly, the acid test of a formulation is whether
it leads to helpful interventions. Chadwick and colleagues (2003) have
demonstrated that people with psychosis do not necessarily report that
formulations increase therapeutic alliance or alleviate distress in
themselves. This is not surprising as CBT is not just an
insight-oriented therapy. We consider increased understanding as
valuable if it leads to a change in cognitions and a change in
behaviour. The formulation can be helpful in providing an alternative
explanation that can be tested to see if it accounts for the
experiences. In addition, the formulation should direct us to
appropriate interventions. Discussion of all of the appropriate
interventions is well beyond the scope of this chapter, but readers are
directed to the work of Morrison et al. (2004).

Case formulation in cognitive behavioural therapy

37

Janet Formulation of Janet's presenting issues from a cognitive
perspective would also draw on the principles represented in the
crucible. A crucial first step would be to undertake a comprehensive
assessment. The groin injuries, refusal to visit her father overnight
and the night terrors could all be regarded as signs of serious assaults
and/or abuse of Janet. However, without more detail, and in the absence
of converging sources of information it would be out of keeping with the
CBT formulation to speculate on such events and their impact on Janet.
There are many people involved in this case and we would draw on all
these sources (school nurse, school reports, CAMHS reports, Social
Services, paediatricians, health visitors, etc.) in our assessment as
well as on Janet's and her mother's views. Such an assessment would help
determine if there is evidence of historic abuse, provide information
about current risk and ensure proper safeguards are in place. During
this process we would spend time with Janet, building a therapeutic
relationship and ensuring she feels safe and comfortable with the
therapist. Levels of conceptualisation

Following assessment we would begin in the same way as with Jack and
define a presenting issues list. This would help to identify the issues
to work on. For Janet we may identify travelling on public transport,
having nightmares, feeling angry, and problems with eating and low
weight. Then the therapist would enquire about each of these areas and
tentatively describe them within a cognitive behavioural framework and
crucially begin to get a sense of Janet's point of view. This may be
achieved with questions such as 'What do you think, Janet, when your mum
puts food on the table?' or 'What do you think to yourself when you are
most upset at bedtime?' Such questions and the use of techniques like
family trees, or genograms, may be used to help determine Janet's view
of the problems as well as her family relationships and hence provide
the beginnings of a window into her world. Outlining the issues within a
simple descriptive cognitive behavioural framework is a helpful starting
point. By gathering examples over time and across situations we can
identify themes or commonalities that may help understand the issues
better and also direct us to potential treatment options. If we do not
understand her issues we may choose inappropriate interventions. For
example, we may conclude that Janet is avoiding transport owing to being
bullied because of her Romany heritage. It is a hypothesis but one that
needs to be tested against the evidence. In discussion, it may emerge
that Janet will not travel by transport as her mother is dependent on it
and that this reflects her anger towards her mother. Equally, if Janet
states that she refuses food prepared by her mother for the same reason,
then we may have identified anger as a common theme that fits with the
evidence (frequent temper

38

Robert Dudley and Willem Kuyken

outbursts and setting the dog on her mother). Understanding the
precipitating and perpetuating factors may then direct us towards an
intervention addressing anger. It is a pertinent to ask whether
longitudinal conceptualisations can be developed for very young
children. Beck's cognitive model of emotional disorders is increasingly
being applied to this age group. However, our understanding of how to
adapt the model for a 5-, 8- or 15-year-old is still limited. Where we
are able to set goals using descriptive and maintenance formulations we
may not need to develop a longitudinal formulation. Of course, if we
were to do so, we would draw on the principle of collaborative
empiricism as with adult clients. Collaborative empiricism

Through the process of collaboration we would agree with Janet what
areas to work on and then begin to develop an understanding of the
maintenance of the presenting issues using five factor models. This will
also help us to assess how able Janet is to describe and label thoughts
and emotions -- clearly an important process when considering whether
CBT is a good match to the issues she faces (Braswell and Kendall,
2001). Careful consideration will need to be given to whether there is
an evidence base for the use of CBT with a child of this age. We do not
know if Janet meets diagnostic criteria for a particular disorder.
However, a number of reviews have indicated that CBT is an effective
treatment for problems such as depression and anxiety disorders
(Cartwright-Hatton et al., 2004). There is a general assumption that
children from around eight years of age may benefit from CBT but this is
largely untested. It may need to be adapted so that it is acceptable,
understandable and helpful to young children (Cresswell and O'Connor,
2011). With a very young child, there is evidence that involving the
family in the form of family-based CBT may well be helpful for anxiety
disorders such as obsessive compulsive disorder (Freeman et al., 2008),
although whether family-based CBT is as effective clinically as
individual work or is cost effective for older children is disputed
(Bodden et al., 2008). So, if Janet's assessment indicated she
experienced anxiety or depression problems there would be a rationale
for offering CBT. Strengths and resilience

Given Janet's age and developmental stage it would be important to avoid
pathologising her feelings or behaviour. Even if individual work was
offered, throughout treatment there would be an emphasis on recognising
and harnessing her strengths. Careful enquiry about areas of her life in
which she feels she is doing well (perhaps at school, with friendships,
or in an ability

Case formulation in cognitive behavioural therapy

39

such as a sport) would enable such factors to be woven into intervention
strategies. Humour and play would be particularly helpful in working
with Janet and her family. Her Aunty Cindy seems to be a particular
source of support and it may be that her close interest in Janet can be
utilised, possibly to help with the eating concerns as Janet seems to
eat food prepared by others, and possibly in helping establish a
consistent sleeping pattern. Of course another potential strength in
Janet's life may be her mother. It may be possible to use a formulation
of Janet's presenting issues but not directly work with Janet. As with
carers of people with dementia, difficult behaviours (such as the
refusal to use transport, or food refusal) can be conceptualised within
a CBT framework and suggested to the carers as a different, alternative
explanation to the potentially unhelpful explanation the carer has come
up with (DCP, 2011: 19). For example, Mary may see Janet's food refusal
as a sign that Janet hates her because of a failure in bonding. This
attribution will probably make Mary feel very sad. However, the
formulation may come up with an alternative explanation that does not
attribute blame to Mary, and thus increases the chance of her trying to
help Janet. Similar methods can be used when working with families of
people with psychotic illness (Barrowclough and Tarrier, 1992) and may
be an option for Jack's family. This issue of working indirectly with
resources in Janet's life raises an obvious question of who is the
client and what is the most effective route to creating change? It is
clear that Mary herself has experienced and continues to experience very
difficult circumstances. A cognitive approach may be useful in helping
understand Mary's reported depression. A perpetuating model of Mary's
postnatal difficulties might start with Mary looking at Janet and
thinking, 'I don't feel close to my baby'. This may lead Mary to think
that she is a bad mother as she did not feel this way with her other
children, and she may then feel guilty and depressed. This in turn may
lead her to withdraw from Janet, hence reinforcing the sense of being
distant and not caring. The loss of energy and tiredness associated with
depression make it even harder to motivate herself to care for Janet,
and means that it is likely that other people such as her husband will
assume responsibility for Janet, hence increasing Mary's guilt. Mary now
involves herself heavily in the care of her grandchildren, perhaps as
compensation, but this may serve to remind her that she did not do the
same with Janet, and hence perpetuate her guilt even some years on. A
provisional formulation (Figure 2.8) such as this could form the basis
of an intervention designed to improve Mary's functioning, and hence
indirectly lead to improvements in Janet's perceived problems as Mary
becomes better able to manage these difficulties. In summary, there are
four potential ways that work with Janet could be informed by a CBT
formulation. First, there is direct work with Janet. It is difficult to
develop a CBT formulation for Janet owing to the lack of detailed
information about her perspective and developmental ability. However, we

40

Robert Dudley and Willem Kuyken

Situation Notice Janet watching TV

Thoughts I do not feel close to her, I am a bad mother

Feelings

Behaviour

Sad Guilty

Withdraws from Janet, others look after Janet

Physiology Tearful, Low energy Poor sleep

Figure 2.8 Mary's perpetuating factors

have indicated some potential routes to this information. Second, the
formulation could be used as part of family-based CBT in which Mary and
possibly Cindy are key contributors. Third, the formulation may be used
indirectly with Mary to help her better understand and consider how to
help Janet. Fourth, it may be that Mary needs help with her own mood
difficulties for which CBT may be useful. Reflections We have made some
suggestions for CBT formulations based on the available information
about Jack and to a lesser extent Janet. It is important to re-emphasise
that what would make this a CBT formulation are the principles set out
earlier, which can be used with a range of presenting problems and
clients of different ages and socio-cultural backgrounds. We have
elected to draw on a generic CBT model to describe and explain Jack's
presentation. Other models, for example of PTSD, trauma and psychosis
(Callcott et al., 2010) or

Case formulation in cognitive behavioural therapy

41

mania (Basco and Rush, 1996) could have been credible alternative
frameworks. The only way of establishing the value of a formulation is
to develop it in the spirit of collaborative empiricism, changing it as
new understandings emerge from the assessment and therapy. Done well,
this leads to strengthening of the therapeutic relationship and
better-targeted interventions. Formulation also has an important role in
supervision and self-reflective practice. A key question for a
practitioner is: 'If I thought the same as the client in those
situations, would I be likely to feel and act in the same way?' If the
answer is yes, then there is a good chance that the formulation has
captured the distress experienced by the client and has provided the
therapist with a glimpse of the world as if seen through the client's
eyes. Where the answer to the question is no, then a frequent focus of
supervision will be in the development of the formulation and
identification of strategies to elicit this information collaboratively,
perhaps by the development of behavioural experiments that will help
identify the missing pieces of the jigsaw. Gillian Butler (1998)
outlines ten tests for a formulation (see p. 264), including whether it
demonstrates logical coherence across the levels and whether it accounts
for the onset and maintenance of the difficulties. Clinicians and
supervisors may find it helpful to consider the formulation against
these criteria. Conclusions In this introductory chapter we have
indicated that CBT, like other psychotherapeutic approaches, places a
strong emphasis on formulation. We liken CBT formulation to a crucible
where the individual particularities of a given case, relevant theory
and research synthesise into an understanding of the person's presenting
issues in CBT terms that informs the intervention. As such, formulation
is considered to be central to the process of undertaking effective CBT,
mirroring its intrinsic orientation to evidence-based practice. We have
argued that what makes CBT formulation distinct is its use of CBT
theory, its emphasis on collaborative empiricism, its emphasis on the
current problems and goals and its evolving status as new understandings
come to light throughout therapy. We have suggested a framework for CBT
formulation that moves from descriptive frameworks in CBT terms, to
simple inferential models (ie five factor models), to more complex
explanatory models starting from what maintains the presentation and
leading onto what may have made the person vulnerable. These principles
and frameworks are illustrated through case examples.

42

Robert Dudley and Willem Kuyken

Key characteristics of CBT formulation • • • • • • •

Based on the cognitive model. Utilises core concepts of schemas/beliefs,
conditional assumptions and rules, and maintenance cycles to explain
onset and maintenance of emotional difficulties. Formulation developed
in levels from presenting issues to more predisposing factors. Client
and therapist work as a partnership or team to co-create a formulation.
Strong emphasis on evidence-base for the effectiveness of the
intervention. Strong emphasis on empiricism in session so that
appraisals are treated as ideas to be tested and alternatives
considered. CBT is closely associated with diagnostic frameworks in that
RCTs are usually based on diagnostic categories. CBT formulation is
complementary to psychiatric diagnosis. Diagnosis may be a reason to
consider a hypothesis or intervention strategy, but the diagnosis will
probably only have marginal bearing on the process of formulation.

Acknowledgements Many people have contributed to the shaping of the
ideas in this chapter. We are indebted to the valuable contributions of
many colleagues including Aaron Beck, Peter Bieling, Paul Chadwick, Mark
Freeston, Kathleen Mooney and particularly Christine Padesky. RD would
also like to express his thanks to Stephen Westgarth who provided
valuable thoughts on the case of Janet. However, the ideas expressed
remain the responsibility of the authors. References Barrowclough, C.
and Tarrier, N. (1992) Families of Schizophrenic Patients: Cognitive
Behavioural Intervention. London: Chapman and Hall. Basco, A.G. and
Rush, A.J. (1996) Cognitive Behavioural Therapy For Bipolar Disorder.
London: Guilford Press. Beck, J.S. (2011) Cognitive Therapy: Basics and
Beyond. London: Guilford Press. Bodden, D.H., Bögels, S.M., Nauta, M.H.,
De Haan, E., Ringrose, J., Appelboom, C., et al. (2008) Child versus
family cognitive-behavioral therapy in clinically anxious youth: an
efficacy and partial effectiveness study. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 47(12), 1384--1394. Brabban,
A. and Turkington, D. (2002) The search for meaning: detecting
congruence between life events, underlying schema and psychotic
symptoms. In Morrison, P.M. (ed.) A Casebook of Cognitive Therapy for
Psychosis. East Sussex: BrunnerRoutledge, pp. 59--77.

Case formulation in cognitive behavioural therapy

43

Braswell, L. and Kendall, P.C. (2001) Cognitive behavioral therapy with
youth. In K. Dobson (ed.) Handbook of Cognitive Behavioral Therapies.
New York: Guilford Press, pp. 246--294. Butler, G. (1998) Clinical
formulation. Comprehensive Psychology, 6(1), 1--23. Butler, A.C.,
Chapman, J.E., Forman, E.M. and Beck, A.T. (2006) The empirical status
of cognitive-behavioural therapy: a review of meta-analyses. Clinical
Psychology Review, 26(1), 17--31. Callcott, P., Dudley, R., Standardt,
S., Freeston, M. and Turkington, D. (2010) Treating trauma in the
context of psychosis: a case series. In Hagen, R., Turkington, D.,
Berge, T. and Grawe, R.W. (eds) CBT for Psychosis: A Symptom-based
Approach. East Sussex: Routledge, pp.175--192. Cartwright-Hatton, S.,
Roberts, C., Chitsabesan, P., Fothergill, C. and Harrington, R. (2004)
Systematic review of the efficacy of cognitive behavior therapies for
childhood and adolescent anxiety disorders. British Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 43, 421--436. Chadwick, P., Williams, C. and MacKenzie, J.
(2003) Impact of case formulation in cognitive behavioural therapy for
psychosis. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41(6), 671-680. Clark, D.M.
and Beck, A.T. (1999) Scientific Foundations of Cognitive Theory and
Therapy of Depression. Chichester: Wiley & Sons. Collerton, D., Dudley,
R. and Mossiman, U. (2012) Visual hallucinations. In Blom, J. and
Somner, I. (eds) Hallucinations: Research and Practice. New York:
Springer, pp 75--90. Creswell, C. and O'Connor, T.G. (2011)
Cognitive-behavioural therapy for children and adolescents. In Skuse,
D., Bruce, H., Dowdney, L. and Mrazek, D. (eds) Child Psychology and
Psychiatry: Frameworks for Practice. 2nd edn. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell,
pp. 265--270. Division of Clinical Psychology (2011) Good Practice
Guidelines on the Use of Psychological Formulation. Leicester: The
British Psychological Society. Dudley, R., Kuyken, W. and Padesky, C.A.
(2010) Disorder specific and transdiagnostic case conceptualisation.
Clinical Psychology Review, 31, 213--224. Dudley, R. and Turkington, D.
(2010) Using normalising in cognitive behavioural therapy for
schizophrenia. In Hagen, R., Turkington, D., Berge, T. and Grawe, R.W.
(eds) CBT for Psychosis: A Symptom-Based Approach. East Sussex:
Routledge, pp. 77--85. Freeman, D. (2007) Suspicious minds: the
psychology of persecutory delusions. Clinical Psychology Review, 27,
425--457. Freeman, J.B., Garcia, A.M., Coyne, L., Ale, C., Przeworski,
A., Himle, M., et al. (2008) Early childhood OCD: preliminary findings
from a family-based cognitivebehavioral approach. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 47(5): 593--602.
Greenberger, D. and Padesky, C.A. (1995) Mind Over Mood: Change How You
Feel by Changing the Way You Think. New York: Guilford Press.

44

Robert Dudley and Willem Kuyken

Hackmann, A., Bennett-Levy, J. and Holmes, E. (2011) Oxford Guide to
Imagery in Cognitive Therapy. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Hall,
P.L. and Tarrier, N. (2003) The cognitive-behavioural treatment of low
selfesteem in psychotic patients: a pilot study. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 41(3), 317--320. Harvey, A.G., Watkins, E., Mansell, W. and
Shafran, R. (2004) Cognitive Behavioural Processes Across Psychological
Disorders: A Transdiagnostic Approach to Research and Treatment. London:
Oxford University Press. Kuyken, W. (2006) Evidence-based case
formulation: is the emperor clothed? In Tarrier, N. (ed.) Case
Formulation in Cognitive Behaviour Therapy: The Treatment of Challenging
and Complex Clinical Cases. London: Brunner-Routledge, pp 12--35.
Kuyken, W., Padesky, C. and Dudley, R. (2008) The science and practice
of case conceptualisation. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 36,
Special Issue 06, 757--768. ------(2009) Collaborative Case
Conceptualization. Working Effectively with Clients in Cognitive
Behavioural Therapy. New York, London: Guilford Press. Martin, D.J.,
Garske, J.P. and Davis, M.K. (2000) Relation of the therapeutic alliance
with outcome and other variables: a meta-analytic review. Journal of
Consulting Clinical Psychology, 68 (3), 438--50. Masten, A.S. (2007)
Resilience in developing systems: progress and promise as the fourth
wave rises. Development and Psychopathology, 19, 921--930. Morrison,
A.P., Renton, J.C., Dunn, H., Bentall, R.P. and Williams, C. (eds)
(2004) Cognitive Therapy For Psychosis, A Formulation-Based Approach.
London: BrunnerRoutledge. Neuchterlein, K.H., and Dawson, M.E. (1984)
Vulnerability and stress factors in the developmental course of
schizophrenic disorders. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 10 (2), 158--159.
Padesky, C.A. and Mooney, K.A. (2012) Strengths-based
cognitive--behavioural therapy: a four-step model to build resilience.
Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, DOI: 10.1002/cpp.1795. Persons,
J.B. (2008) Cognitive-Therapy in Practice: A Case Formulation Approach.
New York: Norton. Salkovskis, P.M., Clark, D.M. and Gelder, M.G. (1996)
Cognition-behaviour links in the persistence of panic. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 34(6), 453--458. Watkins, E., Scott, J., Wingrove,
J., Rimes, K., Bathurst, N., Steiner, H., et al. (2007)
Rumination-focused cognitive-behaviour therapy for residual depression:
a case series. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 2144--2154. Wells, A.
(1996) Cognitive Therapy of Anxiety Disorders: A Practice Manual and
Conceptual Guide. Chichester: John Wiley and Sons Ltd. Wykes, T., Steel,
C., Everitt, B. and Tarrier, N. (2008) Cognitive behavior therapy for
schizophrenia: effect sizes, clinical models, and methodological rigor.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 34, 523--537.

Chapter 3

Psychodynamic formulation Looking beneath the surface Rob Leiper

What is a psychodynamic approach? There is no single psychodynamic
theory and hence no single way of constructing a psychodynamic
formulation. Psychoanalysis has reproduced within itself many of the
controversies of the entire field. It contains a multiplicity of ideas
and approaches: there are competing visions, differing assumptions and a
wide variety of possible conceptualisations which have led to an endless
debate. The term psychodynamic is now used generically to encompass the
many theoretical approaches that remain connected to these
psychoanalytic roots. A key feature of the psychodynamic use of
formulation can be related to this confusing multiplicity: that
sustaining a sense of uncertainty is in itself a value that has come to
be held very close to the heart of the modern psychodynamic stance. In
the realm of unconscious processes one should not presume to know too
much. No form or formula can be clung to as a secure guide -- except
perhaps that of 'not knowing'! Within the array of ideas and approaches
that constitutes the psychodynamic tradition, there is, nonetheless, a
commonality of outlook which holds the different strands together
(Leiper and Maltby, 2004; Wallerstein, 2002). This is not the enforced
unity of ideas that Freud once thought was essential to protect the
analytic ideal from watered-down versions or wild practitioners.
However, certain key perspectives and shared values constitute the
essentials of a coherent approach. At its most basic, what is held in
common exists at the level of the perception of the human condition
rather than its conceptualisation: it is, in a sense, pre-theoretical.
This shared vision forms the basis of a recognizable clinical
orientation -- a sensibility about the nature of therapeutic practice --
rather than an articulated psychological paradigm. Such a general way of
looking at clinical material leaves a lot of scope for diversity in what
an 'accurate', or even a simply useful, formulation might look like.

46

Rob Leiper

Core features of a psychodynamic approach What ideas constitute the core
of the psychodynamic approach? Perhaps the most fundamental one is the
focus on psychological or emotional pain. Life is thought of as a
difficult and demanding process and the psyche is constructed in the
struggle to deal with it. What is 'dynamic' is the turbulence created in
the currents of mental life by these struggles. Means of avoiding pain
are developed: ways of seeing, thinking, feeling and behaving can all
serve this purpose. Much of this activity takes place out of awareness.
There is an 'internal world' constituted differently from external
reality, the unconscious elements of which have a fundamental influence
on the way we live our lives. These unconscious attempts to avoid pain
often fail, but since our awareness is limited, they are nonetheless
repeated again and again. Failing defences are what give form to and
maintain patterns of psychological disorder. Therapy is about getting in
touch with thoughts and feelings which were previously 'warded off',
kept hidden from the conscious mind because they seemed to be too much
to deal with. Psychodynamic therapy is about helping the client to
're-formulate' what they are experiencing in a more inclusive way, and
to tolerate the discomfort that this involves. The understanding that
the therapist and client develop about these difficulties expands the
client's awareness and opens up new options for managing conflict. The
client's capacity to bear emotional pain and cope constructively with
dissatisfaction is enhanced, and the ability to reflect on and be
curious about their experience is developed. This view of human life,
personal development and psychological functioning underpins the
'clinical theory' of psychodynamics, and informs and guides the
therapist's thinking and actions (Wallerstein, 1988). At this level of
theory, it is possible to pull together (to some extent at least) the
competing psychodynamic versions of psychological development and
structure and establish the elements of an approach to formulation.
Several complementary 'points of view' (Rappaport, 1959) can help to
systematise our understanding both of the general theory and of a
particular individual clinical situation. I will emphasise four main
perspectives: the dynamic, the developmental, the structural and the
adaptive. These can be used to organise the diverse array of information
that needs to be integrated into a coherent narrative to arrive at a
useful formulation. (Compare McWilliams, 1999 for an alternative
approach.) The dynamic perspective One radical implication of Freud's
vision of the unconscious is that all behaviour is purposeful and
motivated; all human activity is meaningful, and has potential
significance. Even the most obscure actions, experiences or behaviour
can be understood in terms of the logic of the unconscious, through
which we can interpret the hidden meaning. This 'latent' meaning can
only

Psychodynamic formulation

47

be unravelled through a careful process of detective work that involves
interpreting the surface material to arrive at the unconscious
intentions underneath. Dynamic formulation is a process of discovering
(or constructing) meaning in confusing and unclear areas of experience.
It re-tells the client's story as intentional and meaningful. The
dynamic perspective views mental life as a shifting flow constantly
influenced by interacting forces. Fundamentally, these forces concern
psychic pain and the wish to avoid it through distorting or concealing
our knowledge of its sources. Pain was initially thought of as the
product of external trauma, and the memory of distressing events. A
crucial theoretical move was made in seeing the source of pain as more
fundamental, as having fundamentally internal roots: pain originates
from inner conflict between parts of the self. These conflicting
internal forces can be conceptualised in various ways, including Freud's
(1936) view about acceptable and unacceptable impulses. Probably the
simplest way of representing these ideas is via the diagram in Figure
3.1, commonly known as the 'triangle of conflict' (Malan, 1995).
(Alternative simplified 'formulae' of these key dynamic processes have
been developed by Luborsky (1984) and Levenson (1995).) This portrays
conflict as arising from a 'hidden feeling', which could be a wish or an
impulse. Awareness of this feeling arouses anxiety, because its
expression is in conflict with another perceived need, and thus is
feared to have catastrophic consequences. For example, a feeling of
anger or rage and an associated impulse to hurt is disturbing, perhaps
unacceptable, in the context of a relationship in which you are
dependent on the other person and need their love or good opinion for
continued well-being. Expressed verbally, the conflict becomes: 'I hate
you' but 'I am afraid that I will destroy our relationship, which I need
and depend on'. In the case of Jack, there seems to be conflict between
his intense desire for success and admiration, and an associated fear
which appears to involve feelings of threat and shame. However,
conflicts are always unique and generally more complex than any
simplified formulation can capture. Hinshelwood (1991), building on
object relations theory (see below), proposes that the underlying
conflict can be viewed as an ambivalent and anxiety-ridden personal
relationship -- but one operating internally between parts of the self
(what has come to be called an 'object relationship' in psychodynamic
theory). It can often be thought of (again in a simplified way) in terms
of a parent and child trying to manage a conflicted situation. This kind
of formulation allows us to visualise the internal situation in a
familiar way. However, a crucial element of this perspective is that
these relationships are subject to the rather different 'rules' of
unconscious mental life (which will be outlined below). The anxiety
signals that there is an internal danger situation. Some action must be
taken to avert the threat posed by the conflicting aspects of the self,
the ambivalent state of mind. The 'solution' is to avoid conscious
acknowledgement of the conflict. This is the third element in the
triangle

48

Rob Leiper Defence

Anxiety

Hidden Feeling

Figure 3.1 The triangle of conflict

-- the process of defence. Where the person does not have the capacity
to tolerate or cope consciously with the threat posed by an internal
conflict, some aspects must be warded off, to avoid the threat to
personal coherence and the fear of disintegration. This defensive
alteration of experience is a kind of selfdeception, in which some
aspect of the self is disguised. There are a myriad of ways in which
this disguise can be achieved; almost any element of experience can be
used defensively in some context or other. Jack, for example, initially
turned to delinquent 'acting out' which substitutes dramatic and
provocative behaviour for the uncomfortable experience of difficult
feelings. His subsequent substance misuse also distracts from and dulls
emotional pain. Hinshelwood (1991) suggests that these strategies can be
thought of as the establishment of a different internal object
relationship which 'evades' the anxiety-provoking situation. There will
typically be more than one such diversionary route available, and
different possible 'substitute' ways of relating. A number of
consequences follow from our tendency to distort awareness in order to
sustain a sense of internal coherence. Crucial elements of our actions
are taken out of conscious control and as a result we are poorly
equipped to manage our true internal state and less able to adapt our
behaviour to the external world. We are limited in our ability to
anticipate damaging consequences of our actions and to learn from our
experience. We may blindly repeat patterns of behaviour again and again.
When routine defences do not work well enough to manage the conflict,
further measures may have to be resorted to as a 'second line of
defence', which may take the form of a 'symptom'. This is understood as
a solution to a conflict through the formation of a compromise in which
both sides of the conflict find a means of expression. Both the need to
keep a wish out of awareness and the force of the wish itself can be
felt in these situations. For example, obsessional

Psychodynamic formulation

49

checking is often thought to be a way of managing unacceptable
hostility. The damage which, it is feared, would result from the
hostility requires the constant reassurance of the checking; meanwhile
the hostile impulses push for expression via compulsive quality of the
behaviour, and achieve some results by torturing the person, and those
round them, with its frustrating repetitiveness. This kind of
re-appearance of the underlying impulse in a distorted form has been
called 'the return of the repressed'. In Jack's case, his delusional
belief system has the same quality of a desperate further attempt to
manage his unbearable experience after his initial defensive strategies
failed him. Equally, it seems to reveal at every turn something of the
underlying nature of his core wishes and anxieties. In summary, from the
dynamic point of view, personal difficulties are considered in terms of
the meanings and motivations that individuals bring to them. These
meanings are formulated as conflicted desires and relationships and the
unmanageable anxiety which they generate. Such meanings always have to
be sought behind the defensive surface presentation which serves to
protect us from overwhelming anxiety. Psychological problems arise from
the rigidities and restrictions in behaviour and experience created by
these compulsive defences. The aim of therapy is to reduce their hold
over us, to facilitate greater flexibility and increase the scope for
choice by bringing about some resolution of conflict. By integrating the
parts of the personality that have been defended against we can have a
more full ownership of all aspects of the self. Thus, a psychodynamic
formulation must consider: • • • •

What are the main underlying conflicts? What self-other relationships or
wishes, impulses and fears make up these conflicts? What is the quality
of the anxieties that arise from the core conflicts? How manageable do
they seem to the individual? What defensive strategies and relationship
patterns are deployed in order to manage these anxieties? How effective
are they and what are their maladaptive impacts? How are the presenting
problems or symptoms related to these defensive strategies and to the
underlying conflicts?

The developmental perspective In the developmental perspective we look
to the past to understand the present. Early experiences are considered
to be of fundamental significance in forming both dynamic and structural
aspects of our mental life. This perspective, although commonly assumed
by psychology, originated in and remains strongly associated with
psychodynamic theory. Perhaps the main element of this assumption is the
idea of a sequence of developmental phases. This was originally
conceived in terms of libidinal

50

Rob Leiper

energies and erogenous zones -- the well-known oral, anal and phallic
stages. However, it became clear that these phases can be understood in
a broader sense as characterising particular modes of relationship with
caretakers. For example, the idea of an oral phase highlights issues of
taking in sustenance, of dependence on others for life and the issues of
what is inside the body and what is outside, of the boundaries of the
self. Erikson (1950) elaborated Freud's work into a well-known sequence
of eight psychosocial developmental stages, each with a relational
dimension. The task of the individual is to achieve progressive degrees
of separation and differentiation, starting from an early experience of
unity and moving towards greater personal identity, and an integrated
sense of self (Mahler et al., 1975). The school of thought known as
object relations has highlighted the crucial role of the parental
relationship, particularly with the mother. However, it is the personal
meaning of such experiences that is important in the psychodynamic view;
the sense that the child made of any particular traumatic separation or
personal abuse or conflicted family constellation. What were the
unconscious meanings and fantasy elaborations of the situation and of
the pain it caused? What were the defensive strategies that the child
had available and resorted to manage the distress? The interplay of
internal reactions and external events is regarded as forming the matrix
out of which personality is created. The child manages early deficits
and traumas as well as he or she can, and these adaptations become the
foundation for later distortions in relating which may ameliorate,
maintain or exacerbate the early failures. Jack's difficulties seem to
emerge in mid-adolescence when the developmental pressures of sexuality,
gender identity and achievement in the wider world start to make
themselves felt. However, psychodynamically we would want to think also
of the impact of earlier events and relationships -- perhaps his
father's successes and difficulties and the reactions of his mother both
to those and to her growing son, and how Jack might wish and wished to
be the same as and also different from his father. A key idea in the
developmental point of view is that dysfunction is closely associated
with problems occurring at particular stages. Childhood problems,
whatever their origin, are experienced in relation to, and have their
subsequent impact through, the particular developmental issues that are
'active' in that phase of life. The effect may be to disrupt and hinder
the developmental process. A central feature of the psychodynamic
perspective, unlike that of developmental psychology in general, is that
the present is interpreted in terms of the developmental past; the past
is 'alive' in the here and now. Dysfunction may be thought of as
repetition. Patterns of feeling, thinking and acting which were
established in previous developmental contexts are replayed in current,
often very different, situations. These patterns are rigid and not
readily open to correction through new experience; indeed present
experience comes to be actively organised in terms of patterns that were

Psychodynamic formulation

51

current at some earlier time. Thus infantile modes of experience and
behaviour persist but in a way that is sealed off from the influence of
the present day. Early patterns of relating to the world, normal at
their appropriate developmental phase, become a template for
understanding the nature of current psychological dysfunction. We might
think, for instance, of the grandiosity and 'omnipotence' of Jack's
delusional stance as akin in some ways to how toddlers quite normally
relate to the world about them. Malan (1995) has summarised this in a
diagram termed the Triangle of Person (see Figure 3.2), which shows how
the past (particularly family) relationships are echoed in the present.
But -- and this is a distinctive feature of the psychodynamic
therapeutic approach -- they are replayed not just in the client's
current relationships but also in the therapy room also. This brings in
the idea of transference: that is, how certain aspects of the person's
perception of and relationship to her therapist might be understood as
reflecting some earlier significant relationship. How the client
approaches and experiences the therapist is a clue to how they
experience (and perhaps distort) other relationships. This also casts
light on the past and the way the situations experienced in childhood
and adolescence were understood and responded to. Jack's defensive
distancing of the (female) therapist through his retreat into delusional
ruminations might offer a clue to his experience of some unmanageable
pressure (to perform? To achieve?) that he feels from others,
particularly when they get close to him. The therapist's own response --
at both an emotional and behavioural level -- to

Other

Defence

Therapist

Anxiety

Past Hidden Feeling

Figure 3.2 The triangle of person combined with the triangle of conflict
(adapted from Molnos, 1984)

52

Rob Leiper

how the client presents in the therapy room is often a vital key to
assessing the hidden emotional quality of these repetitions. These
'counter-transference' responses give a clue as to the interpersonal
situations which are, at an unconscious level, being replicated in each
relationship context, including the therapy. We seek to identify similar
patterns of relating repeated across different contexts. In summary, the
developmental point of view looks to the past in order to cast light on
what might be thought of as the personal context in which certain
'decisions' about how to survive were originally made. Patterns which
are thus established often create self-perpetuating cycles. Individuals
are seen as both the product and the author of their life history.
Framing understanding in the light of development in this way can often
enable people to acknowledge less acceptable aspects of their
personality. In considering a formulation, the developmental point of
view directs our attention to such issues as: • • • • • • •

What were the nature and quality of family (and other social)
relationships at various times during the person's life (in childhood,
adolescence and subsequently)? What events and experiences appear to
have been significant in the person's life? At what ages/developmental
phases were these relationships or events experienced and what may have
been the impact of these on psychological development? What has been the
person's conscious experience/account of these experiences? Does this
accord with what might be expected or is there the possibility of
defensive distortion? What meaning may these have had? What relationship
and coping patterns or themes appear to be repeated at different phases
of development and across different relationship contexts? What
developmental phase appears to be most associated with these thematic
issues? How are these themes represented within the therapeutic
relationship? What is the pattern of transference and
counter-transference interaction and experience?

The structural perspective The structural perspective focuses on the
framework within which psychological functioning is understood and the
ways in which individuals might differ in their psychological
structures. In psychodynamic theory the principle feature of this
psychological map is the different levels of organisation operating in
the mind. In particular, we need to be aware of the very different ways
that the unconscious, as opposed to the conscious, realm functions:
mental life 'as we know it' structured by verbal syntax and logic is not
all there is to us. In the

Psychodynamic formulation

53

world of the unconscious there are no opposites and no negation so that
contradictory propositions co-exist without challenge; there are no
ordered sequences and so no sense of time; there is no clear division
between different things or between subject and object, and so one thing
can stand for another (displacement) or for many things at once
(condensation); meanings are absolute rather than conditional and there
is no doubt or degrees of certainty. In this realm of internal rather
than external reality, everything is at once single minded and fluid;
mental phenomena have a similar character to dreams. This model is used
as a framework for interpreting the presence of hidden meaning,
transformed and disguised by the need to maintain repression. In
psychodynamic theory, the internal world is seen as the dominant force,
structuring our perception of the world. By selection and manipulation,
all the situations, people and relationships that we encounter can be
made to conform to its assumptions and expectations. The structural
perspective considers the characteristic forms of the relationship
between these internal and external realities, and the degree to which
our relationship with the world is either flexible and reality-based or
dominated and distorted by unconscious needs. Freud made the famous
division of the mind into the ego, id and superego. While the
tri-partite model plays a much less significant part in modern
psychodynamic thinking, it does point to this vital element in an
overall formulation. It is usual to think in terms of more or less
'healthy' kinds of defence, that is, degrees to which we need to alter
our experience of reality. Repression, which involves keeping some
impulse or emotion out of conscious awareness, is a relatively
straightforward form of avoidance. It involves only the distortion of
one element of our internal reality, although it often lays the
foundation for further defensive transformations of it. Dissociation
involves cutting off a whole area of self-experience with an associated
complex of feelings, memories and aspects of the self: there is thus a
more radical alteration to internal reality. Denial can be thought of as
more serious still, involving the distortion of significant aspects of
both internal and external reality. Jack's use of acting out and
substance abuse would be regarded as a relatively serious deficit in his
capacity to manage reality, involving significant levels of denial and
associated 'primitive' defences such as projection (of feelings into
others) and weak behavioural controls. These are the context for his
further regression to psychotic levels of functioning, which suggests
that he has what is termed poor 'ego strength', that is a fragility in
his capacities for reality testing, emotional regulation and
self-control. We all have our ways of defending ourselves, and the
pervasiveness, rigidity and severity of these distortions distinguish
personality style from 'personality disorder' (not as a 'diagnosis' but
as a functional description). The seriousness of dysfunction depends on
how early the developmental disruption occurred and how severe it was.
Thus problems in the first year of life -- Freud's 'oral stage' -- such
as a deficit in care-taking due to a mother being incapacitated by
depression or absent through illness, could

54

Rob Leiper

cause quite fundamental developmental damage, resulting in distortions
to the basic sense of reality, and the capacity to relate to others and
to regulate the self. Both Winnicott (1965) and Kohut (1977) suggest,
for example, that an experience of 'good-enough' dependence provided by
the mother's empathic attunement to the infant's needs and
communications lays the foundation for future development. Deficits in
these areas may have to be filled defensively with a 'false self' -- an
artificial persona and way of relating to others which conceals the
internal lack arising from the unmet dependency needs. In summary,
formulation from a structural perspective is based on an understanding
of the mental structures that enable the psyche to maintain some balance
in the face of internal and external stresses. Therapeutic change
consists of an increased capacity to take responsibility for our
behaviour and to become more flexible, capable and aware. The
'structural theory' is clear too about the limits to change: we are
always engaged in a balancing act between conflicting demands. However,
if the ego is strengthened and the power of the primitive superego
reduced, a more effective, satisfying and less self-defeating balance is
achievable. In considering a formulation from a structural point of view
we might ask: • • • •

•

•

What are the person's characteristic defences? What level of 'maturity'
do these suggest, how effective are they and at what cost of personal
restriction? What is the person's capacity for self-reflection? Can they
think about their internal states and motivations in a 'psychological'
way? What degree of 'ego strength' does the person display? Are they
resilient or fragile, flexible or rigid? Can they utilise their adaptive
strengths and abilities? How able is the person to regulate their
emotions? Is there an ability to manage distress and anxiety and
reasonable differentiation of response to different situations? Is there
a capacity to sustain disappointment and loss? Is the person able to
regulate and sustain their sense of self-functioning? Is there a sense
of personal coherence, stability and self-esteem? susceptibility to
shame or grandiosity? clear and stable ideals, goals and values? Does
the person's mode of relating to others achieve a balance between the
tensions of intimacy and autonomy, dominance and submission, neediness
and nurturing?

The adaptive perspective One of the many developments in psychodynamic
theory has been an increased interest, influenced partly by systemic and
behavioural thinking from the 1970s onwards, in the relationship of the
internal to the external 'real' world,

Psychodynamic formulation

55

that is, how experience affects and interacts with our life situation
and interpersonal relations. Strupp and Binder (1984), followed by
Levenson (1995), for example, explicitly introduce this element into
their system of formulation. Defensive responses to relational conflicts
often end up as selfperpetuating because they tend to confirm the
individual's worst fears. This happens through a variety of linked
processes: the distortion and misinterpretation of other people's
motives and actions; the selection of specific individuals and
relationship contexts which are familiar and meet our expectations; and
the subtle pressure which at unconscious levels invites others to
respond in particular ways. For example, someone who tends to expect and
fear rejection in close relationships may have a tendency to approach
intimacy in a guarded and suspicious way (in spite of, indeed because
of, the strong underlying sense of need), and so react strongly to any
minor rift and interpret it as betrayal. This produces the feared result
of a breakdown in the relationship which seems to confirm that people
are untrustworthy and always disappoint you in the end, and the cyclical
pattern is strengthened. Jack appears to be caught in a version of just
this kind of trap, in which an oversensitivity to perceived slights or
anticipated demands causes him to react suspiciously and rejectingly to
people, depriving him in turn of the support and validation which he
needs and longs for. However, from a psychodynamic perspective this can
be a golden opportunity for both therapist and client to understand
these patterns, to intervene with them directly as they are played out
in the therapeutic relationship, and to discover the possibility of a
new outcome. So, if Jack's therapist were to notice signs of this
process as a response to something she said, it might be possible to
explore how Jack had reacted there and then 'in the transference' and to
clarify and correct the interaction, later linking this to other
instances of how things go wrong for him in relationships. Malan (1995)
believes that this adaptive perspective is necessary to integrate the
various psychodynamic issues during the process of assessment and
formulation. The key to this is what he calls the 'Life Problem', the
way in which the underlying dynamic and developmental issues intersect
with the current situation in the person's life. Careful note must be
taken of an individual's life-style, work circumstances and intimate
relationships, but the main purpose of this is not simply to look at the
surface rewards and stressors, but at how they reflect the key
developmental and dynamic themes and issues which are crucial for that
client. Events and relationships have an idiosyncratic meaning for that
individual which gives them their particular force. It is especially
important (as in so much psychological understanding) to take note of --
perhaps to seek out -- what may have changed in the life situation in
order to understand what has created the perceived need for outside
help. A dynamic compromise may have been working however
unsatisfactorily until something occurred -- what that was may lead to
an exploration of what it meant and so to what the prior conflicts and
compromise solutions might have been. For Jack, the emergence into
manhood and the added element of abuse at this

56

Rob Leiper

time take on their meaning for him in the context of the deep
ambivalence about masculinity and fears concerning untrustworthiness and
violence in men which have become part of his and his family's story.
However, this perspective should also encourage an interest in what is
going well for an individual. While the psychodynamic tendency to see
all living as a kind of 'compromise' between conflicting needs can seem
pessimistic or even cynical, there is also a corrective and
compassionate sense that we are all in the same boat! Clients are no
different from therapists in the issues that we all struggle with. The
charge that this language 'pathologises' people (which of course it can
do if misused) has to be understood in this context. We should also look
therefore at what is working in the person's life: what compromises are
successful? how developmental traumas have been managed and what
achievements have been won in the struggle? Jack clearly started life
demonstrating various capabilities. However, perhaps the most troubling
aspect of Jack's life has been the lack of any sign of capitalising on
these strengths with any real achievement. This should give us pause in
our natural wish for a transformative therapeutic outcome and may direct
us to seek more limited stabilising goals. The adaptive view thus sees
psychopathology as a process of mismatch with the environment in which
compromise solutions to conflict are limiting to the person's creative
responses to life's challenges and self-confirming in their cyclical
repetitive quality: they prevent learning from experience. Change is the
process of opening up a wider range of creative options and breaking out
of maladaptive cycles. In the adaptive point of view on formulation we
should ask: • • •

• •

What pattern is being repeated in these life problems or symptoms and
with what unconscious aim? Why has this arisen now or become intolerable
and presented for help at this time? What maladaptive cycles are
operating which maintain the management of the core conflicts? In what
ways are the person's responses distorting or manipulating their
experience of life to bring about these self-confirming repetitions? How
do these stereotyped patterns of response limit the person's continued
development and achievement in life? What ways of handling conflict have
worked relatively well and how have these been a positive response to
developmental problems?

An intrinsic part of the psychodynamic approach (and perhaps of the
creation of any psychological narrative) is the search for themes and
patterns appearing across these differing perspectives and contexts,
which help to build a coherent formulation of an individual's experience
of personal difficulty. The presence of similar themes in different
arenas and from diverse points of view will tend

Psychodynamic formulation

57

to support a formulation's validity. This circularity -- though
potentially problematic 'scientifically' -- is a key to how formulations
are created in practice. The therapist must test out hypotheses with the
client in the therapeutic context through interpretation and attention
to the response it receives. The difference from other more cognitively
based approaches to this task is that it is not the client's conscious
assent to a 'formulation' (offered in the form of an interpretive
intervention) that counts, but their unconscious reaction to and
elaboration of it. This is a subtle process and certainly one with
considerable room for error. This difficulty is greatly exaggerated when
we only have rather abstract case material to work from, with no data
about the therapist's experience or the client's response to his or her
interpretations. Jack: a psychodynamic formulation A prince betrayed and
disinherited

The main themes of Jack's developmental history as offered to us hinge
around the success and then the failure of his father and its effect on
the family -- capturing the internal drama of this, we might think of
Jack as a young 'prince' who feels 'disinherited and betrayed'. From
nothing, the father builds a business 'empire' but then destroys it; his
is initially a success story but there is a dark side of violence and
drunken unreliability to it; he abuses then abandons his family and
becomes (to the women) a denigrated figure. The heart of Jack's story
might be read in his relationship to this: he is offered and responds to
a vision of himself as the inheritor of the 'kingdom', he has a sense of
himself as growing into a man entitled to power, seemingly secure and
enabled to develop and use his talents and social position. However, the
shadow elements of this emerge as his father's 'realm' disintegrates and
a substitute father is found who replicates an abuse he already feels in
a seduction and betrayal of his sexuality just as he is becoming heir to
it as an adult. Jack's life starts to disintegrate in a mirror image of
his father's before it has even started. This somewhat dramatised
narrative certainly makes various speculative assumptions, but it
endeavours to capture something of the possible experiential quality of
the young man's life. The impact of Jack's story (on me) is of an
overwhelming feeling of devastation and loss together with the
omnipresent sense of threat and betrayal. It also points towards key
themes to be explored in dynamic terms in other parts of the case
material. These themes are the nature of masculinity; its roots in the
identification with both parents and their images of manhood as a
foundation for self-esteem and entitlement to success in life and for
sustaining work, creativity and personal relationships in the real
world; and the relation of sexuality and aggression to these. How does
one 'come into one's own'? This is the core conflictual area --
'narcissistic' strivings probably closely liked to masculine identity
but involving ambition

58

Rob Leiper

and pride and the desire for recognition against the fear of failure,
shame and humiliation. Jack's identification with his father is highly
ambivalent -- as perhaps it would inevitably be in a family situation
where this father, and hence perhaps men in general, are both idealised
and denigrated. To be strong and in charge is also to be violent and
untrustworthy; success leads to failure and failure is not sustainable
and leads to collapse, abandonment of others and shame for oneself. This
ambivalence is intense enough to lead to confusion over what is reliable
and, indeed, what is real. It is experienced as a profound betrayal:
Jack needs his father desperately but feels as though his birthright has
been taken from him by some trick -- but one in which by his need and
his ambivalence he is complicit. The sexual abuse (presumably) has this
quality in his mind. This leads to further guilt as well as shame --
because sexuality appears to figure as dangerous and destructive, a kind
of rape. Someone in this story is sexually dangerous and it is
(presumably in part experienced as) Jack: he is himself a (fantasised)
betrayer. He and the world are unsafe and fragile -- collapse is always
imminent. These anxieties about the masculine are likely, of course, to
be intimately linked with ideas of femininity: the world that Jack grows
up in (though information is lacking) appears to be a very female
environment and may be experienced as overwhelming and engulfing. The
fear of women may be thought of as an aspect of his need for his father
and of his lack of safety with his masculinity. It may also be related
(though this is less clear) to the issue of a safe and secure sense of
home, of a right to belong. This is obviously connected to the family's
immigrant status: are they as a whole settled securely (psychologically)
in their new homeland? It is the men who principally suffer this
uncertainty, and the fragility of their world, their identity and
entitlement to a place, is emphasised at this wider social level too.
This insecurity and the aggression it gives rise to are projected and
experienced in a paranoid and persecutory form. Many of the clinical
features of Jack's history may be thought of as defensive responses to
these core anxieties and conflicts. Initially there is acting-out in
delinquency, violence and substance misuse -- all are, of course,
identifications with the father but are also escapes from overwhelming
affect and anxiety -- and, one would guess, chiefly experienced in terms
of shame and humiliation. This becomes more explicit in the hypomanic
symptoms and the omnipotent and compensatory aspects of his fantasy
system which are fragile efforts to triumph over these shame-filled
experiences. It is likely that these break through again in the
depressed phases of his symptoms where escape is into self-blame. These
defences are not completely effective, and they deepen into the severely
regressed state of psychotic delusion, blurred reality boundaries and
transient hallucinations: primitive unconscious material emerges and
massive projection and denial take over at points of stress, including
when the therapist (a woman which may or may not be an added threat)
attempts to make some meaningful emotional contact. The delusional
system is a defensive

Psychodynamic formulation

59

retreat but at the same time, reveals in a rather obvious way the
fantasies which structure Jack's anxieties: theft and betrayal, revenge
and persecution, entitlement to stardom and 'royalty', sexual violence.
In summary then, Jack is a young man whose development has broken down
in adolescence in the face of the demands of his developing sexuality
and particularly of the need to forge a successful identity and capacity
to achieve in the world. This has activated a core dynamic conflict
around self-assertion and creativity that is associated with his sense
of masculinity. Because of his ambivalent identification with his father
these needs are associated with shame and fear of failure and probably
also secondarily with anxieties about damage and sexual aggression. He
has retreated into increasingly regressive defensive strategies and
finally resorted to manic and paranoid psychotic delusional positions to
which he is liable to return under stress. Adaptively, this has created
a trap for him in heightening the sense of risk associated with efforts
to build a life in the real world and of engaging in intimate personal
relationships, especially sexual ones. The evidence suggests the
presence of considerable structural ego weakness, in his difficulty
sustaining his sense of self-coherence and reality and the dangers of
severely regressive, particularly psychotic, strategies to deal with
interpersonal or other life pressures. Reflection on the formulation It
is difficult in such written case material to locate that vital element
of psychodynamic thinking, the counter-transference (that is, the
feelings that the client arouses in the therapist). However, a story may
serve to fill some of this gap. I wished to reassure myself that I was
not going to 'over-interpret' elements of the case material that were in
fact put there as disguise, and asked to be alerted to any examples of
this. I was not well informed about the details of Robbie Williams's
career and image, so I looked him up on the internet, became duly
excited by the correspondences to what I saw as the themes (omnipotence,
sexualisation and sexual ambiguity, making good, betrayal and so on) --
and only then realised I'd already been told this might be a disguise
element! I duly felt ashamed (at my omnipotence and naivety), seduced
and betrayed, and perhaps especially, confused, with my sense of what
was real undermined: I had turned a blind eye to what I already 'knew'
and blanked it out in favour of a fantasy! Unconscious material gets
into us in the most surprising ways during the process of formulation
itself: we have to stay alert and open in order to use it to deepen our
capacity for empathic understanding of the subject and their
relationships -- including those with ourselves and with other
professionals. Towards intervention Recent developments in psychology
generally about new ways of working with psychosis together with the
wish to offer the respect to clients which so

60

Rob Leiper

often seems lacking in the mental health system might seduce us into
being too tactful to mention that Jack is 'mad'! Of course, one has to
take note of his abilities and popularity and to feel sympathy that his
situation is 'understandable' in terms of the events of his life (as the
nurses do in making the referral). However, we should not turn a blind
eye to the utter lack of achievement from age fifteen, the very fragile
ego capacities, the failure to find any place to 'lodge' in life and the
resort to a delusional identity. These features, all indicating
extremely serious structural deficits, should shape a therapeutic
response as much as any understanding drawn from the dynamic and
developmental features of the case material. For these reasons,
intensive exploratory therapy is not indicated as the choice of
intervention. There is a considerable risk that Jack will feel too much
emotional pressure in such a situation, and since he is unlikely to be
able to utilise it to understand himself he will probably cut off
emotionally, may act out in some way, and might have to resort to
psychotic forms of coping. However this does not mean that the
psychodynamic formulation has nothing to offer: it can and perhaps
should inform the more social and life-building interventions and
relationships which Jack needs in order to begin to establish a more
coherent and well-founded identity and a positive life structure for
himself. These might usefully include a supportive therapeutic
relationship which responds to his delusions in an understanding,
containing but non-pressurising way that is informed by psychodynamic
appreciations of their significance (without 'pushing' interpretations
of them). Such a form of therapeutic work would focus on clarifying
Jack's relationships in the real world (not on their fantasy meanings),
offering positive coping strategies and perhaps provide a positive and
safe personal role model to relate to (the preferred therapist for this
task would probably be a man). Many of these developmental functions are
likely also to be made available in a good social care setting. However
these positive relationships and social opportunities are all too
commonly disrupted and undermined by difficulties in the way such care
is provided. Psychodynamic theory understands this in terms of the
counter-transference dynamics activated amongst the staff and within the
service systems. While some of these are general responses to dealing
with severely disturbed people, in Jack's case one might predict a wish
to see him as rather special and make extra efforts to rescue him; he is
likely to feel alarmed and pressurised by such opportunities and to
retreat from them, which in turn may result in disappointment for the
therapists, and rejection or abandonment which Jack will experience as a
further betrayal. A dynamically informed care plan would offer
consultation and containment to the care team to avoid this kind of
replication of an old destructive pattern and enable them to hold Jack
as he gradually (and probably falteringly) deals with his shame,
self-doubt and fragile sense of safety. Through this process he might be
helped to find a place in life in which he can start to establish his
sense of himself as a man.

Psychodynamic formulation

61

Janet: a psychodynamic formulation A girl unheld

Perhaps what is most striking from a psychodynamic perspective about
Janet and her situation is how it can seem as though we don't really
know her in spite of a proliferation of detail: understanding feels
elusive, information fragmentary, and she herself seems to slip through
our hands. This is a consequence in part of the nature of the case
material that is provided -- it might be described as referral-level
information and there are numerous gaps at the level of psychological
data. However the fact that this is what has been offered as
representing Janet's life story might be taken as in itself significant:
we can 'read' the material counter-transferentially both in our own
reactions as readers and (interpretively) in those of the professionals
who provide it in this form! Janet, if not exactly missing, seems to be
difficult to take in, to hold coherently in mind, and this can be felt
as both enticing and frustrating; it may parallel the ambivalence
(between merging and rejecting) that is there in others' reactions to
her. This kind of first impression can be useful as a clue to where to
direct attention in assessment and how to integrate the overall story.
In Janet's case it fits with and emphasises the evidence which suggests
early attachment difficulties -- Mary's depression in the post-natal
period, problems 'bonding' and feelings of rejection towards Janet, the
possible lack of care demonstrated by the attendances at the Accident
and Emergency Department. Features of the current problems certainly
lend themselves to being thought about in these terms -- anxieties about
sleeping in her own bed and transport difficulties. At the same time
Mary's possible over-identification and confusion of her own anxieties
with those of her daughter (around the issue of mobility problems for
example) are also likely to contribute to difficulty in a
developmentally appropriate resolution of the tension between secure
attachment and necessary separation. Mary's health problems seem likely
to mean that there is a limited amount of attention and emotional
'feeding' available. These attachment issues within the mother--daughter
relationship are set in a wider context. The relationship of both Janet
and Mary to the father is crucial and the violence, drunkenness,
deterioration and final breakdown of the marriage suggest themselves as
major contributors to Mary's difficulties and to Janet's insecurities.
There are darker hints about possible abuse of Janet but while this
needs to be kept in mind during assessment it may be a red herring. The
place of the grandchildren in Mary's affections and Janet's reactions
(perhaps of displacement and jealousy) to them may be a very important
factor, and may indeed be what has precipitated the current worsening of
difficulties and the referral. Equally, such issues of insecure
attachment are paralleled by some social and cultural aspects of the
family's circumstances (the traveller background and the disruption to
this culture,

62

Rob Leiper

the social disintegration of the area and the anticipated but uncertain
re-housing). Mary is unlikely to feel 'held' herself in these
circumstances and so is less able to offer this to her daughter. On the
other hand, Janet's close relationship with another adult (Cindy) may be
an important protective factor and a potentially therapeutically helpful
resource. In spite of her various problems, she is a girl with areas of
achievement and good functioning. While these features of the case can
be pulled together to some degree under a general focus on attachment
problems and the way that Janet is insecurely held in the relationship
with her mother and her wider networks, this does not really constitute
an adequate basis for a formulation, certainly not a fully articulated
psychodynamic account. The details of the attachment anxieties, the
fantasy elaborations and meanings that they have for Janet (or indeed
the underlying quality of Mary's anxieties and coping responses or the
meaning of her relationship with this 'late' child who has been
associated with so much difficulty in her life) remain obscure. Some
features of the case -- including what may be the main presenting
problem of refusal to eat -- might be part of this mother--daughter
attachment issue, but equally they might not. The meanings, both
relational and dynamic, of Janet's various 'symptoms' require detailed
exploration. The attachment issues and other areas are best regarded as
lines of enquiry to follow up in a more detailed assessment process.
However, a psychodynamic approach to this assessment process would also
have some features of an intervention, in that there would be an effort
to understand some of the experience of both mother and daughter by
offering tentative interpretive understandings as part of the enquiry.
Further therapy could be with either Mary or Janet (or both)
individually, or with both of them jointly, though individual assessment
opportunities would be advisable. The aim would be to touch on and
perhaps articulate for each their underlying needs and fears within the
network of relationships and problem areas, and to differentiate their
concerns at a developmentally appropriate level. Assessment and
formulation would need to make an appraisal of the accessibility of each
to being helped by such an exploratory relationship. But again (as for
Jack) intensive individual therapy is not necessarily the only or even
the preferred answer from a psychodynamic point of view. The strengths
that Janet shows in the ways in which she continues to cope, plus the
resources of her family and local community, might provide the means by
which she can find the personal attention and security which she craves
and needs. At the same time, a major component of the intervention must
be to ensure that Mary receives sufficient support for herself and that
Janet is not over-identified with her own needs. Reflections This
clinical level of theory that we have articulated above has been
developed to support the therapist in managing the many competing
demands and

Psychodynamic formulation

63

pressures of her role. A dynamic formulation might help to select the
therapeutic strategy and identify risks and aims. If exploratory therapy
is indicated, there are other issues to be considered: the intensity of
the therapeutic approach, the length of work, the specificity of the
focus, the balance of supportiveness and challenge in the relationship
and so on. Above all, each point of view can be thought of as a
'listening perspective': a way of hearing and understanding clinical
material in a therapeutic session and hence using it to develop an
empathic response (Hedges, 1983). The therapist might monitor the
interventions and interpretations made against the overall case
formulation to keep herself 'on track'. But there are risks in this too.
Formulations might become a barrier to empathy through objectifying the
client. This is one reason why it has not been the usual practice in
dynamic therapy to explicitly share an overall formulation directly with
the client. Such a move is thought likely to be experienced as an
imposition which stands in the way of the client's autonomous
self-exploration and discovery, a process which is in itself as
important therapeutically as any explicit new understandings arrived at
as its outcome. Understanding is found and offered only in the context
of the therapeutic (transferential) relationship as it unfolds. In this
sense, from a psychodynamic perspective we would wish to ask what 'work'
a formulation is doing (emotionally) for the therapist who is creating
it. Often we formulate when we feel a 'need' to do so -- but that need
is formed by the therapeutic relationship itself: we never stand outside
that transference/ counter-transference matrix in such a way as to be
objective. For instance, it is a common experience to feel that we have
a good and clear understanding of a client at the beginning of therapy
and then to lose that as the work proceeds. That sense of understanding
is (hopefully) regained -- we often have a feeling that this was
something we knew all along -- but is the meaning the same? In a modern
psychodynamic practice, understanding is a mutually constituted process
arising through the transformation of the relationship patterns. It is
not an external, abstract or objective construction. Formulation in this
sense is the therapist's continuing struggle to make meaningful -- to
symbolise or 'mentalise' -- what is confused and unformed in experience.
This depends, crucially, on the capacity not to know what is going on,
to allow and tolerate the (often painful) experience of being lost, of
disorganisation and confusion. Seeking an abstract formulation may be
part of a wish to avoid this experience, to be defined, limited and in
control: it can be defensive. A defensive need to understand makes us
prone to oversimplify, to coerce meaning -- and in doing so to coerce or
seduce the client into a self-limiting version of themselves. I
suggested earlier that a psychodynamic view creates, in effect, a
'democracy of pathology' -- we're all in it together, this painful and
confusing mess of conflicting desires, hatreds and fears. This is why
personal therapy is such a crucial part of psychodynamic practice, not
so much, perhaps, to solve our own problems but to gain some familiarity
with the workings of our own mind and emotions, and so, hopefully, to
save ourselves from the worst traps

64

Rob Leiper

that therapeutic work lays in its path. This appreciation of the shared
pain and difficulty that being human involves for all of us is a basis
for a profound empathy and respect for clients. But it does not appeal
to everyone: psychodynamic theory is not, in this sense, a 'positive
psychology' and it is, as it were, proud of the fact. Instead it takes a
tragic and ironic view of existence. Psychodynamic formulation requires
that we face the painful issues at the heart of life squarely and find
hope for people, ourselves included, in honesty, humour and compassion
for our common plight. As therapists we need all the help we can get
with the difficult and demanding task of therapy, and formulation must
find its place in this, not as a refuge from the agonies of uncertainty
but as an aid to tolerating the experience of not understanding,
managing the sense of risk in relating therapeutically, promoting rather
than stifling curiosity and encouraging the possibility of playfulness
and aliveness. A formulation can function as a kind of 'transitional
object' for the therapist in Winnicott's (1971) sense. Like a child's
teddy, it is something that is both real and important but not entirely
serious, something that we hold onto for security and that helps us
think -- but which can be discarded as wider fields of mutual
understanding open up. Over the past forty years psychodynamic
clinicians have taken an increasingly relational view not only of
therapeutic technique but also of the nature of the knowing that is
established in psychotherapy: constantly shifting and highly
contextualised understandings are constructed with the client in the
process of interpreting and formulating clinical 'material'. However,
there remains a substantial range of different theoretical approaches
from the classical to the post-modern within the psychodynamic spectrum.
This chapter has offered the outline of a 'clinical' approach to
formulation which, to a degree at least, links these competing
perspectives. Key characteristics of a psychodynamic formulation • • • •

Looks at symptoms and life problems as expressing an underlying order of
meaning in the client's emotional life, arising from conflicting
relationships, feelings, desires and fears. Identifies these key
conflicts as ones which repeat across different contexts and which are
being managed by characteristic defensive strategies giving rise to
recurring cycles of dysfunctional and self-limiting solutions. Relates
these conflicts and defences to the individual's developmental history,
main past relationships and attachment patterns -- finds meaning in the
person's unique experience of their life course. Draws heavily on the
notion of the unconscious and its workings -- meanings are viewed as
symbolised and purposefully concealed, as complex and multi-layered,
fluid and shifting.

Psychodynamic formulation

• •

• •

• •

65

Identifies what in the client's recent life situation has destabilised
previous ways of resolving the core conflicts, in order to give meaning
to the client's seeking help now. Validates these hypotheses by
observing how they are played out within the therapeutic relationship
(the transference) and the therapist's own experience of participating
in it (the counter-transference), seeking parallel patterns and themes
in these specific relational contexts. Uses the therapist's
feelings/emotional resonances, not just thoughts and theories, as a
guide to eliciting and understanding meanings. Does not explicitly share
the whole formulation with the client, but validates it by observing how
the client responds to the construction of specific meanings
(interpretations) of his or her actions and experience based on that
understanding. Looks for coherent responses and elaborations more than
explicit agreement: the evidence being sought is hermeneutic (that is,
it enriches meaning and understanding) and contextual rather than
generalised. In considering such 'structural' issues as the degree of
maturity, stability and flexibility or the stylistic regularities of
typical defences in a person's psychological functioning, the
psychodynamic approach can sometimes take on a broadly 'diagnostic'
character -- but its deeper thrust is intensely individualising and
suspicious of general categorical statements about people.

References Erikson, E. (1950) Childhood and Society, New York: Norton.
Freud, A. (1936) The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defence, London: Hogarth.
Hedges, L.E. (1983) Listening Perspectives in Psychotherapy, Northvale,
NJ: Jason Aronson. Hinshelwood, R.D. (1991) Psychodynamic formulation in
assessment for psychotherapy, British Journal of Psychotherapy, 8(2)
166--174. Kohut, H. (1977) The Restoration of the Self, New York:
International Universities Press. Leiper, R. and Maltby, M. (2004) The
Psychodynamic Approach to Therapeutic Change, London: Sage. Levenson, H.
(1995) Time-Limited Dynamic Psychotherapy, New York: Basic Books.
Luborsky, L. (1984) Principles of Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy: A Manual
for SupportiveExpressive Treatment, New York: Basic Books. McWilliams,
N. (1999) Psychoanalytic Case Formulation, New York: Guilford Press.
Mahler, M. S., Pine, F. and Bergman, A. (1975) The Psychological Birth
of the Human Infant: Symbiosis and Individuation, New York: Basic Books.
Malan, D. H. (1995) Individual Psychotherapy and the Science of
Psychodynamics, 2nd edn, London: Butterworths.

66

Rob Leiper

Molnos, A. (1984) The two triangles are four: a diagram to teach the
process of dynamic brief psychotherapy, British Journal of
Psychotherapy, 1(2), 112--125. Rappaport, D. (1959) The structure of
psychoanalytic theory: a systematizing attempt in S. Koch (ed.),
Psychology: The Study of a Science (Vol. 3), New York: McGraw-Hill.
Strupp, H.H. and Binder, J.L. (1984) Psychotherapy in a New Key: A Guide
to Timelimited Dynamic Psychotherapy, New York: Basic Books.
Wallerstein, R.S. (1988) One psychoanalysis or many? International
Journal of Psychoanalysis, 69 (1), 5--21. ------(2002) The trajectory of
psychoanalysis: a prognostication, The International Journal of
Psychoanalysis, 83(6), 1247--1267. Winnicott, D. (1971) Playing and
Reality, London: Tavistock. Winnicott, D.W. (1965) The Maturational
Processes and the Facilitating Environment: Studies in the Theory of
Emotional Development, London: Hogarth.

Chapter 4

Systemic formulation Mapping the family dance Rudi Dallos and Jacqui
Stedmon

The systemic approach In this chapter, a brief overview of systemic
theory is offered within a historical perspective which describes how it
has progressed through a number of phases from a relatively modernist
and behavioural framework, emphasising patterns and sequences in family
interactions, to frameworks which came to foreground shared meaning. The
most recent developments focus on the centrality of language and the
joint construction of understanding between family members. This has
much in common with social constructionist approaches to therapy as
described in chapter 5. A systemic approach to formulation is then
illustrated through the two case studies of Jack and Janet. Symptoms and
family processes Systemic family therapy is an approach which involves
working with families or subsections of families. Originally there was a
strong insistence on meeting with all of the relevant family members,
though therapists nowadays may see part of a family system, and will
sometimes even work with an individual member while keeping the dynamics
of the wider family system in mind. The most formal version of family
therapy is conducted by a team of therapists, most commonly with one
person in the room with the family and the rest of the team observing
live through an observation screen or video, or sometimes by being in
the room with the family. However, practitioners use the ideas flexibly
and may work alone, in pairs, carry out home visits and so on. A
characteristic feature of modern practice is that the therapist and the
team will discuss their ideas with the family in the form of reflective
conversations. For example, the observation team may come and join the
family and the therapist and share their ideas or formulations with the
family. Alternatively, when working as a pair, the two therapists may
periodically turn to each other to have such a conversation in front of
the family. Even working alone, family therapists may still engage in a
conversation where they

68

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

reflect their thoughts about the family back to them, followed by a
discussion with the family members. Core systemic concepts

Systemic theory and practice has evolved since its inception in the
1950s from a theory centred on a biological metaphor of families as
homeostatic systems, to that of families as 'problem-saturated'
linguistic systems. Nevertheless, an enduring concept is that problems
apparently located in one individual can instead be seen as a product of
the interactional dynamics in the family. In this way 'symptoms' are
seen as problems in interaction and communication between people, rather
than as residing within individuals. Central to systemic practice is the
idea that cause and effect have a circular relationship whereby problems
are maintained through vicious cycles of unhelpful feedback. This is
most easily understood through thinking about quite widely held
stereotypes of couple dynamics. Jane 'nags' John because he won't talk
about his feelings, John feels blamed and 'withdraws', Jane feels
unheard and angry and 'nags' more and so both feel trapped in a circle
of anger/nagging and blame/withdrawal that has a natural tendency to
escalate. The problem is not that John is emotionally illiterate or that
Jane has a complaining personality, although each might construe the
other's difficulties from this structural linear perspective. Systemic
therapists view these narrow individualistic 'punctuations' of problems
as unhelpful and actively seek instead to shed light on the relational
interactions that maintain presenting 'problems' between people (Dallos,
1991; Dallos and Draper, 2010; and see chapter 7). Another core concept
adopted by family therapists is the importance of understanding triadic
relationships, whereby conflictual processes between two people may
recruit, or 'triangulate' to use technical jargon, a third person. For
example, if we wind the clock forward, Jane and John may have a
two-year-old child. They have given up resolving their difficulties as a
couple and have stopped talking to one another about how they feel.
However, their angry and blaming emotions towards one another find a new
outlet in arguing about how to manage little Tom's temper tantrums; Jane
wants to try a 'Naughty corner' while John thinks it best to ignore such
outbursts altogether. Caught in the middle, Tom reacts anxiously to his
parents' confusing messages and shows his frustration through further
'tantrums'. Hence the parents' unresolved conflict is 'detoured' through
arguing over Tom. Alternatively, John and Jane may have escalated their
arguments to a point where violence is threatened. In this context, Tom
may feel aroused and frightened by his parents' arguments to the point
that he throws a tantrum. This has the effect of bringing both parents
together to calm him down and comfort him, momentarily diffusing the
conflict between them. Later when Tom is settled, they find another
source of dangerously escalating disagreement, triggering

Systemic formulation

69

Tom's distress once more. If this pattern between the three of them
persists over time, Tom's behaviour may come to serve the function of
regulating the marital distance and closeness between his parents
(Byng-Hall, 1980). Family therapists also recognise the importance of
trans-generational processes for contextualising current difficulties
and will often explore how parents' ideas about caregiving connect with
their early childhood experiences of being parented. For example, John
may have admired his father's apparent ability to remain unflustered
during family arguments and may be attempting to replicate his style,
while Jane may have been raised in a very liberal family with a brother
who went 'off the rails' during his adolescence. She may want to do
things differently by creating firm boundaries for Tom, thereby
correcting perceived deficits in the parenting practices of her own
family of origin. One of the most influential early ideas in systemic
family therapy was that families, like other social systems, can
experience stress, anxiety and distress at points where significant and
fundamental changes need to be made (Haley, 1973; Carter and McGoldrick,
1988). The onset of problems in families can be seen as connected to the
emotionally destabilising aspects of family transitions, especially at
family life cycle transition points, such as the birth of children and
when young people leave home. We shall introduce some ideas for applying
these systemic concepts when we return to the case scenarios for Jack
and Janet. Formulation in systemic practice Importantly, systemic
approaches have increasingly come to regard all aspects of therapy as an
interactional and collaborative process. Formulation therefore is not
seen as something that the therapist does to the family but as something
that they do with the family. Thus therapy has been seen as a
co-constructional process whereby the therapist, supervision team and
the family members jointly come to develop new formulations of their
problems. This is not as an objective process, but as a perturbation
which starts to change the family system. How formulation is undertaken,
the questions that are asked, when and how they are asked, are all seen
as having the potential to bring about significant changes. This
carefully crafted sequence of questioning, attending to moment-by-moment
feedback and eliciting fresh information for family members to consider
constitutes a style that Tomm (1987) refers to as 'interventive
interviewing'. The way in which this process of formulation is
undertaken starts to shape the relationship with the family. Thus, there
is less of a distinction between the stages of
assessment--formulation--intervention than in many therapies. A
cornerstone of early systemic thinking was that symptoms in families
served a function of stabilising a family system. In many ways this
appeared a counter-intuitive idea since the established view was that
the

70

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

symptoms were the very thing that was causing the distress and
unhappiness. One of the most enduring and helpful ideas from the first
phase is the model of formulation proposed by the Mental Research
Institute team (Watzlawick et al., 1974). This consists of the elegantly
simple idea that many problems arise from the failing solutions that are
applied to difficulties (see Figure 4.1). In this approach to
formulation, the focus is on an identification of what is seen as the
problem and how this is linked to difficulties which the family has
attempted to overcome. The formulation consists of the following steps.
Exploration of the problem

• • • • • •

Deconstruction of the problem -- how do family members define the
problem, when did it start, who first noticed, what was first noticed?
Linking the problem to ordinary difficulties. Exploration of what was
attempted in order to solve the difficulties. Beliefs about the
difficulties and what to do about them. Discussion/evaluation of what
worked and what did not work. What decisions were made about whether to
persist with the attempted solutions and which solutions to pursue.

With the growing influence of constructivist ideas about unique personal
meanings as being central to human activity and experience, systemic
family therapy came to view descriptions and formulations as having an
'as if' quality, in that they were held to be propositions rather than
truths. As such, these propositions could be more or less useful in
terms of the extent to which they facilitated positive change. Instead
of assessment and formulation being seen as one-off scientific
activities they came to be viewed as a continual and dynamic process of
developing, testing and revising formulations (see also Dallos, 1991;
Hoffman, 1993; and chapter 7). PROBLEM

Difficulty

Figure 4.1 Attempted solutions

Attempted Solution

Systemic formulation

71

Progressive hypothesising

The Milan team of family therapists (Palazzoli et al., 1978) added the
useful idea that therapy and formulation are inter-twined, and
inevitably progress through a recursive process of hypothesising. By
hypothesising we refer to the formulation by the therapist of a
hypothesis based upon the information he possesses regarding the family
that he is interviewing. The hypothesis establishes a starting point for
his investigation as well as verification of the validity of that
hypothesis based upon scientific methods and skill. If the hypothesis
proves false, the therapist must form a second hypothesis based upon the
information gathered during the testing of the first. (Palazzoli et al.,
1980: 4) They argued that there could be no objective truth about a
family; the best that could be achieved was to formulate hypotheses
(hunches) about what was going on which could be more or less helpful in
our ways of working. Hence a hypothesis was to be judged in terms of how
effective it was in facilitating positive change. The Milan team argued
that the process of developing hypotheses was not only fundamental to
the process of formulation but also to the practice of clinical work.
The beginning of therapy with a family can be an extremely confusing
affair and it would be easy for a therapist to feel overwhelmed by the
amount of information that a family presents. A hypothesis can help to
cut through this potentially overwhelming complexity and organise the
information into a meaningful and manageable structure. Holding a clear
hypothesis can help the therapist to actively engage the family by
pursuing issues and asking questions to explore and test the hypotheses.
This gives a direction to the work and helps to avoid the risk of
unwittingly getting caught up in, or even aggravating, the family's
problems. It also helps to reduce the anxiety of the initial contact
(which can be considerable for all concerned, not least the therapist).
Another key function of the hypothesis was to be elaborative; that is,
to help to elicit new information. Cecchin (1987) questioned the notion
of 'hypothesising' and argued that it implied an inappropriate idea of a
'scientific' testing for truth. In contrast, he went on to compare the
process of formulation to a form of creative curiosity. The therapist is
encouraged to maintain this position of curiosity in relation to the
family. The team went on to note a number of other important aspects of
this process: •

explicitly forming and stating our hypotheses can help to reflect on our
implicit assumptions which might otherwise impede therapeutic progress;

72

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

•

articulation of hypotheses can help to reveal differences and agreements
within the therapy team which again might hinder therapy if left
unstated; this view of hypotheses puts less pressure on the therapist to
'get it right', and thus reduces anxiety especially in the early stages
of therapy; as the engagement with the family is from less of an
'expert' position it may be easier for the therapist and the team to
remain curious and interested as opposed to trying to develop a
'correct' formulation.

• •

In practice there seemed to be times when the Milan team deviated from a
constructivist position into making statements about their hypothesis
being 'correct' or 'hitting the nail on the head'. There was also a
sense that the hypotheses were not invariably formed in a collaborative
way with families and might even convey implicit theories about how
families function. For example, the Milan therapists assumed that all
family members have benign intent, a position that has since been
challenged by feminist family therapists working with domestic violence
and abuse (Goldner, 1998). The 'correctness' of a hypothesis was seen in
terms of whether it was accurate about the family's beliefs. For
example, the team describe a case of an adolescent boy who was
displaying delinquent problems. The boy was living alone with his
'attractive' divorced mother. Their first hypothesis was that his
behaviour was intended to draw his father back into the family. However,
this was rapidly disproved and it became clear that a more accurate
hypothesis was that: The mother was an attractive and charming woman,
and perhaps after these years of maternal dedication, she had met
'another man', and perhaps her son was jealous and angry, and was
showing this through his behaviour ... Our second hypothesis hit the
target. For the past two months the mother had been dating a friend.
(Palazzoli et al., 1980: 2) Family therapy and social constructionism
Contemporary systemic family practice has shown a significant move
towards social constructionism. This extends constructivist ideas by
emphasising the importance of language and culture. Language is seen not
only as an attempt to describe the world but as helping us to actively
make meaning and 'construct' it (see chapter 5). These constructions are
shaped by the dominant ideas or discourses that a given culture holds as
central. In turn these ideas have their own influence and may be
reaffirmed and reproduced in local conversations. Dominant ideas such as
that of 'mental health', 'satisfactory family life', 'good mother',
'appropriate behaviour' and so on will shape the expectations and
actions of family members. Systemic therapy tries to bring these
discourses into consciousness so that families can be freed up from the

Systemic formulation

73

constraints imposed by everyday language use. This has also heralded a
more collaborative approach to therapy in which the therapist and the
team work alongside the family and attempt to work in a transparent and
open way. Recent approaches thus put forward a view of formulation as a
shared activity rather than as something predominantly conducted by the
therapist (White and Epston, 1990; and see chapter 5). Use of
self-reflective formulation

Central to the developments described above was a recognition that the
therapist brought both personal and professional experiences to the
process of formulation. It was therefore necessary to explore these
reflectively; for example, why am I so concerned and angry about Jack's
father? Furthermore, systemic therapy started to regard the relationship
between the therapist and the family, and also between the therapist and
the consulting team, as essential aspects of the formulation. As an
example, they started to observe that sometimes the consulting team
could show similar ambivalences, splits and divisions in their
formulation about parenting as the child was experiencing. In relation
to Jack, part of the formulation might be that some members of the team
would feel angry towards the father and very sympathetic towards the
mother. In addition, formulation included the dynamics in the therapy
room, such that for example the team might notice and comment on their
observation of the therapist--family dynamics; perhaps that the
therapist appeared to talk mostly to the mother and to ignore one of the
sisters. The therapist could discuss with the family whether this was
something that they had also observed happening in the room. Did
anything like this happen at home? How did they communicate about
feelings of not getting their fair share of attention and so on? This
feature of systemic family therapy formulation is harder to illustrate
since we do not have a transcript of a family therapy session with Jack
or Janet. However, we will attempt to demonstrate a similar process in
chapter 9 through a piece of imaginary dialogue between Jack and a
therapist. A proposed model of systemic formulation Though systemic
therapy has evolved from an emphasis on structure and pattern to one on
meanings, we suggest that a number of common threads can be drawn out
(see also Carr, 2006): 1 2 3 4 5

Deconstruction of the problem. Problem-maintaining patterns and feedback
loops. Beliefs and explanations. Transitions, emotions and attachments.
Contextual factors.

74

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

Contemporary systemic formulation has shown a shift from an emphasis on
patterns and processes, to a focus on understandings and narratives, and
most recently to an emphasis on language and cultural contexts (see
Dallos and Draper, 2010). We suggest in addition that it is important to
think about assessment and formulation in terms of two inter-connected
processes: analysis and synthesis. •

•

Analysis: this entails exploration with the family about their patterns
of interactions, understandings of each other, their explanations of
problems and their attempts to solve them. This happens not just in the
early sessions but throughout therapy. Synthesis: this may follow or run
alongside the assessment and analysis. Here, we start to integrate the
strands of information into preliminary hypotheses or formulations of
the problem.

This suggested inter-dependence between analysis and synthesis is
consistent with a constructivist view which regards observation and
gathering of information as an active, selective and interpretative
process. In starting to analyse the problem we are inevitably making
assumptions and interpretations, for example about what evidence is
relevant and what further material we need. We are selectively attending
more to some factors and less to others. By adopting a reflexive stance
we may be less vulnerable to being limited by our implicit assumptions
(see Stedmon and Dallos, 2009, for an extended analysis of reflective
processes in systemic practice). In addition, we emphasise formulation
as a dynamic and collaborative process (see chapters 8 and 9) that is
developing between us and the family. By sharing our ideas with them we
move towards a co-constructed formulation. Jack: a systemic formulation
Deconstructing the problem

The initial starting point from any therapeutic perspective is to
explore the nature of the 'problem/s'. This involves an analytical
process in which we search for clues about what may be causing and
maintaining them. From a systemic perspective this typically involves a
number of related questions: • • •

How is the problem defined? Is it framed predominantly as individual or
interpersonal? Contexts -- why does the problem occur now? Where does
the problem occur and in what settings (home, school, work)? And where
is it at its worst? How does the problem affect important relationships
in the family and elsewhere? How do relationships affect the problem?

Systemic formulation

• • •

75

For whom do the problems cause most difficulties and distress -- the
parents, siblings, people outside the family? What is the life history
of the problem, when and how did it start, how has it altered over time,
and what factors influenced its development? The development of the
problem in relation to the financial resources, environmental factors,
extended family, the role of professional agencies, and cultural
discourses.

Exceptions

Alongside this exploration it is important to consider exceptions since
these can offer a clue as to what the causal and maintaining processes
might be, and can help to construct a more positive and hopeful
framework with the family. Exceptions are times when the family has been
successful in resolving the problems or can draw from other aspects of
the wider family network to develop stories of competence, achievement
and so on, such as: • • • •

recent cases of success in overcoming the problem or times when it has
been absent; exceptions that have occurred further back in time or in
other contexts as above; exceptions in the wider family network;
hypothetical exceptions -- these are invitations to consider possible
circumstances or developments where the problems might be reduced or
absent.

Genograms

Systemic formulations often start with a visual depiction, or genogram,
of the immediate family and its connections with external systems (see
Figure 4.2). The genogram gives a map of the family system and its
relationships and sources of support, and helps to direct the gathering
of further information. In Jack's case it might lead us to ask: • • • •
•

How isolated is this family? What contact is there with other relatives?
How much support has the family had since father left? Why is there no
contact between Jack and his father? What is Jack's relationship with
his sisters like? Have they visited him in hospital? Who knows about the
sexual abuse? Did his parents support him in dealing with it? Is Jack
the child who carries some allegiance to his father whereas his sisters
may have given up on him? Has this led to conflicts between Jack and his
mother and sisters? Is Jack's drinking a form of loyalty to his father
-- following in his footsteps in his use of alcohol?

76

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon Extended family -- sources of
support/conflicts? Grandparents, uncles, aunts?

Grandparents, uncles, aunts

alcoholic/violent

ill

Italian community (Italy)

Jack (25)

(S.West . UK)

Sisters (younger, at home with mother)

(in-patient unit)

Figure 4.2 Genogram of Jack's family system

Problem-maintaining patterns and feedback loops

It is possible that Jack is caught between the women in the family, and
his father. A cycle may be occurring whereby he has tried to be helpful,
to be the 'man of the family', but feels he has failed, and is
humiliated and displaced from his role as the caring big brother.
Perhaps he is now seen by the family as a burden and a cause of
problems, which may make them angry with him. This response may be
intensified by their anger at his father for 'abandoning' them all to
poverty and distress. Likewise, Jack may be worried about his mother's
health but also angry with her for kicking him out, and perhaps for
taking her feelings about father out on him. Again, Jack may feel caring
and protective towards his sisters but feel humiliated and resentful
about their 'good' role. This sense of resentment may in turn fuel a
mixture of feelings such as defeat, confusion and retaliation (see
Figure 4.3). It may well be that this pattern bears some similarities to
one that existed between Jack's father and his mother. It would be
interesting to explore whether there have been similar marital dynamics
on either or both sides of the parents' families.

Systemic formulation

77

Mixed feelings

Jack

Mother and sisters

Tries to help, fails, drinks,

Helpful, and concerned about

drugs, angry -- feels rejected

the abuse ... but then feel let down,

drink/drugs to feel better...

angry, rejecting ...

Figure 4.3 Circularity indicating core pattern maintaining the problems

Beliefs and explanations

It is possible that Jack sees himself, and is seen in the family, as
being like his father. He is said to miss his father and describes
seeing his father's face in the mirror, which suggests pre-occupation
with thoughts about him. Given the history of violence in the family,
his mother and sisters may be frightened of Jack and worried that he
will turn out the same. This perception, along with the fact that Jack
does miss his father and may be angry at his mother for 'driving him
away', could make it more likely that Jack will at times act like his
father and subsequently hate himself for doing so. It can be helpful to
consider what some of the shared beliefs between the women in the family
might be (Procter, 1981; Winter and Procter, this book; Dallos, 1996).
Procter (1981) describes families as holding contrasting beliefs which
encapsulate and maintain the patterns of relationships in the family.
For example, seeing Jack as dangerous is likely to align the women in
the family together in fear of him. In contrast, seeing him as 'ill' and
needing care may mean he is less excluded. Thus, mother's and sisters'
beliefs may include the following: • • • • • •

Jack is abusive like his father, looks like him and acts like him --
drinks, drugs and violence. Jack is a victim -- he has been abused and
cannot cope. Jack should be helping us, things are bad enough without
him causing more problems. Mother is ill and cannot cope with all of
this. The girls, in contrast to Jack, are helpful and good. Men are
useless and dangerous.

78

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

Jack's beliefs may include: • • • • •

I am not like my dad who abandoned us. I am like my dad and I miss my
dad and I don't know why he left -- he doesn't care about me/us. Mum has
made no attempt to get in contact with dad -- she doesn't care about how
I feel. My mother is ill and has been badly treated. Men, me included,
are useless and dangerous.

Scaling questions

An effective way of exploring and clarifying family members' shared
formulations is by the use of 'scaling' or 'least--most' questions. For
example, seeing Jack as dangerous is likely to align the women in the
family together in fear of him. In contrast, seeing him as 'ill' and
needing care may mean that he is less excluded. They can be invited to
consider some dimensions and to discuss where they think each member of
the family might lie on the dimension: for example,
sensitive--insensitive, similar to--different from dad (see Figure 4.4).
The questions invite the family members to consider differences in their
views, to generate new information for the therapist and to arrive at
shared viewpoints. For example, we might be surprised that they see Jack
as the most sensitive, despite also being so frightened and wary of him.
The questions also encourage the family to express their own
understandings or formulations, whether agreed or not, and can help to
promote more psychological formulations than for example, the dominant
belief that Jack is 'ill'.

Similar to dad

Different from dad

X

X

Jack

X

X

X

Sister 1 Mum Sister 2 Sister 3

Sensitive

Insensitive

X

X

Jack

Sister 1

X

X

X

Mum Sister 2 Sister 3

X Dad

Figure 4.4 Scaling technique to explore family members' positions on
core family dimensions

Systemic formulation

79

The role of illness

Both Jack and his mother are coming to share an illness identity, which
can perform the function of helping to resolve some of the mixed
feelings, thus: • •

If Jack is ill then he is not responsible for his actions and we can
forgive him and be sympathetic. Since mother is ill she cannot be
expected to resolve Jack's feelings about his dad -- she has enough on
her plate.

The consequences, though, are that Jack has to remain ill and/or become
increasingly incapacitated. This increases the burden on the family as
well, and the longer he is ill the less possible it becomes to confront
the underlying conflicts, which are concealed behind the 'illness' role.
Transitions, emotions, attachments

A helpful way of mapping transitions and changes is through the use of
family sculpts. This can employ objects, such as coins, buttons or
stones, to represent family members (and also can be elaborated by
adding friends, professionals and so on) with distances between the
objects representing emotional closeness and proximity. Rather than
focusing on normative stages, such as leaving home, the sculpt can offer
a more focused and idiosyncratic view of what transitions were important
for the family. In Jack's case it might be possible to consider the
patterning of their relationships while Jack's father was still living
with them as opposed to during the stage of him leaving the family and
afterwards, or when Jack was well and after he became 'ill'. Family
members are asked to arrange the objects on a large piece of paper and
explain their decisions as they do so. The discussion continues until
they reach a consensus or agree to differ. Interestingly, families
usually find it possible, despite initial differences of perspective, to
agree on a shared position. In carrying out the sculpt the family
members in effect reveal their own formulations along with being
prompted to consider relational formulations -- how the problems have
influenced their relationships and vice versa (see Figure 4.5). This
initial sculpt might reveal graphically how Jack was caught in the
middle in having split loyalties to his father and mother, as opposed to
his sisters who had aligned themselves with their mother (see Figure
4.6). It appeared that the family almost completely lost contact with
Jack's father after he left. Despite this, his place on the edge of the
sculpt shows that Jack was still pre-occupied with thinking about him.
However, the splits became wider with Jack's sisters retreating even
further from their father. It might also be apparent that Jack has
become more distant from his sisters due to their fear of him. It also
becomes evident that Jack's mother might feel in a very ambivalent
position in being concerned about Jack but also angry and

80

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon While dad was at home:

Mother Dad

Jack

Sisters

Figure 4.5 Sculpt with shapes indicating pattern of emotional
relationships before dad left the family After dad left

Dad Mother

Jack Sisters

Figure 4.6 Sculpt with shapes indicating pattern of emotional
relationships after dad left the family

frightened of his father. It may also be revealed that, for example one
of his sisters had tried to help Jack but increasingly felt trapped in
her ambivalent feelings about him as vulnerable but also frightening and
similar to their father. The process of conducting a sculpt can also
assist in promoting re-formulations, or therapeutic changes. This
integration of exploration/ formulation/intervention is central to
systemic practice. The information gathered can also prompt different
ideas, questions and formulations about the changes and causes of events
in the family: •

Jack started drinking around the time that his father and mother
divorced. Possibly this was to deal with the pain, or in the hope that
they would recognise his distress and stay together?

Systemic formulation

• • • •

81

This divorce was also close to the time that Jack was sexually abused
and in need of emotional support, but his parents may have been
distracted by their own distress and anger surrounding their separation?
The divorce also coincided with Jack taking on a job, presumably to help
out because of the deteriorating family fortunes? Jack's leaving home
appears to have occurred in a very negative and destructive way -- did
being thrown out contribute to his deterioration and admission to
psychiatric services shortly afterwards? The next serious development in
Jack's problems is associated with his mother developing serious health
problems -- is she now even less able to offer Jack support?

We may observe a pattern in the family whereby distress, illness and
misfortune are accompanied by further problems. It seems extremely
difficult for family members to meet each other's needs, and people
appear to respond in a symmetrical way to each others' neediness by
becoming more needy themselves. As a result, there may be so much
distress at times of crises that there is no spare capacity to resolve
the issues associated with the transitions, e.g. negotiating contact
between the children and their father (see Figure 4.7). We could also
see the situation here in terms of the entrance of professional agencies
-- the 'comfort of strangers' entering the dynamics of this family so
that, for example, the hospital takes on the role of the missing
parent/s (see Figure 4.8). The family may benefit by gaining some relief
while Jack gets looked after, but at the expense of a transition to the
hospital and Jack acquiring a chronic 'illness' identity. The support of
the hospital system may depend on Jack being seen and seeing himself as
'ill'.

Illness, abuse,

Family members, especially

burglary

Jack and his mother, become more desperately needy

Figure 4.7 The transition to a family--hospital system

82

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon Not our fault Jack is ILL

Hospital:

Mother and sisters: Jack is:

ILL

ILL/BAD? Jack

Jack (self-perception)

I am confused. Am I MAD/BAD?

Figure 4.8 Process maintaining the definition of Jack as 'ill'

Contextual factors

Systemic approaches emphasise that systems are profoundly influenced by
contexts. In this they typically include the influence of cultural
factors, the extended family, the community and different environmental
situations. For Jack's family we would consider the following factors: •
• • • •

The family has roots and connections to a different (Italian) culture
which has a strong emphasis on religion, family loyalty and closeness.
We do not know much about mother's background except that she seems to
have come to accept and value her role in an Italian community. There
appears to be a tradition of drinking on the male side of the family and
it would be interesting to know whether there were other problems on
either side of the family. There is a sense that this family is very
socially isolated and that their only support comes from the psychiatric
services. We do not know whether Jack's sisters have their own friends
and supports.

Systemic formulation

83

Summary The initial stages of formulation consist of the generation of a
range of questions. In systemic therapy this is seen as a recursive and
fluid process as captured in the notion of 'progressive hypothesising'.
The search is not for a definitive formulation but one that helps to
orient us in our search for further information and at the same time
offers a guide towards possible areas of intervention. In turn, the
initial attempts at interventions are seen as offering further
information which serves to re-shape the formulation and the direction
of interventions. What determines the usefulness of the formulation is
the extent to which the family starts to derive benefits from the work
that results from it. One of the main ways that systemic therapists
share their formulations with families is through the use of reflecting
teams, where the team members supporting the therapist discuss their
ideas in the presence of the family, and share their multiple
formulations with them (see Figure 4.9). Synthesis: a systemic
formulation for Jack So what might be a synthesis of our formulation
about Jack and his family? There are a variety of ways we could combine
the available information, and the direction we choose will also be
shaped by our own clinical and personal experiences. One version that
fits for us is the following, though we emphasise that this would only
be held as tentative. Our formulation is centred around a theme of
multiple distress. Though Jack is the identified patient in this family
there is sense of the whole family Team

Therapist

Family

Reflective Discussion

Reflection back from family

Figure 4.9 Family therapy and reflecting teams -- sharing formulations

84

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

being 'under siege'. Certainly Jack and his mother are both weighed down
by troubles and it seems likely that the sisters are also feeling
exhausted. There is a strong sense that when painful, disastrous events
happen this family has not been able to support each other in dealing
with the resulting distress. It is as if their lives are taken up with
just trying to survive. To feel happy, secure and reassured may seem
like a luxury they never have been, and never will be, able to enjoy.
Tracing this back in time, Jack seems to have been very distressed by
the loss of his father, especially since the breakdown of the marriage
may have occurred in a violent and frightening way. This may have left
the whole family feeling upset and vulnerable. Subsequently they have
experienced multiple traumas, not least the abuse that Jack was
subjected to by his boss. Since Jack's mother was herself emotionally
exhausted it is unlikely that Jack felt he could or should turn to her
for support -- she had 'enough on her plate'. So Jack may have attempted
to bury his anger and upset in an attempt to play the role of the
'strong man' in the family. However, this pressure may have been too
much for him and he subsequently turned to drugs for comfort and showed
his distress through outbursts of anger. Unfortunately all of this may
have led others to see Jack not as different from, kinder and more
caring than his father, but more like his embodiment. Sons are often
seen as similar to their fathers, especially if there is a physical
resemblance, which can be taken to imply similarities in temperament and
personality. Thus, it is possible that Jack has increasingly come to be
seen as a threat -- like his father. This sense of not being understood,
being seen as dangerous despite his good intentions, may be extremely
distressing for Jack, and his oscillation between anger, anguish and
self-medication with drugs may have added to this perception of him.
Because of their own experiences of poverty, burglary and residual pain
from the divorce, the women in the family may have had very little
'spare emotional capacity' to be understanding towards Jack. However, as
Jack's distress increased, his frightening actions may increasingly have
come to validate the belief that he 'really' is just like his father.
The women's fear and anger may have reached a point where they felt they
had no option but to seek outside help and have Jack admitted to a
psychiatric unit. This in turn may have compounded Jack's sense of
rejection, hurt and anger. There can be a self-perpetuating cycle
whereby the hospital becomes perceived as a source of support or a sort
of benevolent 'father figure'. Unfortunately one of the costs of this is
that Jack becomes to be seen, and increasingly sees himself, as 'mad'.
Family therapy might proceed in a number of ways. Central is the initial
process of gaining a positive relationship with all members of the
family. It might be the case that initially family sessions with Jack,
his mother and sisters might be too emotionally explosive. The family
therapist might first meet with Jack and utilise the systemic
formulation in work with him, for example to discuss positive aspects of
the role he has had in the family and

Systemic formulation

85

how this has changed. The therapist could also meet with the rest of the
family to start to explore their understandings and anxieties. Both Jack
and his mother and his sisters can be prepared for the eventual joint
sessions and the therapist can then utilise the positive relationships
developed with all of them to help steer the family through the
difficult feelings and dynamics that may arise. Techniques drawn from
other models, such as an empty chair to represent Jack's father, can
also be employed to explore what appears to be a central issue in this
family which is the father's continuing emotional influence over them.
Ideally, once trust and confidence with the family has developed it may
be possible to organise some communication with him, or even his
attendance at a session. This is potentially a dramatic move and would
have to be considered in full collaboration with Jack and his family.
Individual work with Jack might include a discussion about a
hypothetical future family session of this kind. For example, the
therapist might ask what he imagines might be said and felt by himself
and his mother and sisters and father. Likewise, the sculpting and
scaling activities can also usefully be incorporated into work with Jack
to explore his perceptions of family relationships and how they relate
to his problems and vice versa. The family sessions usually take place
at intervals of two weeks and in Jack's case might be expected to last
for at least 10 sessions. A successful outcome might consist of Jack
being able to meet with his mother and sisters outside of the family
sessions in a constructive and calm way. Therapy might be concluded when
the family had a shared confidence about being able to communicate
calmly with Jack and with each other, and that they could work together
to assist him. The decision about when to end is a reflective one in
which the therapist also feels confident that the family can manage in
the future and will be able to request further help if needed. Janet: a
systemic formulation A large proportion of systemic work takes place in
the context of work with children, not adults, as the identified
clients. This is the genogram for Janet, a 9-year-old girl suffering
with anxiety and developmental problems (see Figure 4.10).
Deconstructing the problems

The key features of the systemic formulation are indicated below: •

Mary has a number of concerns about Janet's behaviour and fears. She
appears to be worried that Janet is not eating properly, and that she is
becoming socially withdrawn and isolated as a result of her fear of
transport and hence loss of contact with friends and family. It is also
likely that Mary regards Janet's temper, especially when directed
towards

86

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

??

Cindy

Colin

Mary

Janet (9)

Andrew (12) 18 months

3 months

Figure 4.10 Janet's family tree

•

•

•

her, as a problem. In addition Mary has concerns about her own feelings
about Janet, having found it difficult to bond with her. She links these
feelings to the breakdown of her marriage and her fatigue. Given the
concerns from social services and school, Mary may feel a failure as a
mother and possibly that she is 'under the microscope' in relation to
suspicions of abuse or neglect of the children. Janet appears to be
angry with her mother, and may see the problems as mainly to do with
home since she is able to go to school and has friends there. Perhaps
she is frustrated by her mother's loss of mobility and ill health and is
in a sense copying her. Social services appear to have had serious
concerns that Janet might be suffering some abuse or physical neglect
resulting in the hospital admissions. This concern has also been voiced
by the school nurse, who was worried by Janet's weight loss. Mary's
clairvoyant appears to have a supernatural belief that a vision of a
'white van' is connected to Janet's fear of transport.

Mary's father's views are not known, but he may feel rejected by Janet
and under scrutiny from Mary and social services. Exceptions and
competencies

Janet has friends and is achieving adequately at school. Mary appears to
have a close relationship with her sister who is said to be fond of
Janet. Mary has

Systemic formulation

87

also had success as a mother with the son who has become a
schoolteacher, and Mary is apparently proud of this achievement.
Problem-maintaining patterns and feedback loops

There appears to be a pattern of both rejection and dependence between
Mary and Janet. Certainly Janet displays both a need for her mother,
such as sleeping in her bed, as well as venting her anger on her mother,
setting the dog on her and refusing to eat her food. Not eating and
being afraid of using transport keeps Janet ill and dependent. Mary also
appears to have a mixture of positive and negative feelings towards
Janet. This may reflect a dynamic in which Mary attempts to be patient,
caring and considerate but becomes exhausted and then becomes angry and
rejecting. Janet is the last of Mary's six children; she may have felt
desperate exhaustion, but also protectiveness, after the arrival of this
'last straw' (see Figure 4.11). Janet may have witnessed her father's
violence towards her mother and be imitating it. Mary may find it hard
to be consistent since she feels both angry about and responsible for
the painful events that Janet has experienced, and guilt about her early
feelings of wanting to reject her. Beliefs and explanations

Mary appears to believe that Janet's problems are caused by the early
difficulties in bonding. In effect, this is a belief that there may be
something fundamentally wrong in their relationship and possibly also
that she may be a 'bad mother'. She counters this with the view that
lack of bonding was caused by the exhaustion and relationship breakdown.
She is also likely to see Janet's father as partly to blame because of
his violence, though she has tried to maintain contact between him and
Janet. Since her children have such different levels of achievement, one
a schoolteacher and the other with 'autistic' problems, Anger/rejection

MARY

JANET Regret/dependency Remorse

Figure 4.11 Problem-maintaining cycle between Janet and Mary

88

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

Mary may have a belief that there is something innately or medically
wrong with Janet. She may also believe that Janet has inherited certain
characteristics, such as a bad temper, from her father. It is also
possible that Mary sees her problems in terms of being exhausted, living
in a poor area, trying to keep contact with a violent ex-partner and
coping with ill health. Janet may believe that her mother does not care
about her. She may be frustrated by her mother's ill health. She may be
angry or anxious -- perhaps feeling unsafe with her father and thus
reluctant to stay with him overnight. Extra-family beliefs

Social services may also hold a belief that family dysfunctions or even
abuse are the cause of Janet's anxieties. This belief might be supported
further by the fact that Janet seems to be calm at school in contrast to
the problems that are presented at home. Socio-cultural beliefs and
discourses

The dominant discourses shaping the beliefs of the family members and
professionals are likely to be either about neglect and abuse, or about
some form of organically based problem suffered by Janet. Less dominant
discourses might be about their social conditions, living in a socially
deprived area and perhaps being marginalised due to their Romany
origins. Another dominant discourse in play may be that of the
'naturalness of motherhood'; the idea that despite her circumstances
Mary, as a good mother, ought to feel positive and loving towards her
children rather than having 'bad' or 'unnatural' thoughts such as
wanting to put Janet into care. Ethnic/sub-cultural beliefs

Due to their Romany origins the family appear to hold beliefs about
supernatural causes of problems, which although meaningful to them,
place them outside dominant cultural norms. Transitions, emotions and
attachments

This refers to the nature of the emotional dynamics, especially the
attachments and emotional dependencies between family members and across
the generations. Depicting the changes through a sculpt may reveal, for
example, that even before her father had left Janet was already feeling
isolated and anxious (see Figure 4.12). It seems clear that there were
early problems in the attachment between Mary and Janet. Mary felt sad
and depressed when Janet was born and consequently was less able to be
emotionally warm, comforting and emotionally attentive to

Systemic formulation

89

Mary (mother)

Colin (father)

Andrew Brother

Sister 1

Janet

Figure 4.12 Sculpt: when Janet's father Colin was with the family

her. These responses may have led to an insecure attachment
representation in Janet -- a sense that she was not loved, wanted and
worthy of affection. This could partly explain why Janet now behaves in
ways which keep her anxiously tied to her mother and seeking her
approval and affection. It also looks from the sculpt as if Janet may
early on have started to see herself as not preferred or liked by her
mother. Since her father was frightening and violent she might have been
ambivalent towards him along with feeling increasingly isolated and
unloved. Mary had the problematic task of trying to manage some
connection between the children and their father whilst feeling
intimidated by him. The anxiety about transport may express Janet's fear
of being taken away from her mother. We do not know about Mary's
attachment history though she appears to have a close relationship with
her sister. She has certainly had losses -- her parents and her
relationships with the fathers of her children. It is not clear when her
parents died, but this may be linked to the attachment problems with
Janet. We do not know whether Mary's relationship with the father of her
older children was abusive, but women who are abused in relationships
have often had a history of insecure childhood relationships, witnessing
and/or being a victim of violence. This often leads to a sense of
inadequacy and low selfesteem which makes them vulnerable to entering
into abusive relationships as adults on the basis of a belief that 'I
don't deserve any better'. Contextual factors

Mary and her family face many disadvantages: they live in a socially
deprived area, Mary has poor health, she has no parents to support her
and Janet's father has been violent, alcoholic and is possibly still
abusive towards her. It is also quite likely that they have limited
financial resources. In addition their Romany identity may contribute to
their marginalisation. The professional agencies may have a high degree
of suspicion about the family and about Mary's abilities as a parent.
This may feed into her anxiety, distress and sense

90

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

of failure and self-blame. Since the involvement with social services
has extended over a considerable period of time, Mary may have become
dependent on professionals to give her advice and direction. Equally,
she may feel that her authority as a mother is being undermined, leaving
her feeling depressed and incompetent (see Figure 4.13). Synthesis: a
systemic formulation for Janet The above framework may help to direct
our attention to the complex web of factors that have shaped and
maintain the problem/s. However, it is easy to see that even the brief
examples that we have offered regarding Mary and Janet can quickly turn
into an overwhelming kaleidoscope of factors. Somehow this mass of
information needs to be combined into a manageable formulation. This
requires us to select the factors that we see as key to our
understanding of the problem. We need to construct a narrative which
links events, actions and contexts into a story or 'pattern that
connects'. We have drawn up two possible systemic formulations of this
family. Neither claims to be exhaustive but both attempt to offer a view
which fits with the available information. In practice this means that
some features or details may be given more attention than others. First
formulation

Janet's and the family's difficulties may have arisen from Mary's early
parenting experiences with Janet. Mary was experiencing abuse and the
family were in difficult circumstances. Since Janet is the last of her
six children, Mary may have been physically and emotionally exhausted,
and felt she had no energy They think I'm neglectful MARY (mother)

I'm inadequate I feel depressed I can't cope Give up - seek help

Professional scrutiny Input/advice Suspicion

Figure 4.13 Professional--family dependency cycle

PROFESSIONALS

Systemic formulation

91

left for Janet. This was the second child by Janet's father, but because
of the marital difficulties Mary may have lost the hope that she perhaps
held earlier for the relationship when their first child, Andrew, was
born. Not infrequently parents hope that a child will repair a failing
relationship or bring about a change in a partner. If Janet's father did
not respond positively to the birth of his daughter, Mary's feelings of
being overwhelmed, abused and exhausted may have made it hard to bond
with Janet. This may have set in motion a pattern of guilt which made
Mary even less able to cope with Janet. For example, it may be hard for
Mary to set clear rules about Janet sleeping with her because of her
guilt about earlier feelings of rejection. In turn, Janet may respond
to, and aggravate, this pattern by making greater demands for
reassurance from her mother and finding ways of becoming dependent but
also hostile towards her. Hence there may be a self-maintaining and
escalating pattern of comfort/rejection between them. This pattern may
also be fuelled by Mary's self-doubt about her abilities as a parent,
and her general low selfesteem resulting from domestic abuse and her
deprived living conditions. Second formulation

The second formulation is concerned more with the relationships between
Janet and her father, and between the professional systems and Mary.
Janet has recently refused to stay overnight with her father, suggesting
some anxieties about this situation. At home she is afraid of sleeping
on her own, which might be connected to possible abusive events with her
father. Refusal to eat can also be associated with sexual abuse, for
example being forced to perform oral sexual acts. Mary may be reluctant
to think about these possibilities since contact with the father has
given her some occasional respite from Janet; also, as a responsible
mother she appreciates that Janet needs to have a relationship with her
father. Furthermore, Mary may be aware of social service suspicions, and
be afraid that being more open about her worries may lead her to being
blamed for not having drawn attention to possible abuse earlier. She may
even fear that her children might be taken away from her. This lack of
action might in turn engender anger in Janet towards her mother 'not
protecting her'. The escalating pattern of mutual suspicion and concern
is illustrated below (see Figure 4.14). Comments These two formulations
are not exclusive and can be seen as additive. The second one may seem
blaming in its suspicions about Janet's father. An alternative view is
to see Janet's father as caught up in a process where he is stereotyped
as an 'abuser', alcoholic, violent and irresponsible. Families who live
in such deprived social contexts may tend to be seen in this way, but it
is important to remember that this is not the only context in which
abuse occurs,

92

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon They don' t trust me They may remove
children I can't reveal my concerns I don't trust them MARY

SOCIAL SERVICES\*

Mary doesn't show appropriate concern about possible abuse Not sure we
can trust her Child protection concerns \* Also other professionals

Figure 4.14 Escalating pattern of distrust between Mary and social
services

and it can be discriminatory to assume that because a family is poor and
live in a deprived area that abuse is occurring. However, in the context
of a history of injuries such a hypothesis would at least need to be
considered. Importantly, though, a systemic hypothesis attempts to
consider how the family-- professional system can escalate and make
matters worse as well as better. Escalating cycles of suspicion can fuel
a sense of failure and eventual hopeless passivity in mothers like Mary.
An important initial question is which parts of the family to convene
for family sessions. Given the potential dangers and conflicts between
Janet's mother and father, an initial meeting might be planned with just
Janet and her mother's side of the family. Both in order to most
effectively promote change but also to develop the formulations, it is
important to see a range of family members. This might usefully include
Janet, her mother, aunt Cindy, and Janet's brother Andrew and her half
siblings. The initial work might focus on gaining everyone's
perspectives on the problems and their ideas about the causes. The
exploratory ideas already described, such as sculpts and scaling
questions, also serve the function of promoting change in that they help
to reveal each family member's thinking. The activities also require
family members to interact in new less problematic ways and, with the
therapist's and team's help, to be able to discuss potentially difficult
and suppressed issues. It would also be important to try and arrange a
session attended by Janet's parents. Children can benefit greatly by
seeing their parents being able to move beyond their conflicts and talk
in a constructive way about their welfare. Where the parents are still
in considerable disagreement, some initial sessions for them as parents
before a session which includes the child can be a helpful start.

Systemic formulation

93

The politics of formulation It is tempting to try and produce assessment
and formulation schemes which set out clear and detailed guidelines for
clinicians to follow. While this may be helpful, not least in revealing
the complexity of the task involved, we prefer to suggest that
formulation contains within it the core conceptual, psychological and
philosophical issues relating to all types of therapy. Most
fundamentally we are compelled to consider what we understand to be a
problem or symptom. Family therapy offers a social model of the causes
and maintenance of problems. It has also become increasingly critical of
medical and pathologising processes (White and Epston, 1990; Hoffman,
1993; Dallos and Draper, 2010). Within this framework, family therapy
offers a critical position that endeavours to question the potentially
oppressive assumptions that may be made about family members and that
family members may even have been conscripted into holding about
themselves: I sometimes think that 99 per cent of the suffering that
comes in through my door has to do with how devalued people feel by the
labels that have been applied to them or the derogatory opinions they
hold about themselves (Hoffman, 1993: 79) In essence this is the
cornerstone of the social constructionist (post-modern) position that
characterises contemporary family therapy practice. More broadly this
places the clinician working with families in a variety of complex
positions regarding formulation: • • • •

as (usually) an employee of the state we may feel pressure to offer
formulations which contain elements of social control, for example to
enable a child in a family to become 'less disruptive' and return to
school; it is important to consider how families may internalise
dominant medical difficulties and come to apply diagnostic categories
such as ADHD or Asperger's in their own formulations of the problems
(Rapley et al., 2011); we need to pay attention in our formulations to
patterns of inequalities and oppressions which have aggravated some of
the distresses and conflicts in the family and which contribute to the
development of problems; we may be aware of the competing definitions of
what their problem is and whether there is a 'problem'. Differing views
may be held by the individual, the family, members within the family,
various agencies such as the police and social services, the school, the
legal system, cultural systems and the therapist's professional system.

In effect, a primary aspect of formulation is the juggling of these
competing definitions or constructions about family problems. A
clinician engaged in

94

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

family therapy needs to take account also of the legacy of their
profession and the expectations that colleagues hold. For example, there
may be an expectation that clinical psychologists are 'experts' at
assessment and formulation and more specifically that they will be able
to assess whether an individual in a family 'really' has an individual
or a family problem. Referring back to the quote from Lynn Hoffman, we
can see that including a political dimension to systemic formulation
permits a wider formulation of how self-punishing, negative and
destructive views have arisen and are being maintained. Although
systemic approaches take the family and other intimate relational
systems as the primary focus for formulation, this is only the starting
point. Systemic therapy recognises that families are connected to
multiple systems and that we need to extend formulation to all of these.
This is a profound shift from the early days of family therapy when
there was a danger of the family becoming just the new site of the
pathologising process -- subject to formulations which in effect blamed
families for making their members mad or bad. An approach which sees
families and their members as influenced by powerful cultural forces,
both structural and ideological, shares with others (Boyle, 1990;
Johnstone, 2000) a strong emancipatory aim. Key characteristics of a
systemic formulation • • • • • •

Problems are regarded as residing in relational processes as opposed to
within individuals. Formulation is seen as centrally concerned with
exploring the meanings, understandings and explanations that family
members hold about the problems. Formulation is seen as an active,
recursive, dynamic process (progressive hypothesising). Exploration and
gathering information for formulation is seen as also promoting change.
There is not considered to be a clear distinction between
exploration--formulation--intervention. Formulation is seen as
collaborative in that the therapist is jointly developing formulation
with family members in order that new ways of understanding the problems
can evolve. Family members may have different and conflicting
formulations and therapists need to try and gain a picture of the range
of different formulations held.

References Boyle, M. (1990) Schizophrenia: A Scientific Delusion? 2nd
edn. Hove, UK: Brunner-Routledge. Byng-Hall, J. (1980) 'Symptom bearer
as marital distance regulator: clinical implications', Family Process,
19, 4: 355--365.

Systemic formulation

95

Carr, A. (2006) Family Therapy: Concepts, Process and Practice. 2nd edn.
Chichester: Wiley. Carter, E. and McGoldrick, M. (1988) The Changing
Family Life Cycle: A Framework for Family Therapy. 2nd edn. New York:
Gardner. Cecchin, G. (1987) 'Hypothesizing, circularity and neutrality
revisited: an invitation to curiosity', Family Process, 26, 4: 405--413.
Dallos, R. (1991) Family Belief Systems, Therapy and Change. Milton
Keynes: Open University Press. ------(1996) Interacting Stories:
Narratives, Family Beliefs and Therapy. London: Karnac. Dallos, R. and
Draper, R. (2010) Introduction to Family Therapy: Systemic Theory and
Practice. 3rd edn. Milton Keynes: Open University Press. Goldner, V.
(1998) 'The treatment of violence and victimisation in intimate
relationship', Family Process, 37, 3: 263--286. Haley, J. (1973)
Uncommon Therapy: The Psychiatric Techniques of M.H. Erickson. New York:
Norton. Hoffman, L. (1993) Exchanging Voices: A Collaborative Approach
to Family Therapy. London: Karnac. Johnstone, L. (2000) Users and
Abusers of Psychiatry: A Critical Look at Psychiatric Practice. 2nd edn.
London, Philadelphia: Brunner-Routledge. Palazzoli, M.S., Boscolo, L.,
Prata, G. and Cecchin, G. (1978) Paradox and Counterparadox: A New Model
in the Therapy of the Family in Schizophrenic Transaction. New York:
Jason Aronson. Palazzoli, M.S., Boscolo, L., Cecchin, G. and Prata, G.
(1980) 'Hypothesisingcircularity-neutrality: three guidelines for the
conductor of the session', Family Process, 19: 3--12. Proctor, H. (1981)
'Family construct psychology'. In S. Walrond-Skinner (ed.) Family
Therapy and Approaches. London: Routledge. Rapley, M., Montcrieff, J.
and Dillon, J. (2011) De-Medicalising Misery: Psychiatry, Psychology and
the Human Condition. Basingstoke: Palgrave. Stedmon, J. and Dallos, R.
(2009) Reflective Practice in Psychotherapy and Counseling. Maidenhead:
McGraw Hill. Tomm, K. (1987) 'Interventive interviewing, part II.
Reflexive questioning as a means to developing self-healing', Family
Process 26: 167--183. Watzlawick, P., Weakland, J. and Fisch, R. (1974)
Change: Principles of Problem Formation and Problem Resolution. New
York: Norton. White, M. and Epston, D. (1990) Narrative Means to
Therapeutic Ends. London: Norton.

Chapter 5

Formulation and narrative therapy Telling a different story David Harper
and Dave Spellman

Formulation and narrative therapy In this chapter we discuss how
formulation might be understood within a tradition of narrative therapy
(White and Epston, 1990). In common with approaches like systemic family
therapy and community psychology, it does not see problems as lying
within the person. However, it is sometimes misunderstood as a liberal
humanistic approach seeking to empower people. Yet narrative therapy
makes quite different assumptions, adopting a questioning approach to
concepts like 'strengths' and does provide straightforwardly causal
formulations. As a result we will begin by outlining the assumptions of
this approach before turning to the issue of formulation and then
describing how we might formulate our work with Jack and Janet.
Theoretical influences on the development of narrative therapy Michael
White and David Epston were both social workers who later trained as
family therapists. They developed a collaborative approach despite
living in different countries (Australia and New Zealand, respectively).
Their work could be seen as having three main influences. Firstly, they
noted that although therapeutic conversations involved people sharing
stories about themselves, psychotherapy traditions did not give much
attention to the importance of narrative. They began to read the work of
theorists for ideas -- for example what makes one narrative richer than
another? Secondly, they were influenced by the work of anthropologists
like Clifford Geertz and Barbara Myerhoff. Anthropology is often seen as
a way of helping us to stand back and question our taken-for-granted
understandings of the world by making the familiar strange, and the
strange familiar. They developed Geertz's (1973) notion of thin and
thick description, noting that the latter offered a way of developing
more richly textured narratives than the more superficial 'thin'
descriptions afforded by, for example, psychiatric diagnostic labels.
They found in anthropology a way of looking at the rituals of everyday
life and drawing on

Formulation and narrative therapy

97

that knowledge to develop new rituals which might help strengthen new
stories. For example, from Myerhoff's (1982) study of groups of elders
they developed the notion that our stories about ourselves are not a
private matter of finding the 'true self' within; rather identities were
public achievements with people telling stories about themselves and
others which shaped the way those listening storied themselves and
others. A final influence was the work of the French philosopher and
historian of thought, Michel Foucault. Foucault was one of a number of
'post-Structuralist' thinkers who questioned the influence of
structuralist philosophies in the human sciences. We can see the
influence of structuralism in therapeutic traditions where actions are
seen as behaviours flowing from 'deeper' mechanisms like internal
states, emotions, drives, thoughts and so on. Examples can be seen in
cognitive therapy (with its cognitions and schemas), psychoanalysis
(with its drives and defences) and structuralist family therapy (with
its hierarchies and boundaries). In particular White and Epston were
influenced by Foucault's focus on the link between power and knowledge
and by how particular ways of viewing the world are embodied in certain
institutions. They drew from Foucault a concern with how people are
subtly -- and often not so subtly -- regulated by the normalising gaze
of society. Relating these ideas to social constructionism Some of these
theoretical currents had already been taken up within the discipline of
psychology. Thus psychologists like Jerome Bruner, Theodore Sarbin and
Miller Mair had sketched out the implications of viewing narrative as a
fundamental metaphor in psychology. Psychologists like Ian Parker and
Erica Burman had drawn on Foucault's work in social psychology. In
addition, from the mid 1980s onwards a number of psychologists like
Kenneth Gergen began to take these ideas forward under the broad banner
of social constructionism1 which can be seen as an incorporation into
psychology of many of the ideas associated with post-structuralism
(Burr, 2003). There is no singular definition of social constructionism,
since it is more of a conceptual framework than a clearly delineated
theoretical model. Moreover, there is a very broad church of theorists
within this tradition. Gergen (1985) has argued, however, that there are
four assumptions implicit in most social constructionist work. Firstly,
there is a radical doubt about our taken-forgranted knowledge. Thus
social constructionists adopt a questioning approach towards
psychological concepts. For example, as Burr (2003) notes, they do not
seek explanations in terms of innate discoverable psychological
properties or essences like 'personality' or 'cognitions'. Secondly,
they view knowledge as historically, socially and culturally specific.
Thirdly, they argue that social and cultural processes influence what is
seen as 'true'. Finally, they argue that the ways we describe and
explain phenomena are not 'neutral' but, rather, served to sustain
certain viewpoints to the exclusion of others. In other words,

98

David Harper and Dave Spellman

by talking and writing about the world in particular ways, we bring into
being -- or construct -- certain ways of seeing the world. However, it
is only really within psychology and, to some degree sociology, that
these ideas are labelled as social constructionist. Many authors,
including White and Epston, have not used this label to describe their
work, preferring the term postStructuralist instead. Social
constructionism does nevertheless provide a useful way of identifying a
family resemblance amongst a group of therapists influenced by similar
ideas (McNamee and Gergen 1992).2 As social constructionism tends to be
a more familiar framework for psychologists and psychotherapists, we
will use this term throughout the chapter. The assumptions of narrative
therapy Narrative therapy has been described by a range of practitioners
(e.g. Freedman and Combs, 1996; Madigan, 2011; Morgan, 2000; Payne,
2006; White and Epston, 1990).3 For this reason we will not provide a
detailed account here, but essentially, it sees problems in living as
occurring when the stories people have available about themselves do not
accord with their lived experience. There is a link here with the social
constructionist concern to take a questioning approach to our
taken-for-granted knowledge and to see it as historically and culturally
specific. Thus diagnostic constructs, which are often portrayed as real
scientific entities -- part of nature -- are, for example, seen as only
one story available to people. In their work White and Epston sought to
'de-naturalise' these taken-for-granted notions. When people seek
professional help, often their lives have become single storied,
limiting, limited and superficial rather than richly textured and
multi-storied. If people have experienced their difficulties for a long
time and have received mental health intervention these stories are
often problem-saturated and pathologising and they will have acquired
individualising and internalised problem labels. White and Epston aimed
to have different kinds of conversations which might open up alternative
meanings of distress. For example, they were interested in the history
of the problem and of the dominant narrative but they also sought to
plot a history of new, previously hidden alternative stories. However,
because they saw stories building on internal state or trait concepts as
inherently limiting, they drew on Bruner's notion of intentional
narratives, encouraging people to develop stories which featured
'purposes, values, beliefs, hopes, dreams, visions and commitments to
ways of living' (White, 2004: 86) rather than on internal states like
'strengths' (a concept which is dependent on the notion of weakness in
order to have any meaning). Moreover, they continually invited people to
stand back from these stories and to make choices about whether they
enhanced and enriched their lives or else limited and diminished them.
Often people came to see that they had options and choices of which they
were previously unaware, and by developing criteria by which to judge
these stories, clients became more aware of their values (i.e. what was
important for them).

Formulation and narrative therapy

99

White and Epston sought to have conversations which might identify the
traces of more marginalised or subordinated stories, stories which broke
with the dominant narrative and which would be experienced by clients as
enhancing the way they saw themselves and increasing the options
available to them in their lives. They showed how knowledge is sustained
by social processes by drawing attention to the cultural rituals which
currently support certain dominant narratives -- thus the process of
diagnosis sustains the stories (e.g. chronicity) and identities
(e.g. 'schizophrenic') provided by diagnostic categorisations whilst
also serving to obscure the influence of other factors (e.g. stigma,
discrimination or the side effects of psychiatric medications). However,
they also saw here the possibility of creating new rituals which could
sustain more subordinated narratives. It is easy to lose the traces of
alternative stories and they can become edited out of the dominant
narrative of our lives; important people and connections with them can
be lost and forgotten. One way of elaborating these stories is, during
therapeutic conversations, to engage in a process of scaffolding -- a
notion developed by theorists following Vygotsky's (1978) concept of the
zone of proximal development. Here particular questions are asked in
order to support (or 'scaffold') the development of emerging stories.
White and Epston also engaged in externalising conversations whereby
clients were invited to consider their problems not as signs of
internalised and individualised deficit or pathology -- something that
was their fault -- but, rather as lying outside themselves. The
therapist, client and others were thus united in a struggle against a
problem which was seen as external -- 'the problem, not the person, is
the problem' became a key motto -- and this could help to undermine the
sense of failure which is often a consequence of the dominant narrative.
Later, White noted how stories became richer when they were responded to
by others. Thus when we are telling someone a story about ourselves and
they respond with another story, or an emotional response or a joke,
these shape our telling of the story. Seeing identity as a public
achievement it became important to include others' responses to a
client's story. The people who were an audience to a person's story were
seen as 'outsider witnesses' and, in therapy sessions, Michael White
would often interview one member of the family and then interview other
family members or members of an outsider witness group (similar to Tom
Andersen's Reflecting Team approach) about their response to this story
(e.g. how it resonated with something they experienced). He would then
return to the person and interview them about how they responded to
these responses, leading to a greater elaboration of these stories.
Finally, White and Epston were acutely aware of the influence of power
and how the normalising gaze of society supported more dominant stories.
For example, we cannot understand young women's concerns about their
bodies and eating without understanding the way in which they view their
bodies through a societal prism -- a prism sustained by the advertising,
fashion and publishing industries for profit -- which equates thinness
with beauty and

100

David Harper and Dave Spellman

moral good and which sets different standards of beauty for women than
for men. There is a relationship between dominant narratives and power
in society (see chapter 6). For example, they obscure and mystify the
effects of power relations by inviting people to compare themselves
unfavourably to unattainable and idealised images of what is normal. As
a result people begin to elaborate problem-saturated descriptions of
themselves -- for example as a 'chronic schizophrenic' or as a 'child
with ADHD'. White and Epston sought to make a positive use of their
understanding of power by interviewing people so that they became aware
of the tactics which their problems used to get the upper hand in their
lives. Narrative therapy represents a move away from a linear cause and
effect paradigm where the role of the expert is to find out and fix, and
for this reason, like solution-focused therapy, it has no position on
the aetiology or cause of problems (White in Stewart, 1995). Narrative
therapists prefer rich, multistoried and intentional narratives to
causal explanations framed in terms of 'factors' like internalised
psychological processes which would be seen as thin descriptions and
single storied narratives. As a result, causal formulations of problems
are not a part of this approach. The assumptions of narrative therapy
pose a challenge for efficacy research since this is traditionally based
on quite different epistemological assumptions (Harper et al., 2013),
yet there is an emerging and promising evidence base (Chenail et al.,
2012). Stretching the notion of formulation A formulation is usually
interpreted as an explanation of the causes (e.g. precipitants and
maintaining factors) of problems which indicates priorities for
therapeutic intervention. Such a definition, which positions the
therapist as a technical expert, poses a particular challenge for social
constructionism (Harper and Moss, 2003). But do formulations only have
to be about problems? How might this fit with theoretical traditions
which are not based on theories of aetiology and pathology? Moreover,
who gets to define what the 'problem' is (Boyle, 2001; see also chapters
4 and 12)? Do formulations have to be causal and historical? One
solution to these dilemmas has been proposed by Alan Carr (2012) who has
suggested that, as well as formulations of problems, it is also possible
to construct an analogous formulation from a solution-focused
perspective of exceptions to those problems, identifying the
interactional processes which sustain them. Another proposal by one of
us (DH) in collaboration with Duncan Moss is that therapists could see
their work as a process of on-going collaborative sense-making rather
than one of developing objective or semiobjective descriptions of the
causes of a problem. This is similar to the notion of progressive
hypothesising found in other family therapy traditions (see chapter 4).
Formulations, then, are situated in particular contexts and oriented to
particular purposes. In other words, they are perspectives: a view from

Formulation and narrative therapy

101

somewhere, rather than the scientific notion of a view from nowhere. To
express this in more narrative terms: if clinical work is seen as a
series of dialogues or conversations, then a therapist's formulation is
one person's story (their story, though authored in collaboration with
the client) and account of that conversation (Harper and Moss, 2003).
From this viewpoint, a formulation is a structured story for therapists
and clients which gives one account of why things are the way they are
and what might need to happen for things to change, and which orients
therapist and client towards ways forward (Bob, 1999; Corrie and Lane,
2010; Parry and Doan, 1994). Formulations are stories which are
constructed rather than discovered and so it is their usefulness and fit
for the client which is most important. But does this mean that
formulations are fictions? Family therapist Bebe Speed offers an
interesting perspective on this question: I can tell many stories about
myself, who I am and the different selves or parts of me which are
called forth in my interactions with others \[but how\] I behave and
feel in any context is not random, but patterned. My life is not a
fiction ... Clients and I construct together some account of what's
going on. It won't be the only one possible, the truth about the
situation ... There will be other versions of their situation that I
(not to mention other therapists) and they together could have
constructed that would also have had some fit and been relatively
adequate to their situation. (Speed, 1999: 136) Our definition of
formulation may seem vague, but the notion of formulation needs to be
stretched somewhat if it is to cover a range of approaches from the more
conventional conceptualisation of biographical and historical causes of
problems to non-causal and non-pathological understandings. Preamble to
the case examples As the other contributors to this volume have noted,
it is challenging to offer formulations in relation to clients whom we
have not met, especially since one of the foundations of narrative
therapy is the emphasis it places on listening to clients' actual words
and asking the kinds of questions which may not be asked in other
approaches. However, we are persuaded of the pedagogical value of trying
to attempt a formulation, with the proviso that readers bear in mind
that we have not met these clients or their families and that these case
examples, like all vignettes in the literature, are particular narrative
constructions based on interviews conducted by therapists from a
different theoretical orientation. Systemic and community psychology
traditions see formulations as dynamic and ongoing, and a narrative
therapy perspective takes this further in

102

David Harper and Dave Spellman

that therapy and formulation are mutually inter-woven activities. Since
narrative therapy may be relatively unfamiliar to many readers, in the
examples that follow we will develop a more descriptive kind of
formulation, focusing both on how we might have proceeded in the
sessions (e.g. what questions we might have asked and why) and on what
narratives might have emerged from these sessions. The latter will be
necessarily more speculative as the directions in which the therapeutic
conversations went from there would very much depend on how the people
in the room responded. Jack: a narrative therapy formulation The
narrative therapist would come to the session with Jack with some
knowledge of alternative ways of conceptualising and working with people
reporting experiences which others would see as symptoms of psychosis or
of 'schizophrenia' (Brigitte et al., 1996; Dulwich Centre, 1995; O'Neill
and Stockell, 1991; Parker et al., 1995; Stewart, 1995; White, 1987).
There has been a great deal of recent interest in more hopeful
narratives about experiences seen as psychotic (Dillon, 2011). In the
section that follows, we have followed Morgan's (2000) introductory
guide to narrative therapy to provide a structure for thinking about how
conversations with Jack might proceed. Obviously, therapy is a dynamic
and recursive process and so these elements would not necessarily follow
each other in a linear fashion and the order in which areas would be
explored would depend on both Jack and the therapist. One approach here
might be for the therapist to reflect on the assumptions within the
referral letter, considering both the implicit dominant narratives at
work (as expressed by Jack; by his family; by professionals; and in the
wider culture) as well as possible subordinate narratives (e.g. Jack's
competence and the impact of traumas on him). In Jack's case, the
therapist had little referral information before he was first seen,
which limits the opportunity to give these issues some thought.
Externalising conversations: naming the problem

As we have noted earlier, narrative therapists use a variety of
practices in order to try to make previously invisible options visible
by helping clients elaborate more hopeful but subordinate narratives.
Externalising conversations can be useful here as many people who seek
help feel they are to blame in some way for their problems. From a
narrative therapy viewpoint, we might see this discourse as an effect of
the normalising gaze of society. Morgan (2000) suggests that a number of
things can be externalised: feelings; problems between people; cultural
and social practices; and the metaphors people use in talking about
their problems. From the account of Jack's difficulties there seem to be
a number of candidates for externalisation. It is important to bear in
mind the question of whether there is a problem

Formulation and narrative therapy

103

and, if so, who gets to define it. As a result the therapist would very
much focus on how Jack saw the problem, if he saw one at all. The
therapist would listen out for opportunities to externalise using Jack's
own words and phrases, rather than professional jargon -- for example
Jack might talk of 'fear' rather than 'anxiety'. A well-known example of
this is that Winston Churchill often referred to his depressed feelings
as his 'black dog'. Indeed, many clients spontaneously talk about an
issue in an externalising way, which the therapist can then extend. From
the information about Jack we surmise that he might talk about the
problem of fear. Fear impacts on Jack's life in a number of ways. He is
afraid of Robbie Williams and his minders. He is fearful about leaving
his accommodation in case he is attacked. He is also afraid of seeing
his father's face reflected back at him in the mirror, possibly
suggesting 'fear' might persuade him that he was like his father
(especially given that he has developed similar difficulties in relation
to alcohol). He is also afraid for his mother and sisters, especially
the sister who, he believed, had been raped (although there was no
evidence that this had really happened). Another thing which might be
externalised is guilt. One might be interested in how 'guilt' affected
Jack. He might talk here about guilt about sex, particularly given that
he had been sexually victimised by the male manager at his Saturday job.
He might also talk about guilt at feeling he had brought trouble on the
family and about the events which led up to his mother asking him to
leave the house. Given dominant cultural discourses about men being the
breadwinners, 'guilt' may make him feel that he has been a 'failure'
according to these dominant stories. Guilt might also have persuaded him
that he might be to blame for his parents separating. Although anger
might present itself as ideal for externalising, this would need careful
thought. For example, externalising 'anger' here might invite Jack to
move away from a sense of responsibility for the effects of his actions.
Carey and Russell (2002) discuss some of the issues involved in
considering whether, when and what to externalise. Alan Jenkins (2009)
has outlined some other alternatives were Jack to want to focus on his
anger. However, one might be able to explore what impact the anger has
had on Jack and those close to him, for example anger about Robbie
Williams; his father's behaviour; and his own abuse. Similarly, Jack
might wish to talk about the effect that drink, drugs, theft and
homelessness have had on his life and on the lives of others. Our main
point is that there are many things which could be externalised, but
which ones are taken up depends on Jack and the therapist working
together. Interestingly, from his own account Jack did not identify his
beliefs about Robbie Williams, the royalty cheque, or the alleged rape
of his sister per se as problems and so we have not included them here
as targets for intervention. Were they to prove a focus for Jack, the
narrative therapist might note how beliefs not shared by others become
constructed as socially devalued by more powerful others like
professionals (Boyle, 2002; Georgaca, 2000; Harper,

104

David Harper and Dave Spellman

2011; Heise, 1988). However, they often provide dramatic narratives for
those who believe them (de Rivera and Sarbin, 1998). This suggests that
it may be less important to focus on the veracity of the beliefs than on
the person's relationship with them; for example, the extent to which
the beliefs disrupt the life they wish to lead (Harper, 2011; Knight,
2009). Narrative therapy and social constructionist thinking about
'paranoia', for example, readily links it to experiences of
victimisation, surveillance and discrimination (e.g. racial
discrimination) in Western culture (Cromby and Harper, 2009; Hardy,
2001; Harper, 2011). Morgan (2000) suggests that narrative therapists
ask the client to give the problem a name. Then begins a thorough
exploration and personification of the problem in order to continue the
process of helping the person to separate their identity from that of
the problem/s. Questions here might focus on the tricks and tactics
which the problem uses to gain the upper hand in Jack's life (for an
example of this kind of discussion see Brigitte et al., 1996). What are
its purposes for Jack? Who are the problem's allies? For example, Jack
might say that throughout his life he had had jokes aimed at him as a
British Italian man or had experienced discrimination because of mental
health problems, and thus, racism and injustice might be seen as an ally
of the problem (see Patel and Fatimilehin, 1999). Following this kind of
conversation, the therapist would ask Jack how he described his
relationship with the problem. Was he happy with how it was or would he
like it to change? The purpose of such questions is to engage Jack in a
conversation in revising his relationship with the problem (e.g. to
resist it or to live with it in a different manner) opening up choices
where Jack may have seen none previously. Jack might say he was unhappy
with how the problems dominated him and that he wanted things to change,
to be more hopeful for the future. Tracing the history of the problem

Although narrative therapy is sometimes misrepresented as a
'here-and-now' therapy not interested in the past, narrative therapists
spend a lot of time asking questions which track forwards and backwards
in time between the present, past and future, and so the therapist might
next turn to examining the history of the problems in Jack's life, and
his relationship to them. For ease of reading we will refer here to one
problem, though in cases where clients discuss a number of problems,
Morgan (2000) suggests asking them to prioritise them. One might ask
Jack when he first noticed the influence of the problem. How has it
changed over time? Conversations like this can help people to feel that
the problem is not necessarily static and unchanging. Allen (1994)
quotes an example from Michael White about how he might approach a
client diagnosed as 'paranoid':

Formulation and narrative therapy

105

If a person is totalised as 'paranoid', I might ask them a series of
questions like: How did you get recruited into the sense that you are
under surveillance? In response to this question, persons speak of their
experience more politically. (Allen, 1994: 31) So one might ask Jack
when 'fear' began persuading him that he might be attacked. He might say
that this began around the time his mother became physically ill and
when finances were stretched. We might also ask what things or people
might have been in league with the fear (for example the manager who
sexually abused Jack). Exploring the effects of the problem

Problems often leave a legacy of negative effects on people's lives and
it is important, indeed essential, to gain a full appreciation of the
problem's legacy. In narrative therapy the focus is on doing this in a
way which allows the client to separate their identity from that of the
problem. One way to achieve this is to map the effects of the problem on
the person's life. Thus, one might ask Jack how the problem has affected
his view of himself and his future. How does it interfere with his life?
For example, what does 'fear' stop him doing? Jack might say that it has
stopped him going out and that he has begun to lose significant
relationships with others like family members. He might talk about how
he has begun to lose his interest in music. One could also ask him about
how 'guilt' has changed the way he views himself. How has 'anger'
changed his relationships with those close to him? The therapist also
asks the client to evaluate these effects. In his later work Michael
White drew on a reading of the work of Jacques Derrida to develop the
notion of the 'absent but implicit' (Carey et al., 2009), in other
words, how implicit values can be detected in clients' accounts of their
experiences. For example, when a client tells us about the negative
effects of a problem they are simultaneously also telling us about the
values, people and activities which are important to them and which can
provide the basis for a new story. Thus one might ask Jack what these
effects are like for him and his family. If he saw these in negative
terms, one could ask him why, and he might then talk about how these
problems get in the way of him showing his love for others; developing
friendships outside his family; allowing him to be as close to his
family as he would like; and/or doing good to others as he would like.
Situating the problem in context: deconstruction

Morgan (2000: 45) argues that from a narrative therapy perspective,
'problems only survive and thrive when they are supported and backed up
by particular ideas, beliefs and principles'. As a result of a
normalising societal gaze, people

106

David Harper and Dave Spellman

often feel as if they are failing when judging themselves according to
an idealised norm or standard. Narrative therapists are interested in
making these assumptions available for exploration. Morgan refers to
this as a deconstruction. Dallos and Stedmon (chapter 4) have discussed
how systemic therapists also use this practice. One might be interested,
for example, in taken-for-granted cultural ideas which may be related to
the problems. For a British-Italian man, particular Roman Catholic ideas
about guilt, the role of men and the place of the family might play a
role in the story. As a man, there might be culturally available stories
about alcohol, violence and the expression of some emotions (e.g. anger)
but not others (e.g. fear, sadness, loneliness, etc.). There might also
be beliefs about who should be the breadwinner in a family and the role
of fathers and sons (such as carrying on the family business) in
relation to mothers and sisters. Others (e.g. family members) present in
a session could be interviewed about these cultural ideas. These kinds
of conversations can be particularly powerful in the context of group or
community meetings, revealing that problems are political, not simply
private and personal (Brigitte et al., 1996; Denborough, 2008; Freedman
and Combs, 2009; O'Neill and Stockell, 1991). One option is to encourage
group members to look through magazines and newspapers or videotapes of
TV programmes and films to see what dominant stories are culturally
available -- in the case of Jack this might include stories about mental
health, about Italians or about young men. Such conversations can help
people to begin to stand back from these dominant stories, seeing them
as culturally and historically specific rather than as universal truths.
So far, the therapist has focused on the problem, its effects and the
implicit assumptions which sustain it. However, in order to begin the
process of tracing out alternative stories the therapist needs to seek
out examples of times when the problem has not been totally successful
in achieving dominance in Jack's life. In narrative therapy these are
called unique outcomes (similar to the idea of exceptions in
solution-focused therapy). They can provide the building blocks for the
new stories we seek to scaffold with clients. Unique outcomes

The therapist shows particular interest in times when the person has,
even in a small way, managed to challenge, resist or in some other way
develop a more hopeful relationship with the problem.4 He or she will
listen for any times when the problem appears to have had less of an
influence on the client or even no influence at all. These provide an
opportunity to start to plot an alternative story to the dominant
problem-saturated one. Unique outcomes could include a plan; an action;
a feeling; a dream; a commitment; a thought and so on (Morgan, 2000). If
the client is unable to think of such episodes, the therapist

Formulation and narrative therapy

107

might ask something like 'How have you managed to stop the problem from
getting even worse?' Thus, one might ask Jack in what ways he has
resisted the power of 'fear'. He might describe how he had overcome
'fear' in order to come along to the session or to accompany his mother
to the corner shop. The therapist might ask how Jack had managed to deal
with the fear that, at other times, appears to paralyse him. One could
also ask whether the influence of 'guilt' on his life has ever changed
or whether there have been any times when he has been able to resist the
urges of 'anger'. Further questions will help to richly elaborate the
emerging story. From what we know of Jack, there are a number of avenues
which might lead us to unique outcomes. One might ask about how he had
managed to survive on the streets when he was homeless, or develop new
relationships in the homeless project. How did he manage to stick at
jobs even for a short time? The therapist might also ask how Jack had
coped with his own sexual abuse and his father's violence. Wade (1997:
23) has argued that whenever people are badly treated, they find some
way to resist. Thus 'alongside each history of violence and oppression,
there runs a parallel history of prudent, creative and determined
resistance'. Similarly, Warner (2009) has pointed out how activities
like drinking alcohol or using legal and illegal drugs to excess, which
may be viewed as problems by professionals, can also be seen as creative
ways of coping with the legacy of abuse, even if they are subsequently
experienced by people as getting in the way of the life they now want to
lead. These unique outcomes and the responses of the person (or anyone
in an outsider witness position or from Jack's life outside the therapy
room), become the building blocks of the subordinate narratives of the
person's life. As a result of rich descriptions of these unique outcomes
or 'sparkling events', Jack might develop new stories of his life. For
example, he might begin to see himself less as a passive observer of his
life and more as an active agent. These new stories are often very
fragile and considerable effort and skill goes into helping the person
elaborate them by rooting them in their history. Tracing the history and
meaning of the unique outcomes and naming an alternative story

The therapist attempts to trace the history of the unique outcomes in
order to 'firmly ground them, make them more visible, and link them in
some way with an emerging new story' (Morgan, 2000: 59). This takes a
lot of effort: the therapist is interested in the particularities of
each unique outcome. Who? What? Where? When? Two particular categories
of enquiry are 'landscape of action' questions, and 'landscape of
identity' questions. Landscape of action questions might include, 'How
did you manage to look after yourself whilst you were homeless? When did
it happen? Who else was

108

David Harper and Dave Spellman

there? How long did it last? What happened just before or after? How did
you prepare yourself?' Landscape of identity questions focus on the
person's desires, intentions, preferences, beliefs, hopes, personal
qualities, values, commitments, plans and so on. For example, one might
ask Jack whether his survival on the street led him to revise his
opinion of himself as a 'failure', and he might be able to see that he
drew on his ability to be streetwise to keep himself safe at times.
Thus, Jack might begin to reconnect with his own knowledges and agency.
After tracing and elaborating an alternative story, the client might
then be invited to name it. Jack might name this as a story of strength
and survival in the face of 'failure' and 'fear'. However, it is
important to go further and to thicken these alternative stories,
rooting these new discoveries. Re-membering conversations

As Morgan (2000) notes, people can often feel isolated and disconnected
from relationships when faced with problems. 'Re-membering'
conversations are attempts to help clients reconnect with these
significant relationships or 'memberships' -- what Michael White
referred to as a person's 'club of life' (Payne, 2006). Such memberships
can include people alive or dead (e.g. friends, family members,
teachers, neighbours, family friends, etc), real or imaginary and may
also include animals, toys, pets, places, symbols or objects. So one
might ask Jack, 'Who else would know that you stand up to fear?' or 'Can
you think of someone who could tell a story about your commitment to
fight injustice?' These kinds of conversation help to solidify the new
emerging -- yet fragile -- alternative story. As it becomes inhabited
with people and memories from the person's past and, as the therapist
asks questions which track from the past to the present to possible
futures, the new story becomes more firmly woven into the fabric of a
person's life. Therapeutic documents

Morgan notes that therapeutic documents are often written 'when people
make important commitments or when people are ready to celebrate
important achievements' (2000: 85), and Fox (2003) has reviewed a number
of types. They are written collaboratively with the client and can act
as 'counterdocuments' to the more usual pathologising and
problem-saturated descriptions that clients find in their case notes or
discharge letters. They should, as much as possible, draw on the actual
words, phrases and metaphors used by the client -- indeed in his
therapeutic work Michael White would write notes consisting entirely of
verbatim phrases used by clients. Something that might help Jack is a
'document of identity' which records new stories about the person. This
has been found to be useful in helping people cope with victimising
voice-hearing (Brigitte et al., 1996; Stewart, 1995).

Formulation and narrative therapy

109

Therapeutic letters

One form of therapeutic document is a letter. Various types of letter
can be used in narrative therapy (Fox, 2003; Morgan, 2000; White and
Epston, 1990). For example, Jack might find it helpful to have a letter
written after each session to summarise the new stories which had been
heard in them (and perhaps pose questions to consider before the next
session); and a letter of reference addressed 'To whom it may concern'
which records accounts of a person's developing identity and aims to
counter negative reputations. There are also rituals and celebrations
which can be constructed to celebrate particular steps away from the
dominant problem story. These might draw on particular family or
cultural traditions. Expanding the conversation: leagues and teams

Those who have experienced problems and escaped from their influence
have considerable knowledge, skills and expertise. Narrative therapists
have helped facilitate the setting up of a number of networks -- for
example, anti-Anorexia and anti-Bulimia Leagues (Grieves, 1997), some of
which have engaged in letter-writing campaigns to protest about the use
of 'waif' models in magazines for young women. Epston (2008) describes
this in more detail and there is the Archive of Resistance:
anti-Anorexia/anti-Bulimia.5 In Jack's case we might consider how to
draw on the knowledge of other young men who had struggled with fear, or
lived with the legacy of physical or sexual abuse, or managed to revise
their relationship with drugs or alcohol. A more recent development of
the 'club of life' metaphor is Ncazelo Ncube's practice of the 'Tree of
Life' -- a creative way of exploring and documenting significant
relationships developed in collaboration with children and young people
living with the legacy of AIDS in southern Africa. The Tree of Life has
also been used elsewhere -- for example the Trailblazer project in
Hackney in London with African Caribbean men involved with mental health
services (Byrne et al., 2011). The Tree of Life and an associated
sports-based metaphor, the Team of Life, is discussed in more detail in
Denborough (2008). O'Neill and Stockell (1991) have described work with
a group of marginalised young men with a diagnosis of 'schizophrenia',
who had attracted negative reputations amongst professionals -- such an
approach might be very useful in helping Jack to feel less isolated.
Michael White facilitated a group for people who heard negative voices
(Brigitte et al., 1996). Narrative work can also be conducted in large
community gatherings (ACT Mental Health Users Network and Dulwich
Centre, 2003; Byrne et al., 2011; Denborough, 2008; Dulwich Centre,
1995; Freedman and Combs, 2009; White, 2003). Finally, some of this work
could potentially be done through others (e.g. nursing staff, the
community psychiatric nurse and so on).

110

David Harper and Dave Spellman

Outsider-witness groups and definitional ceremonies

As we noted earlier, in narrative therapy anyone present in a therapy
session could be invited to adopt an 'outsider witness' position.
However, sometimes a group of outsider witnesses might be used. These
kinds of processes come under the category of definitional ceremonies.
In Jack's case the 'audience' might include family members,
professionals involved in his care, or other people who have struggled
with similar issues (e.g. a group of young men: O'Neill and Stockell,
1991). These meetings follow a particular structure of a conversation
between the therapist and Jack (a 'telling') followed by the therapist
interviewing those in the 'audience' position about what they have heard
and exploring what new ways of seeing Jack this leads to (a
're-telling'). The therapist would then interview Jack about what he
heard and what new stories about himself these led to (a 're-telling of
the re-telling'). Conversations can move between tellings and
re-tellings and often prove to be enormously enriching and profoundly
moving, particularly for people from marginalised groups. Of course, it
is important that these new stories are rooted in action. As Jack begins
to develop an account of his hopes for the future, he can be enabled to
make choices about what he wants to do next in his life. This might lead
into conversations about where he wants to live -- with his family? On
his own? With others? How would he like to spend his time? Would he like
to use his creative and musical talents in some way? -- undertake
further education? -- or make other choices? To formulate or not to
formulate?

Given that narrative therapists do not aim to produce causal stories
about problems, we do not feel it would be appropriate to shoe-horn the
approach into the traditional formulation structure. A more
theoretically consistent narrative therapy analogue of a formulation
would be a therapeutic document such as a post-session summary letter,
detailing the effects of the problem and outlining the emerging traces
of an alternative story. Normally, as we have already noted, this would
be done in collaboration with Jack, using his own language and
preferences and with actual examples of unique outcomes. As a result,
what follows is quite speculative. The content of the letter might be
influenced by whether the letter was for Jack alone or intended to be
read by others, such as his family, or other professionals, as well. As
we are presenting this letter for pedagogical purposes, it is a little
longer and more detailed than the letters that we would normally send.

Formulation and narrative therapy

111

Dear Jack, You'll remember that when we met recently we said that we
would write to you to put on record some of the important things we have
been talking about recently. You told us about the ways in which Fear
had entered your life soon after your mum became physically ill and
money at home was short. It seemed it had crept up on you and was
stopping you doing the things you wanted to do and living the life you
wanted to lead. The Fear tried to convince you of many frightening
things. However, as we talked, it seemed to us that you were now onto
what this Fear wanted to do to your life. We were very moved by the many
small ways you stood up to it, for example in actually managing to get
out of the house at some points and in attending our meetings. You said
that you thought your medication had a part to play in this, but when we
asked you how you had joined forces with the medication to bring change,
it seemed you had taken a number of initiatives. You recognised that
what the Fear wanted with your life and what you wanted were two very
different things, and you started to tell us about some of the hopes you
had for the future, which we found very inspiring. Another problem which
you identified was the way that Guilt was trying to wreck your life by
making you feel that you were to blame for many of the difficulties you
faced. It seemed that Guilt was in league with some of the people who
had abused their positions of trust in your life in the past. However,
it could not cope with hearing of how your family loved you, or you
talking about the times when you accepted yourself or you expressing
your hopes for the future. We got wise to some of Guilt's tactics: it
tended to pick on you when you were feeling low and also sensationalised
any little setbacks which cropped up in your life, as they do in all of
our lives at some point. Throughout all this, you began to rely on your
wish to do good in the world and wanting the best for your family. These
values seemed to give you strength in your attempts to win your life
back from Guilt. You have really been through the mill recently with
these problems and the challenges you have faced in dealing with your
anger, the drink and drugs and homelessness. Many people do not realise
how hard it can be to survive on the streets and how much it takes when
facing problems like these to manage to go to work. However, in our
meetings with you we heard how creative you had been in surviving from
day to day on the street and were amazed at how long you had stuck at
the jobs you'd had, and how, after a setback, you had picked yourself up
and gone for another job. These did not sound to us like a story of
'failure', more a story of hope and overcoming.

112

David Harper and Dave Spellman

We very much look forward to meeting you again in the near future. We
wondered, in the meantime, whether there might be other small ways in
which you were managing to get your life back from the control of Guilt
and Fear. Perhaps you could keep an eye out for these so that we can
hear more about them when we meet? Best wishes, Dave Harper and Dave
Spellman Janet: a narrative therapy formulation The practitioner working
from a narrative perspective would be familiar with some of the
literature pertinent to adopting this approach with children and their
families (e.g. Freeman et al., 1997; Morgan, 1999; Smith and Nylund,
1997; Vetere and Dowling, 2005; White and Epston, 1990; White and
Morgan, 2006). Having outlined this perspective in some detail in
relation to Jack we will illustrate some possible approaches to Janet
and her family more briefly. The context of the referral

Finding a starting point that is likely to be helpful can be difficult.
A useful question to ask oneself at this point is: 'What is being asked
of me and by whom?' Long lists of 'concerns' are often provided by
referrers with little indication as to why they are a concern and to
whom. It is important to explore such assumptions and not be
automatically organised by them. As in the case of Jack, then, one might
already be deconstructing the dominant and subordinate stories in the
referral letter and initial conversations (e.g. with referrers and with
the clients). Although adults often play little part in their referral
to mental health services, this is even more true of children, who may
be unaware of the referral, let alone consulted about it. Their views
are rarely included in such decisions, and the social convention is that
adults speak first and convey what they see as the truth of the problem.
It is very important to begin the first session with a friendly
introduction and a simple but open description of the aims of the
session. It is also important to get to know a family aside from the
problem, if that is possible, by finding out a little about them and
hearing from everyone rather than launching straight into what
solution-focused therapists refer to as 'problem talk'. Collaboration

After some general conversation oriented to getting to know the family,
it is helpful to hear from members about what has brought them to the
service.

Formulation and narrative therapy

113

Questions might be asked about what they would like to change and
whether they agree with the referrer's ideas about the nature and
priority of particular worries. Narrative therapists tend to place an
emphasis on describing in detail how everyone would prefer things to be.
After this the therapist sets about interviewing with an eye to helping
the family colour the picture in. In this way the scene is set for a
more collaborative way of working with and relating to family members.
If we treat the case description as a referral, then we can attempt to
delineate some key themes. From our reading, these seem to include
concern about Janet eating enough; Janet losing her temper; the effects
of potential social exclusion; and some difficult aspects of the family
history. With such a range of issues it can be difficult to know whether
to try and find a central theme or deal with each separately. Checking
out such dilemmas with the family directly would be common practice for
us. Our preference is to consider themes which connect with
relationships rather than those which seem more individualised.
Referrals tend to be focused on individual 'pathology' and request
'anger management' or 'parent training'. We would draw on systemic ideas
(see chapter 4) and invite family members to map the effects of events
upon relationships (e.g. 'How does the Temper affect the way you both
get along?' 'To what extent does arguing about how much Janet eats stop
the two of you having fun together?'). This can be blended with
externalising conversations where the therapist interviews the family to
plot the influence of a problem and disentangle it from people. As we
noted earlier, throughout such an interview clients are asked to make
evaluations, even when it may seem pretty obvious how they might
respond. For example one might ask, 'When you managed to count to ten
and not lose your temper that time, how did that turn out for you and
your Mum?' If the reply was, 'Oh it was much better when I did that',
this would be followed by an invitation to justify the evaluation, by
asking, for example: 'How was that a good thing for you?' 'What good
effects did you notice? 'Good in what kind of way?' A sensitivity to the
clients' responses is required here. What kind of questions do they
prefer? How do they like to talk? What images or metaphors do they
respond to? Conversations with Janet and family members might focus on
who expresses a preference for change and what kind of change they
prefer. Professionals commonly hold quite clear views about what 'needs'
to change and refer with this in mind, sometimes without much regard for
the wishes or preferences of parents and children, whose views may be
quite different. Narrative practitioners would aim at developing stories
that do not blame anyone in the family or professional system. The next
step in these therapeutic conversations might be an exploration of
unique outcomes -- for example, how close the family have come to seeing
their preferences enacted. These might include times when the arguing
did

114

David Harper and Dave Spellman

not have such a negative effect on their relationships; or when Janet
was able to give herself more nourishment; or when, despite their
alleged history of 'lack of bonding', they had a good time together. We
would explore these unique outcomes and consider in detail how they
happened. In work with parents it is often important to identify common
unhelpful dominant cultural stories such as 'child-blaming', or
'mother-blaming' and 'parent-blaming', some of which may originate from
the 'psy' disciplines (see also chapter 6), and to develop stories that
counter these viewpoints. Externalisation

Possibilities for externalising something which both Mary and Janet
could join forces against, include the Fears; the Temper; the Arguing;
the Not Eating, the Conflicts which get between Mary and Janet, and so
on. Finding imaginative names for problems to be externalised can be fun
for all family members. In a narrative approach it is not just one
person's job to tackle a problem; a team of 'co-workers' (e.g. family
members, other significant relationships in the family's 'club of life')
needs to be recruited. The family can be asked about the best ways of
working together, communicating, staying focused and developing common
tactics. This can be an antidote to the fragmentation seen when the
problem can appear to get in between people and their relationships. It
can also enable the separation of person from problem. So, one option is
to invite the family to consider themselves as a team fighting an
external problem together. The therapist can discuss with the family
what might be achieved if it was possible for everyone to agree on some
goals and work together, harnessing everyone's strengths. This can help
them develop ideas about alternative possibilities for themselves. Since
an aim of narrative therapy is to shift the balance of power away from
the problem, individuals can be helped to find the resources to move in
the direction of their choosing. One potential resource here might be
Mary's strong interest in spiritualism and clairvoyance. We could invite
the family to say something about how these notions influence their
lives in positive ways. It may be that they are rooted in the rich
history of Romany tradition and that there are significant people alive
or dead who could be talked about in re-membering conversations. There
are obviously countless ways in which therapeutic conversations may
develop, but for the purposes of this chapter we have put together a
letter that might be written to Janet and her mother as part of a
narrative approach. Since letters are not always helpful, it is
essential to discuss with families how they might feel about being sent
one and, afterwards, what it was like to receive it.

Formulation and narrative therapy

115

Dear Mary and Janet, When we met today we agreed to write to you to
record some of the things we talked about and wanted to remember. It
would be great if you could tell us what it was like getting this
letter. We both admire the commitment the two of you are showing, trying
to work out some of the difficulties. You have demonstrated that you are
not willing to let your relationship slip away from you and that you are
determined to win it back. We wondered what it was that made you both
feel the relationship meant so much to you. You had told us what a
difficult start in life you had together. It would be hard to list all
the set-backs you had, but there were many. You, Mary, felt very guilty
at how the sadness and depression got in the way of you being with Janet
in the way that you wanted to be when she was very young. Guilt made you
feel that the violence which you experienced at the hands of Colin was
your fault, rather than his responsibility. Despite this, you have not
lost sight of how you would like things to be. Some people would have
given up and lost hope by now, but something seems to have kept the hope
alive for you. We were really curious about that and wondered what that
could be. It was also quite striking to see how you, Janet, had made a
decision to stay in touch with your dad but not to stay overnight
anymore. We wondered how you found the courage to make such a big
decision to take care of yourself. This also questions the idea (which
you had heard from others) that you weren't able to look after yourself,
wouldn't you say? We have talked quite a lot about how the arguments
seem to overshadow everything in the house sometimes. You said it was
like a big fat rain cloud, didn't you, Janet? You both said very clearly
that that's not how you want it to be. You, Mary, said you'd like to see
the sunshine again and you agreed with that, Janet. We were delighted to
see some sunshine in our meeting when you were able to hold hands at the
point when you were both feeling upset. Did you notice that? Is that a
sign of the sunshine you'd like to see more of? When we started to look
closely at your lives we thought there were quite a few shafts of
sunlight that crept in, like the way you laugh together when you watch
your favourite TV programmes and how you enjoyed your day trip to the
seaside a few weeks ago. You both seemed to start noticing the sunshine
in your lives more than the rain cloud by the end of our meeting. Was
that a good thing, do you think? We can't ignore the rain cloud but we
wonder what the effects would be if you were able to team up together
and notice the sunshine more? If you thought it was a good idea, you
could both try to do that and we could talk about how you got along at
our next meeting. We'd be

116

David Harper and Dave Spellman

interested to hear what your lives would be like if you were able to
bring in more sunshine. Best wishes Dave Spellman and Dave Harper Key
characteristics of a narrative therapy approach to formulation • • •

•

Formulations are seen as a story developed collaboratively by therapist
and client/s using their own words, phrases and metaphors as much as
possible. These stories are seen as local and provisional and are not
intended to be causal explanations. Psychiatric diagnoses and other
professional classifications would be seen as 'thin' descriptions in
need of elaboration. The aim is to encourage the development of richly
textured, 'thick' and multi-storied narratives of people's lives. A
formulation might include: -- a description of an externalised problem,
identifying the tactics by which it exerts its power, including how it
is sustained by dominant societal discourses; -- the identification of
new maps and knowledges -- for example ways in which the person has
resisted or found a way of living alongside the problem -- to scaffold
the emergence of new stories; -- the identification of more subordinate
narratives framed in terms of intentions (rather than internal states)
so the person can live a richer, more multi-storied life; -- the
responses of others (e.g. 'outsider witnesses'); -- reconnections with
significant relationships from the client's past which may be drawn on
to help sustain these alternative previously 'hidden' stories; -- a
record of the choices the client has made in relation to the place of
these stories and relationships in their life; -- creativity in its
presentation (e.g. a variety of different kinds of documents and
rituals) as well as some (sensitive and appropriate) humour!

Acknowledgements Dave Harper would like to thank past and current UEL
trainee clinical psychologists, past and present members of the
Narrative East peer supervision group (Heleni Andreadi, Angela Byrne,
Grace Heaphy, Gillian Hughes, Georgia Iliopoulou, Philip Messent and
Heather Qualtrough), Duncan Moss, Jane Herlihy, Tania Thorn and the
contributors to the workshop on

Formulation and narrative therapy

117

formulation at Bristol in 2002 for interesting conversations on social
constructionism, narrative therapy and formulation. Jonathan Buhagiar
provided helpful comments on a previous draft of this chapter. This
chapter is dedicated to Michael White (1948--2008). Notes 1 One
important confusion to clear up is the difference between constructivism
and social constructionism as, unfortunately, many authors use these
terms interchangeably. Constructivist approaches to therapy pre-date
narrative therapy and therapists following Kelly's (1955) Personal
Construct Theory would most accurately be termed constructivist.
Constructivists acknowledge that individuals construct their own views
of the world. However, social constructionists go one step further,
arguing that those individual constructions are developed in a social
world where, moreover, different constructions have different social
power. 2 Since the publication of McNamee and Gergen (1992) a number of
other approaches consistent with a social constructionist perspective
have appeared, for example Ekdawi et al. (2000), Sam Warner's Visible
Therapy approach to working with sexual abuse (Warner, 2009) and the
contributors to Parker (1999). 3 For those interested in learning more
about narrative therapy, many books, resources and freely downloadable
articles can be found at: http://www. dulwichcentre.com.au/ 4 In early
narrative therapy work therapists drew liberally on protest metaphors in
talking about problems (e.g. fighting, resisting, etc) but in later
narrative work a much fuller range of metaphor is used (Stacey and
Hills, 2001). 5 See
http://www.narrativeapproaches.com/antianorexia%20folder/anti_anorexia\_
index.htm (accessed 20 August 2012).

References ACT Mental Health Consumers Network and Dulwich Centre (2003)
These are not ordinary lives: the report of a mental health community
gathering, International Journal of Narrative Therapy and Community
Work, 3: 29--49. Allen, L. (1994) The politics of therapy: Michael White
in conversation with Lesley Allen, Context: A News Magazine of Family
Therapy and Systemic Practice, 18: 28--34. Bob, S.R. (1999) Narrative
approaches to supervision and case formulation, Psychotherapy, 36:
146--153. Boyle, M. (2001) Abandoning diagnosis and (cautiously)
adopting formulation, paper presented at symposium on Recent Advances in
Psychological Understanding of Psychotic Experiences, British
Psychological Society Centenary Conference, Glasgow. ------(2002)
Schizophrenia: A Scientific Delusion? 2nd edn. London: Routledge.
Brigitte, Sue, Mem and Veronika (1996) Power to our journeys, American
Family Therapy Academy Newsletter, Summer: 11--16. Burr, V. (2003)
Social Constructionism. 2nd edn, London: Routledge.

118

David Harper and Dave Spellman

Byrne, A., Warren, A., Joof, B., Johnson, D., Casimir, L., Hinds, C.,
Mittee, S., Johnson, J., Afilaka, A. and Griffiths, S. (2011) 'A
powerful piece of work': African Caribbean men talking about the 'tree
of life', Context: A Magazine for Family Therapy and Systemic Practice:
117: 40--45. Carey, M. and Russell, S. (2002) Externalising: commonly
asked questions, International Journal of Narrative Therapy and
Community Work, 2: 76--84. (Also available at www.dulwichcentre.com.au
accessed 20 August 2012). Carey, M., Walther, S. and Russell, S. (2009)
The absent but implicit: a map to support therapeutic enquiry, Family
Process 48: 319--331. Carr, A. (2012) Family Therapy: Concepts, Process
and Practice, 3rd edn. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell. Chenail, R.J.,
DiVincentis, M., Kiviat, H.E. and Somers, C. (2012) A systematic
narrative review of discursive therapies research: considering the value
of circumstantial evidence. In A. Lock and T. Strong (eds) Discursive
Perspectives in Therapeutic Practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
pp. 224--244. Corrie, S. and Lane, D.A. (2010) Constructing Stories,
Telling Tales: A Guide to Formulation in Applied Psychology. London:
Karnac. Cromby, J. and Harper, D. (2009) Paranoia: a social account.
Theory and Psychology, 19: 335--361. De Rivera, J. and Sarbin, T. (eds)
(1998) Believed-In Imaginings: The Narrative Construction of Reality.
Washington DC: American Psychological Association. Denborough, D. (2008)
Collective Narrative Practice: Responding to Individuals, Groups and
Communities Who Have Experienced Trauma. Adelaide: Dulwich Centre.
Dillon, J. (2011) The personal is the political. In M. Rapley, J.
Moncrieff and J. Dillon (eds) De-Medicalizing Misery: Psychiatry,
Psychology and the Human Condition. Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan,
pp. 141--157. Dulwich Centre (1995) Speaking Out and Being Heard.
Special issue of Dulwich Centre Newsletter, 4. Ekdawi, I., Gibbons, S.,
Bennett, E. and Hughes, G. (2000) Whose Reality is it Anyway? Putting
Social Constructionist Philosophy into Everyday Clinical Practice.
Brighton: Pavilion Publishing. Epston, D. (2008)
Anti-anorexia/anti-bulimia: Bearing witness. In D. Epston and B. Bowen
(eds) Down Under and Up Over: Travels with Narrative Therapy.
Warrington: AFT publishing, pp. 169--191. Fox, H. (2003) Using
therapeutic documents: a review, International Journal of Narrative
Therapy and Community Work, 4: 26--36. Freedman, J. and Combs, G. (1996)
Narrative Therapy: The Social Construction of Preferred Realities.
London: Norton. ------(2009) Narrative ideas for consulting with
communities and organizations: Ripples from the gatherings, Family
Process, 48: 347--362. Freeman, J., Epston, D. and Lobovits, D. (1997)
Playful Approaches to Serious Problems. London: Norton. Geertz, C.
(1973). Thick description: Toward an interpretive theory of culture. In
The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays. New York: Basic Books,
pp. 3--30.

Formulation and narrative therapy

119

Georgaca, E. (2000) Reality and discourse: a critical analysis of the
category of 'delusion', British Journal of Medical Psychology, 73:
227--242. Gergen, K.J. (1985) The social constructionist movement in
modern psychology, American Psychologist, 40: 266--275. Grieves, L.
(1997) From beginning to start: the Vancouver Anti-Anorexia AntiBulimia
League, Gecko 2: 78--88. Hardy, K.V. (2001) African-American experience
and the healing of relationships. An interview with Kenneth V. Hardy. In
D. Denborough (ed.) Family Therapy: Exploring the Field's Past, Present
and Possible Future. Adelaide: Dulwich Centre Publications, pp. 47--56.
Harper, D. (2011) The social context of 'paranoia'. In M. Rapley, J.
Dillon and J. Moncrieff (eds) De-Medicalizing Misery. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 53--65. Harper, D. and Moss, D. (2003) A
different kind of chemistry? Reformulating 'formulation', Clinical
Psychology, 25: 6--10. Harper, D., Gannon, K.N. and Robinson, M. (2013)
Beyond evidence-based practice: rethinking the relationship between
research, theory and practice. In R. Bayne and G. Jinks (eds), Applied
Psychology: Practice, Training and New Directions, 2nd edn. London:
Sage, pp. 32--46. Heise, D. R. (1988) Delusions and the construction of
reality. In T. F. Oltmanns and B.A. Maher (eds) Delusional Beliefs. New
York: Wiley, pp. 259--272. Jenkins, A. (2009) Becoming Ethical: A
Parallel, Political Journey With Men Who Have Abused. Dorset: Russell
House Publishing. Kelly, G. (1955) The Psychology of Personal
Constructs. New York: W.W. Norton. Knight, T. (2009) Beyond Belief:
Alternative Ways of Working with Delusions, Obsessions and Unusual
Experiences. Berlin: Peter Lehmann Publishing. Available for free
download from:
http://www.peter-lehmann-publishing.com/beyond-belief.htm, accessed 20
August 2012. Madigan, S. (2011) Narrative Therapy. Washington, DC, US:
American Psychological Association. McNamee, S. and Gergen, K. (1992)
Therapy as Social Construction. London: Sage. Morgan, A. (ed.) (1999)
Once Upon a Time: Narrative Therapy with Children and their Families.
Adelaide: Dulwich Centre Publications. ------(2000) What is Narrative
Therapy? An Easy to Read Introduction. Adelaide: Dulwich Centre
Publications. Myerhoff, B. (1982) Life history among the elderly:
performance, visibility and re-membering. In J. Ruby (ed.) A Crack in
the Mirror: Reflexive Perspectives in Anthropology. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press, pp. 231--247. O'Neill, M. and
Stockell, G. (1991) Worthy of discussion: collaborative group therapy,
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Family Therapy, 12: 201--206.
Parker, I. (ed.) (1999) Deconstructing Psychotherapy. London: Sage.
Parker, I., Georgaca, E., Harper, D., McLaughlin, T. and Stowell-Smith,
M. (1995) Deconstructing Psychopathology. London: Sage.

120

David Harper and Dave Spellman

Parry, A. and Doan, R.E. (1994) The re-vision of therapists' stories in
training and supervision. In A. Parry and R.E. Doan, Story Re-Visions:
Narrative Therapy in the Postmodern World. New York: Guilford Press,
pp. 187--205. Patel, N. and Fatimilehin, I. (1999) Racism and mental
health. In C. Newnes, G. Holmes and C. Dunn (eds), This is Madness: A
Critical Look at Psychiatry and the Future of Mental Health Services.
Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books, pp. 51--74. Payne, M. (2006) Narrative Therapy:
An Introduction for Counsellors. 2nd edn. London: Sage. Smith, C. and
Nylund, D. (1997) Narrative Therapies with Children and Adolescents. New
York: Guilford Press. Speed, B. (1999) Individuals in context and
contexts in individuals, Australian and New Zealand Journal of Family
Therapy, 20: 131--138. Stacey, K. and Hills, D. (2001) More than
protest: Further explorations of alternative metaphors in narrative
therapy, Australian and New Zealand Journal of Family Therapy, 22:
120--128. Stewart, K. (1995) On pathologising discourse and psychiatric
illness: an interview within an interview. In M. White, Re-Authoring
Lives: Interviews and Essays. Adelaide: Dulwich Centre Publications,
pp. 112--154. Vetere, A. and Dowling, E. (eds) (2005) Narrative
Therapies with Children and their Families: A Practitioner's Guide to
Concepts and Approaches. Abingdon, Oxford: Taylor & Francis. Vygotsky,
L.S. (1978) Mind and Society: The Development of Higher Psychological
Processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Wade, A. (1997)
Small acts of living: everyday resistance to violence and other forms of
oppression, Contemporary Family Therapy, 19: 23--39. Warner, S. (2009)
Understanding the Effects of Child Sexual Abuse: Feminist Revolutions in
Theory, Research and Practice. London: Routledge. White, M. (1987)
Family therapy and schizophrenia: addressing the 'in-the-corner'
lifestyle, reprinted in M. White (1989) Selected Papers. Adelaide:
Dulwich Centre Publications, pp. 47--57. ------(2003) Narrative practice
and community assignments, International Journal of Narrative Therapy
and Community Work, 2: 17--55. ------(2004) Folk psychology and
narrative practice. In M. White, Narrative Practice and Exotic Lives:
Resurrecting Diversity in Everyday Life. Adelaide: Dulwich Centre
Publications, pp. 59--118. White, M and Epston, D. (1990) Narrative
Means to Therapeutic Ends. London: Norton. White, M. and Morgan, A.
(2006) Narrative Therapy with Children and their Families. Adelaide,
South Australia: Dulwich Centre Publications.

Chapter 6

Reformulating the impact of social inequalities Power and social justice
Lynn McClelland

What is a social inequalities approach? The central feature of a social
inequalities approach to formulation is that it goes beyond the
traditional boundaries of psychology in emphasising the role of social
and cultural contexts in shaping problems. This is shown in two main
ways: structural features of society are seen as systematically
marginalising and disempowering some people and not others; and
psychology itself is viewed as part of an ideological dimension which
shapes how we think and feel about ourselves. Importantly, this includes
what is regarded as acceptable or deviant behaviour, such as what is
seen as mental 'ill health'. In fact the very notion of psychological
experience as indicative of a state of 'health' is a pervasive and
questionable assumption. Most psychological and social practitioners are
unable to avoid awareness of the very real forms of suffering that many
people experience: lack of access to basic material goods, shelter or
healthcare; lack of safety and exposure to violence or abuse;
environmental degradation; the impact of war, genocide or terrorism;
migration and displacement; and the influence of toxic work
environments. Their work often directly addresses the emotional and
practical consequences of broader scale trauma and 'disruptive
globalisation' on the local and personal level. Yet most therapeutic
'solutions' tend to be focused on the intra-psychic or inter-personal
level. In contrast, a social inequalities perspective suggests that
there are structured differences or hierarchies of power that limit and
constrain some people, and privilege and empower others, thereby
creating and revealing conflicts of interest, and drawing attention to
social relations, power and context. It is an approach which is
influenced by the Frankfurt School of thought and the 'critical theory'
of late capitalist society and culture that emerged from it (Kagan et
al., 2011). This theory of human and social reality, which incorporates
ideas from psychoanalysis, philosophy and sociology, looks at the
contradictions and conflicts of interest between economic and social
processes within capitalism, and whether progressive change is possible.
Such an account of human

122

Lynn McClelland

behaviour differs from the more traditional individualised accounts of
drives, motives, intentions or internal conflicts that are dominant
within psychology and psychotherapy. A social inequalities approach
questions the concept of an atomistic free-floating individual as the
central unit of analysis in psychology, and its preoccupation with
intra-psychic processes and individual behaviour. Instead it sees the
psychological as both emerging from, and dependent on, social relations
-- not only inter-personal ones, but also collective and socialsystemic
relations. This approach also suggests that a key aspect of reflexive
practice is to ask the question: if psychology as a body of knowledge
and practices had developed in a different society or culture, would it
have looked different? In this way it highlights the fact that our
current forms of theory and practice are not inevitable. Formulation
needs to reflect a complex picture where the ambivalences and
inconsistencies of inner thoughts and feelings are not simply
individually driven, or inherent faults of the person needing to be
'fixed', but part of a social world which is shaped by contradictory and
conflicting expectations. As Kagan et al. (2011) point out, this need
not deny the bodily reality of being human, but it does try to
articulate how social phenomena beyond the level of the inter-personal
shape the construction of human actors -- their ideas, desires,
prejudices, feelings, preferences, habits, customs and culture. What are
social inequalities? Social inequality exists when an ascribed
characteristic such as sex, race, ethnicity, class, and disability
determines access to socially valued resources. These resources include
access to money, status and power, especially the power to define
societal rules, rights and privileges. (Williams and Watson, 1988: 292)
We can use this definition to develop a working map of the impact of
social inequalities on mental health which may help us articulate the
processes through which people experience and resist the operation of
inequality in their lives. This draws attention to the presentation of
mental health problems as 'signs and symptoms' of inequality in a
deliberate attempt to make conceptual links and to disrupt the common
use of these terms to define distress within a medical model. An example
of the model that has informed our approach to formulation is given in
Figure 6.1. Social inequalities and mental health The unequal
distribution of economic and social resources in society is central to
explaining why some groups are more likely than others to seek help from
psychological services (Fryer, 1998). Unfortunately, as has been
documented

Reformulating the impact of social inequalities

123

(Socio-cultural Context) Structured Inequalities Gender, Race, Class,
Sexuality, Disability, Age (Interpersonal Context) Interpersonal
Inequalities Family, partnerships Roles; economic, employment, education
(Lived Experience) Internal(ised) Inequalities
Domination...............Subordination
Normalised................Marginalised Control..................
Appease/resist Symptoms of Inequality Wellness................Illness
Negotiation Resistance

Solidarity Social Support, community, participation, regenerative
psychologies

Social Justice The power to resist Diversity, liberty sustainability

Figure 6.1 Map of social inequalities

many times, it is 'low status' groups who also experience the most
negative and disempowering contact with services (Morgan et al., 2001;
British Psychological Society, 2008, 2012). There are many different
possible definitions of inequality and a number of psychological
perspectives that attempt to address the intersection between the person
and oppression. My main approach here is best described as critical
community psychology (Kagan et al., 2011; Fryer, 2008). All these
approaches are 'critical' of mainstream Western psychological theories
and practices that tend to decontextualise individuals and obscure
social, political and material realities, and argue for a community or
societal-level formulation and community-level or a broader
systems-level intervention.

124

Lynn McClelland

Orford (2008), in his major review of community psychologies, describes
an 'emerging consensus' in theory and practice organised around core
values of liberation, empowerment and social justice. Kagan et
al. (2011) have added 'stewardship' to their model of critical community
psychology, which links with the emergence of Ecopsychology (Rust and
Totton, 2012) as a psychological response to our current ecological
crisis. The importance of building sustainable environments and of
recognising our fundamental interconnectedness within the human system
is increasingly seen as vital to psychological wellbeing. So, at present
we are seeing a potential revisioning of psychology and psychotherapy
through the infusion of a wide range of international social justice
perspectives related to personal, community and societal wellbeing
(Prilleltensky et al., 2007). Liberation psychologies (Watkins and
Shulman, 2008) and critical race and postcolonial theories (Dalal, 2002;
Fernando, 2010; Hook, 2011) contribute to what Aldorondo (2007) calls
'the reformist spirit' in the mental health professions. These views are
part of an emergent tradition of critique which includes critical and
community psychologists, radical psychotherapists, sociologists,
philosophers and policy-makers. It also includes the perspectives of the
survivor, service user and disability movements, feminists, LGBT groups
and critical race activists -- all of whom have contributed to a growing
weight of evidence, theories and practices. The best emerging practices
and services are often characterised by partnerships across these
different professional and non-professional groups. Critical evaluation
of the 'evidence base' It was through attempts to diagnose,
conceptualise and regulate pathologies of conduct that psychological
knowledge and expertise first began to establish its claims for
scientific credibility, professional status and social importance.
(Rose, 1985: 226) A social inequalities perspective takes a particular
perspective on the current emphasis on evidence-based practice within
clinical psychology, medicine and other disciplines. This involves a
recovery of ideas about the human condition which tend to become
marginalised or excluded in mainstream practice, reaching out to the
'evidence' that lies within sociology and feminist theory, and taking a
'critical' approach to the widespread adoption of a 'metaphorical
medical model' or the 'bio-bio-bio model masquerading as the
biopsychsocial' (Boyle, 2002; Read et al., 2009). This perspective
disrupts the notion of an objective, socially neutral investigation
which is inherent in the scientist--practitioner model and takes a
critical view of the focus on individual 'cognitions' and behaviour
rather than, for instance, toxic environments, as mediating distress.

Reformulating the impact of social inequalities

125

This perspective also questions the validity of research designs, vested
stakeholder interests, and publication bias involved in the presentation
of evidence in, for instance, the NICE guidelines. It recognises instead
that the presentation of 'data' and 'facts' can serve an ideological
function as Jones (2011) demonstrates in his analysis of prejudice and
stereotyping within the UK media, in which 'chavs' and 'welfare
scroungers' appear as a demonised underclass. He argues that this
formulation obscures a more complex picture of poverty and exclusion of
people abandoned by the aspirational societyfragmenting policies of both
Tories and New Labour, and illustrates the clash in versions of the
'truth' through a series of interviews with people living at the sharp
end of disenfranchisement. A woman voices a challenging alternative
version: We died! ... Once all the mines closed, all the community had
gone. It's just been a big depression ever since ... just struggling to
survive, that's all ... loads of men over 45 never worked again. (Jones,
2011: 185) This study is reminiscent of Pierre Bourdieu's (2000)
analysis of the weight of social suffering as described in interviews
across several generations of ethnic groups in working-class communities
in France. The resulting 'data' was used to illustrate his theories of
social capital, habitus and symbolic violence -- ideas which have become
closely linked to individual and collective wellbeing in critical
community psychology. The relationship between social inequalities,
health and mental health has been extensively documented in national and
international health and social care policy reports (BPS, 2008;
Department of Health, 2010, 2009; Marmot, 2012; Institute of Health
Equalities (IHE), 2012; World Health Organisation, 2009; UNICEF, 2011)
and in service user consultations (Bates, 2002; Sashidharan, 2003;
Morgan et al., 2001). The Marmot Review argues that reducing health
inequalities is a matter of fairness and social justice, and
demonstrates that there is a marked social gradient in health and mental
health. Collective and personal wellbeing are intimately connected with
action to reduce social inequalities (Wilkinson and Pickett, 2009). The
present economic situation presents a direct threat to our mental health
and psychological wellbeing with pressures on communities increasing
during economic recession -- particularly if social and financial
inequalities are permitted to increase and people with mental health
problems becoming more vulnerable. They may also become more so, via
threats from cuts in public spending on health and social services. The
IHE Report (2012) on the likely impact of economic downturn on policy
change summarises a number of factors that increase social inequality,
including rising unemployment, poorer working conditions, depressed
incomes, inability to pay for basic needs, lack of decent and affordable
housing,

126

Lynn McClelland

and child poverty. They predict a decline in mental and physical health
(e.g. more suicides and depression, homicides and domestic violence)
with possible long-term effects (p.7). This research suggests that
particular groups may be differentially affected by these changes,
especially young people (under 25 years), and men with lower level
skills and education, or those in insecure jobs. Previous research into
economic downturns suggests that the psychological impact of
deteriorating work conditions for those in work, including job and
financial insecurity, higher debt levels and less sense of control in
face of increasing demands, will lead to much higher rates of anxiety
and depression, and will have a knock-on effect on families and
community cohesion (another indicator of wellbeing). It is therefore
crucial that psychological practitioners ask the right questions about
these powerful 'distal' forces (Smail, 1993) in people's lives and
psyches. These processes potentially affect those 'being helped' and
those 'helping', as well as the relationship between them, and are
likely to become part of a 'polarisation of disadvantage', placing
particular stress on public services in the most deprived areas (Marmot,
2012; Hoggett, 2006). Despite a number of attempts to call attention to
these links within clinical psychology (Bostock, 2003, 2004; Fryer,
1998, 2008; Orford, 2008; Smail, 2011; Rapley et al., 2011), this
perspective remains peripheral to clinical psychology theory and
practice (Boyle, 2011; Miller and McClelland, 2006). Disturbingly,
social inequalities and their oppressive psychological effects may be on
the rise. Power and inequality Power derives more from the routine
application of effectively unchallenged assumptions than from the
manifest dominance of one group over others in open conflict ... simply
the routine operation of social institutions. (Ng, 1980: 14) A further
aspect of a critical-social approach is the attention to the presence of
ideologies or dominant discourses within traditional formulation
practice. These tend to mask and legitimise inequalities, misdirect our
attention (Newnes, 2012) and work to sustain established power balances
(Williams, 1999). Mental health professions and disciplines such as
medicine and psychology are seen as key sites for the production of such
discourses, and also of contesting them (Foucault, 1980; Rose, 1989).
The institutional context of clinical discourses is the 'clinic' in its
broadest sense, which is part of a historical process of the development
of ideas about madness/normality, and a co-dependency between mental
health professions and marginalised groups (who treats/who is treated).
From this perspective, it

Reformulating the impact of social inequalities

127

can be argued that in formulating we are located within a process of
social control which has shifted away from overt forms of extended
incarceration and the more brutal physical treatments towards subtler
forms of control such as the processes and technologies of diagnosis,
medication and therapy, which nevertheless serve the same ends. As
Hoggett (2006) argues, mental health services are situated within
complex public organisations characterised by continuous questions and
debates about values and policies. These are played out and intensified
at the point of delivery where clients and practitioners meet. It is
therefore crucial that we extend our gaze beyond the world of the
clinic. He formulates the role of the mental health services themselves
as to act as receptacles for social anxieties about disorder and
madness, performing the explicit and implicit function of containing
much of what is disowned by the society in which they are situated. This
approach is wary of the current tendency to adopt managerialist and
neo-liberal language within mental health settings as indicated by talk
about the 'delivery of goods and services' to 'clients' and 'consumers'
who are able to make empowered choices about this or that 'treatment'.
It draws attention to the potential commodification of relationships,
and the consequential stripping of ethics and meaning inherent in this
version of practice. In contrast, in a recent review of medical and
health professionals' role in addressing health inequalities, Allen,
Allen, Hogarth and Marmot (2013) propose that they are well-placed to
take action on the social determinants of health (including mental
health) as committed and potentially powerful advocates. Miller and
McClelland (2006: 132) recommended the use of reflective questions about
how power is operating in the lives of people we work with (Bostock,
2003; Prilleltensky and Nelson, 2002) as part of a critical approach to
formulation which recognises the contested nature of values and
interests involved. For example, what ideas of a 'good life' and 'good
society' are promoted by our formulations (self-interest or cooperation?
based on pursuit of equality or at the expense of others?)? How have
people gained power/ agency in any domain? These questions create a
challenge to individualistic explanations of the origins of mental
health problems and relocate responsibility for oppression and change.
They also highlight issues of ownership of the problem; in other words,
we need to ask: whose problem is this? Reflecting real-life diversity
and recognising difference Third-wave feminist theories (Gillis et al.,
2007) have also influenced the understanding of gendered experiences,
giving a voice to those outside the ethnic, sexual and sociological
mainstream (Boyle, 1997). Critical race, post

128

Lynn McClelland

colonial and multi-cultural approaches (Dalal, 2002, 2012; Hook, 2011;
Ryde, 2009; Sewell, 2009; Fernando and Keating, 2008) have flourished
and influenced the development of individual, systemic and group
therapies. Many of the best models consider the impact of multiple
sources of inequality, a common element in service user accounts as an
accumulative 'risk factor' for mental health and trauma (White, 2004;
McGoldrick and Hardy, 2008). An early example of this was the study of
the impact of 'everyday' racial microaggressions -- the subtle,
common-place, often non-verbal indignities experienced particularly by
marginalised groups, even in those exchanges considered to be fair and
non-discriminatory (Sue et al., 2007). Another example is Almeida's
Cultural Context Model (CCM) (Almeida et al., 2007) which combines
social justice principles, post colonial analysis and multilevel
intervention to explore multi-generational histories of cultural
resistance and survival. This offers a 'reformulation' of both the
structure of services and the process of therapy in an effort to make
therapy a journey of liberation and healing instead of renewed
compliance and acquiescence to society's everyday oppressive
expectations (p. 179). Some of these ideas are reflected in the accounts
of Jack and Janet below. Making Jack more visible: critical formulation
Before we even begin to understand Jack, it is important to recognise
how little we can do without his personal involvement and participation.
The 'cases' are already decontextualised and have been subjected to the
clinical gaze. It isn't Jack telling us about himself. It isn't Jack who
appears to be directly involved in the process of making sense of his
predicament. It should be Jack who is at the heart of his own story, and
Jack who is the expert on his own life. This cautions us not to
complicate Jack's already tenuous feeling (one supposes) of ownership
over his own life with well-meaning but potentially oppressive
narratives. We are uneasy about having this conversation about Jack,
without Jack. Furthermore, it is likely that as a mental health service
user Jack will already have been subjected to the dominant models
inherent in Western cultures regarding distress -- namely, medicalised,
pathologising accounts about his difficulties, in which his own account
of his experiences will have been ignored except as an indicator of
various symptoms. One need only look through the often voluminous notes
documenting the treatment of mental health service users to confirm the
detachment of the 'person' from the 'story'. The psychiatrising or
psychologising of distress (Dillon et al., 2012; Smail, 2011; Fryer,
1998) can achieve this separation very easily with people already made
vulnerable by distress, confusion and hopelessness. Clinical formulation
runs the risk of simply being another 'expert' monologue which, in the
attempt to obtain clinical coherence, locates the centre for recovery at
arm's length from the person, adding to their experience

Reformulating the impact of social inequalities

129

of objectification and alienation, and complicating genuine therapeutic
engagement. Clinical formulation must therefore demonstrate its
credentials in terms of how the service user experiences it. In
particular we would ask: how participatory is the process? How well is
it rooted in the person's own experience and beliefs? Collaborative
formulation: situating Jack's experiences

In 2006 we took this problem to a 'reference group' of young men whose
life experiences seemed to us (and them) to provide some basis for
informed 'witnessing' of some of the themes identified in the account
about Jack. These young men had all encountered mental health services,
had all experienced alienation and had all been subjected to abuse in
one form or another. They all had many other kinds of experiences too,
not to mention a diverse range of talents, interests and hopes for their
lives. In this respect our methodology has links with Almeida and
colleagues' (2007) 'Cultural Circles' and 'coalition groups' (Friere,
1970), using mixed groups of professionals and non-professionals to
challenge oppressive norms, create solidarity and develop more
accountability. We can only hope that Jack would have shared in this
sense of commonality. This approach is connected but different to the
narrative therapy technique of a 'reflecting team' (White, 1995) in
terms of its membership being non-professional, although in this case a
summary was provided by a male clinical psychologist. The conversation
that unfolded, summarised below, helped us to identify some key issues
and themes. Dialogue: 'A few lines about a world of trouble' Paragraph
1, page x

The descriptions of Jack in paragraph 1 drew interest. Several of the
young men shared their experience of having their emotions 'measured'
against some invisible norm. A medicalised context allows this, and
reserves the right to determine 'appropriateness' against a template of
signs and symptoms. The quantifying and objectifying of expressed
feeling can obscure the simpler question of why? Why is Jack feeling
what he is feeling? Paragraph 2

Several young men identified with the theme of social and familial
expectation in paragraph 2. This led into an interesting discussion
about the privileges and burden of being 'favoured'. People spoke about
the costs of compliance in terms of giving up your own ambitions, and
the costs of resisting, such as rejection or censure or further
pressure. One young man said that as the only

130

Lynn McClelland

son he had felt this pressure of expectation as a 'heavy hand on my
shoulder' and that, looking back, the only means of resistance was to
fail. Several in the group also enjoy music and wondered if this put
Jack in conflict with the expectation of running the family business.
Paragraph 3

This paragraph provoked considerable discussion amongst the group. One
man commented: 'A few lines about a world of trouble'. Does this reflect
the tendency of mental health services and 'case formulation' to
minimise the impact of either witnessing or experiencing violence, or
being subjected to sexual abuse as a child? The group identified similar
experiences of power abuse in their own lives and the often ruinous
consequences for them. Paragraph 4

In paragraph 4, the group quickly noted the chronological proximity
between sexual abuse and the emergence of alcohol use. Many of our young
men identified with the use of alcohol and drugs as a seductive means of
'self-medicating' distress. Other significant life events were
identified, including: • •

•

Stresses associated with GCSEs. The fact that Jack also has to contend
with the breaking up of the family, his parents and the disappearance of
his father back to Italy. Perhaps it was his gender as a man that made
his father's departure more difficult for Jack than for his sisters. The
group speculated about the period leading up to the separation. How
emotionally available would Jack's parents have been to Jack and his two
sisters? Several, perhaps like Jack, had not felt able to disclose their
abuse because they felt they wouldn't or couldn't be heard.

Paragraph 5

After reading this paragraph, one or two of the young men spoke about
having lived through similar periods of alienation and disruption in
their own lives. They described these times as like being 'lost to the
world', feeling uncared for and not caring for anything or anyone, least
of all themselves. One said, 'Someone should have seen that being
depressed isn't just about your head, but your life; they didn't for me
and they didn't for him'. Many, though not all, described their first
contacts with mental health services as like 'confirming all the worst
things you thought about yourself'. There was a strong feeling of
solidarity with Jack in the group.

Reformulating the impact of social inequalities

131

Paragraph 6

The whole family now appeared to be struggling. Our group thought that
Jack was sounding in desperate straits at this stage. The diagnoses Jack
was attracting are more serious, with more power to label him
negatively, and yet, our group felt, were still missing the point of
what may have been going on for him. Some observations were: 'He wants
out of his life.' 'He sounds like he's really lost it, he just doesn't
want his life anymore, he wants Robbie's life.' 'Is he worrying about
his family? His sisters? Does he feel bad because he hasn't helped
them?' 'He is really haunted by his father.' 'He'd rather be Robbie than
his father, maybe? Well, he needs to be someone! But who?' We will now
consider in more detail the themes that emerged from this discussion.
Critical reflections on the discussion Masculinity as problematic

Masculinity, the experience of being born male, of trying to learn how
to relate to himself and the world as a male, seems to play a
significant role in several key areas of Jack's life. In relation to his
father: 'He described the frightening experience of looking in the
mirror and seeing his father's face reflected back at him.' Jack is
exposed to his father's alcoholism and his violence towards his family
and towards Jack himself. Jack was also expected to carry on the family
business, literally, to follow in his father's footsteps. These
experiences form part of Jack's socialisation and introduction to
masculinity. More specifically, we wondered if Jack has learned the
male-typical strategies for managing distress. Miller and Bell (1996)
argue that the privileged male role imposes expectations about
masculinity that may have a serious detrimental effect on the mental
health of men and the women and children in their families. They argue
that one of the most pernicious consequences of male socialisation is
that it requires men to be silent and strong, leaving individuals little
scope to acknowledge and deal constructively with feelings of
vulnerability or powerlessness. Instead men are offered safety through
dominance and control of the external world, and survival through the
sanctioned means of violence. Does Jack learn that this is how men
manage their distress -- through objectifying others and through
violence and alcohol abuse? Does Jack feel 'caught' between his family
and his father? Does Jack identify with his disempowered, female,
victimised family? And does he also crave acceptance and inclusion from
his father? We might speculate as to whether Jack experiences himself as
alienated from both, a member of neither.

132

Lynn McClelland

He may experience his father as powerful, but it seems that Jack
experiences himself as powerless. Jack is left to somehow reconcile the
disparity between the expectation of dominance and the actualities of
his life. In this sense our formulation is not that Jack has
ambivalences and inconsistent inner thoughts and feelings, but that his
inner world is shaped by the inconsistent and contradictory expectations
in his culture. This dilemma is dramatically and seriously compounded by
Jack's sexual abuse by another male in a position of power in relation
to him. That Jack was silent about this is unremarkable. In a review,
Watkins and Bentovim (1992) suggest that the under-reporting of sexual
abuse is consistent and universal. Within the terms of masculinity the
consequences of assault are compounded by a form of psychological
emasculation, literally implying a loss of power, gender and the failure
to be a man (McMullen, 1990). For Jack this occurs at a highly critical
and vulnerable period in his life. The man in question could have made a
huge difference to Jack, by taking a fatherly interest in a vulnerable
boy. Instead, his vulnerability was exploited. Jack, as we know, did not
disclose this to his parents at the time, and is barely able to mention
it subsequently. Jack's story points to a 'failure of recognition'
(Fraser and Honneth, 2003). Formulating power

We tried to focus on experience, not symptoms, using 'thick' not 'thin'
descriptions of people's lives (White, 1995; and see chapter 5). Whether
we succeeded in avoiding reductionism can, perhaps, only be judged by
Jack himself. Our formulation sought to avoid 'vocabularies of deficit'
(Gergen, 1999). Jack has been diagnosed as, not is, a 'delusional
schizophrenic', so we don't imply a consensus or objective reality that
is in fact highly debated (Boyle, 2002; Johnstone, 2000; Harper, 2011;
Knight, 2012). This approach recognises that diagnosis and formulation
are relational processes involving power imbalances. A response that
renders his behaviour insane/psychotic, or 'beyond the pale', would
confirm his process of alienation, and contribute to the 'loss of
myself' already set off by the experience of multiple trauma and social
inequalities (White, 2004). The initial and primary focus is not on the
removal of delusions. Rather, the beliefs Jack holds are accepted and
meaning is co-constructed. The 'delusions' are re-framed as a positive,
active coping strategy that works to keep him safe at the moment. The
confusion over reality in Jack's case relates more to the feeling that
there has been a 'cover-up' on many levels in his life, than to an
organic disease process. There have been many times when he had to lose
himself to survive and contort himself to fit with others' actions. Real
threats and persecutions to abused children, and consequent fears of
dying, are common tactics of abusers. When compounded by secrecy and the
sanctioning of emotional expression due to social stigma and taboo, this
creates still

Reformulating the impact of social inequalities

133

further potential confusion. So a belief that 'I mustn't go out -- I
might get attacked', is embedded within a real experience of lack of
protection and exploitation in the world. It is not a figment of Jack's
imagination, nor a dysfunctional belief, but rather an attempted
solution to real-life conditions. If we don't assume the discontinuity
between normality/abnormality that so much of mental health practice
seems to rely on (Dillon et al., 2012), we minimise the development of
'otherness' or 'them-and-us' thinking (May, 2000; Dalal, 2002) that is
characteristic of so many practitioner--client relationships. In
positioning Jack as 'delusional' and 'paranoid' we position ourselves,
in contrast, as sane, balanced and informed. Jack is then forced into a
false choice between 'I am wrong' or 'The world is wrong' that mirrors
and exacerbates these dynamics. Social justice and empowerment
potentials

In contrast to most mental health practice, we were more interested in
making sense of Jack's so-called 'delusions' in terms of his local
inter-personal and cultural context than in categorising his experiences
in terms of particular diagnoses. We don't have to look far to see the
potential for empowerment and recovery in an alliance between Jack and
Robbie Williams, a powerful collective cultural icon of contemporary
masculinity representing success, a rags-to-riches journey (a
working-class hero who has proved the existence of social mobility),
potent sexuality and musical creativity. Jack's choice of 'delusion' is
not random or meaningless, and provides a positive contrast to other
male role models in his life. Nor is Robbie such an idealised image that
Jack is unable to relate to him -- Robbie is known for his own struggles
with substance abuse, sexuality and pressure. Similarly Jack's
preoccupation with 'stolen money' and 'money owed' has deep resonances
with a sense of social justice and the profound impact that
socioeconomic decline has had on his life. He is owed something, a lot
has already been taken away from him. The world needs to give him back
something he has lost, and in this sense he is presenting a 'complaint'
(Bentall, 2009). In common with many other victims of abuse and domestic
violence, Jack can be seen as having been socialised into a hierarchical
victim--perpetrator model of social relations. He anticipates the
possibility of causing sexual harm and appears stuck in a traumagenic
process commonly seen in abuse victims (Baker and Duncan, 1985) where
the potential for abuse and revenge, and ultimately a repeat of the
violence he experienced, can become a paralysing preoccupation. Jack may
be influenced by a dominant discourse that is widely held both outside
and within mental health services, despite research that shows that
victims are at least as likely not to abuse as become abusers themselves
(Hester et al., 2000). In dwelling on these fears he inadvertently draws
attention to the denial of social inequalities and power processes that
are so central to abuse.

134

Lynn McClelland

Sources of resistances for Jack are to be found within the survivor and
service user movement, or clinical approaches that encourage the
'transformative' (where emphasis is placed on meaningfulness and
creativity, e.g. Mad Pride, the Hearing Voices movement, the Survivor
movement, Experts by Experience groups), rather than on the
'accommodative' (where the emphasis is on resignation and disability).
Jack's passion for music appears to us to be a major resource and a
possible source of creativity and resistance, part of his self that
feels OK, pre-disempowerment, free, able and whole. This may contain
potential for a redefinition of a positive male role. Significantly,
when we created a local space for young men experiencing psychosis in
our collaboration with MIND (Young Voices Project), their chosen means
of connection was music rather than talk. MAC-UK is an excellent example
here (www.mac-uk.org.uk). Making Janet more visible: critical
formulation Space and time did not permit us to describe a reference
group for Janet and Mary, but we were able to draw on Appleton et al.'s
(2003) example of powermapping (Hagan and Smail, 1997b) with a group of
Gypsy and Traveller women. This study, and our experience of working
alongside Community Development Workers, suggests that a history of
marginalisation and fear, loss of perceived status, lack of job
opportunities and difficulties in accessing education is likely to be
relevant. My experience on training courses and in mental health teams,
is that recent media portrayals of this community have had a largely
negative influence. These themes are now explored in relation to Janet
and her family. Femininity as problematic

Firstly, there is a fundamental 'risk of being' for women presenting to
services with experience of oppression (Williams, 1999; Chesler, 1994;
Beckwith, 1993; Ussher, 1991) where their thoughts, feelings and
behaviour are highly likely to be interpreted as 'madness' or 'badness'
depending on whether they encounter psychiatric or social care
institutions. Secondly, as Walkerdine (1996) asserts following her
analysis of dominant discourses within sociological and psychological
literature, women are present in discussions of disadvantaged or
'working class' women in Britain primarily as a 'mother': a mother who
must be watched and monitored at all times through the available
medical, educational, social work and legal apparatuses because she is
seen as the relay point in the production of the democratic citizen. It
is she, above all others, who will obey the moral and political order
and not rebel. (Walkerdine, 1996: 146)

Reformulating the impact of social inequalities

135

This, she argues, has led to a mode of regulation through psychology
which targets groups of women and particularly mothers, and ascribes
them the role of 'transmitters' of social pathology (e.g. through faulty
or damaging child-rearing practices, or failure to bond). At the same
time, any attempt to engage seriously in the psychological effects of
their oppression is avoided. This dynamic is even more likely to be
present when mothers have lived experience of other kinds of difference
-- mothers from minority groups, lesbian mothers, teenage mothers, older
mothers, mothers of sexually abused children, etc. These 'soft forms of
regulation' are in operation in a wide variety of institutional settings
(e.g. social services), and particularly within mental health services
(e.g. child and adolescence mental health teams), where subjectivity and
development are only understood in terms of normality or pathology, as
applied to children or mothers (e.g. the ADHD discourse; Timimi, 2011).
Formulating power

In the case of Mary and Janet we would want to recognise the ideological
function of much research and practice which claims expertise about
motherhood, often from a white, male, middle-class vantage point.
Instead we would be searching for grounded, contextualised evidence
where attempts are made to consult and put mothers themselves in a
central position. One complication that arises from this suggestion is
that 'the anxieties and projections onto them, which are entailed in
their regulation, will be present in their views of themselves and their
own insecurities' (Walkerdine, 1996: 152). For example, the women may
have internalised views of themselves as stupid, sexually damaged or
inadequate mothers. This does not need to be conceptualised as a
straightforward process of internalisation by a passive subject, but can
be seen as the outcome of a long historical practice of survival in
minority groups within deprived material conditions and in defence of
the myths and fantasies of dominant oppressive groups. Formulation would
benefit from approaches that use critical consciousnessraising (Almeida
et al., 2007; Dalal, 2002; Prilleltensky et al., 2007; Ryde 2009;
Friere, 1978). This would attempt to deconstruct diagnoses and
pathologised accounts of motherhood (Woollett and Phoenix, 1997; Van
Scoyoc, 2000) thus raising awareness of a number of power processes that
may be operating in Janet and Mary's case. Firstly, Mary is 'captured'
by medical diagnoses, a traditional way of concealing social
inequalities by pathologising and medicalising women's distress (Ussher,
1991; Woollett and Phoenix, 1997). Secondly, there is the obscuring of
the impact of domestic violence on both Mary and Janet, which is perhaps
being played out in Janet's night terrors, aggression towards her mother
and eating problems. We might hypothesise that the formulation of Mary
and Janet so far is likely to be influenced by mother-blaming discourses
(Woollett and Phoenix, 1997),

136

Lynn McClelland

the double-bind of traditional motherhood roles within heterosexual
relationships (lack of power and access to resources combined with full
responsibility for childcare; exposure to violence; lack of childcare
support; the psychological and emotional costs of caring), along with
the absence of accounts of fathers' influences on relationships and
children's development. As is typical of many referrals to CAMHS
services, this gendered nature of clinical discourses about families
remains unquestioned (Almeida et al., 2007). We might ask why there is
ongoing unsupervised contact with an abusive father when there are many
personal accounts as well as much research pointing to the risk of
further harassment for Mary and abuse for Janet (Hester et al., 2000).
Janet's hidden and internalised distress is characteristic not only of
being a girl, but also of being a child witness to domestic violence.
Boys' needs, although no less complex, may tend to be more evident in
mental health services, schools and society as a whole, due to their
tendency to act out distress in highly visible ways such as behavioural
problems, youth offending and so on. Similarly, the interdependence of
mothers and daughters as a survival strategy in adverse conditions is
unlikely to be valued, but will tend to be pathologised and measured
against socially constructed Western, gendered norms of separation and
autonomy. In extreme cases there may even be a diagnosis of factitious
disorder by proxy (formerly 'Munchausen's by proxy') syndrome. The
relational needs of women in services are recognised in the Women's
Mental Health Strategy (Department of Health, 2003). This might suggest
the possibility of Cindy as a potential non-abusive co-parent, and the
involvement of 'outsider witnesses' (White, 1995: 26; and see chapter 5)
within the Romany or local community. Mary could therefore be reframed
as a 'surviving mother' and grandmother instead of a 'failing mother' as
she appears to be in the referral. Mary's experience as a mother of
older children, one of whom has special needs/disabilities (autism),
would be an important part of her story, her sense of self and the
skills that she could bring to an encounter with services. Restoring
meaning through making socio-cultural context visible

There is growing interest in family interventions which emphasise
broader social and cultural contexts. Korbin (2003), for example,
highlights the contextual and multi-dimensional factors in child
maltreatment, especially the influence of social networks, neighbourhood
ties, and community connectedness. In Gracia and Musitu's (2003)
comparison of families in two different cultural contexts, families
where abuse had occurred were less involved in local activities and held
more negative attitudes towards the wider community. Abusing parents had
smaller peer groups, less contact with families of origin, received less
help from family relations and felt more isolated in their communities.
The existence and meaning of these kinds of

Reformulating the impact of social inequalities

137

sub-cultures is not necessarily picked up by mainstream services. Gracia
and Musitu (2003) described a process of 'social impoverishment': an
isolation from formal and informal sources of support so that some
families do not use services even when they are available. There is
potential for this kind of marginalisation in Mary and Janet's case.
Sheppard's (1998) study in the UK has shown the influence of
disadvantage, low income and lack of social support on the 'progression'
of families towards social service caseness, and the link between
disadvantage, abuse and depression amongst mothers on social service and
health visitor caseloads, independent of pathways into care. Where
social support and involvement of services was lowest, there was an
increased risk of injury and neglect of children. Fatimilehin, Raval and
Banks (2000) have also made some important points about the cultural
context of formulation. As applied to Janet, these may include: •

•

• • • • •

The combination of factors in this case because of minority group
status: multiple disadvantage in relation to the power and dominance of
mainstream cultural values, racism, harassment, alienation from
professional discourses. Generational impact of acculturation through
assimilation, and the consequent dilution or disconnection from cultural
history and heritage. Use of cultural genograms (cultural family trees)
may be helpful (Hardy and Laszloffy, 1995). Normative theories of child
development: independence, separation, child-rearing practices.
Formation of self-identity and racial/ethnic identity may be
problematic. Ethnic definitions of distress differing from mainstream:
child abuse, bereavement, impact of racism, harassment denied.
Interaction with education system: language, aspirations, stigma,
achievement. Lack of specific provision for black and minority ethnic
family support for parents with mental health problems.

We would also want to make a note of the many resiliences Janet shows,
for example her enthusiasm for school, her sociability and the family's
spiritualism as a potential connection to the past. Practitioners should
be able to work with difference (Sewell, 2009), and the cultural
competence of services is increasingly becoming important. We would
therefore want to develop an understanding of the institutional
inequalities (myths, explanations, racism) that are present. We would
focus on qualitative assessments and seek the involvement of cultural
consultants, outsider witnesses, community groups or representatives to
assist with the issues of cultural accountability (Tamasese and
Waldegrave, 1993). We could

138

Lynn McClelland

also explore the possibility of alternative spiritual and holistic
interventions and a community base for delivering them. Reflexive
practice A social inequalities approach implies a reclaiming of the
reflexive practitioner (Bleakley, 2000). This demands personal and
collective reflection on both the content and context of formulation. It
highlights the vulnerability of formulation to the idiosyncratic as well
as the normative, and the importance of creating a context for it that
shapes its accountability. Are we, in this, speaking for the other? Are
we attending closely to the client's story or indulging our own
intellectual interests and predilections? We also need to adopt the
position of the critical practitioner who recognises the wider social
processes, the organisational and institutional context, and their own,
value-based practice as much as possible. This particular account, for
instance, is situated in, and constrained by, my own position as a
white, female, heterosexual mental health professional. A supervision
process that takes power and privilege into account and develops
awareness of social inequalities (Aitken and Dennis, 2004; Patel, 2004;
Ryde, 2009) is of enormous help in developing and sustaining this. It is
never easy to hold a position that is almost inevitably counter-cultural
and often sits in painful contrast with the dominant discourses and
ideologies, attracting defensive responses (Boyle, 2011). These ethical
dilemmas can be played out on a daily basis, and at every level. 'Do I
challenge a colleague?' 'Do I attend a ward round?' 'Do I challenge
diagnosis x or treatment plan y?' 'Do I participate in a flawed service
development plan?' These questions can seem endless and difficult to
answer. Similarly, the challenge of working in these ways brings
complexity rather than simplification. The answer to the question 'What
do I do?' is unlikely to be simple or straight-forward. Perhaps most of
all, it places a requirement on us to subject our values and practices,
and our own life experiences with oppression and victimisation, to
critical reflection and debate. What helps with many of these challenges
is to look to our own social contexts, and to actively seek connection
with like-mindedness wherever it is to be found. For me, this has
included involvement with user groups as well as professional networks.
These are hugely important sources of support and sanity. Nor should we
be scared of passionate commitments and embodied reactions as energisers
of social and political action (CrocianiWindland and Hoggett, 2012;
Shohet, 2008), as an appropriate response to the 'cognitivised and
over-civilised' talk of 'emotions' and 'formulation' with which we are
so familiar.

Reformulating the impact of social inequalities

139

Key characteristics of formulation from a social inequalities
perspective • • • • • • • • • •

•

•

Providing opportunities for recognition and respect. Making material
realities and relevant social contexts visible (domains of life,
structures, relationships, resources, processes). Critical
consciousness-raising about the presence of ideology and dominant
discourses that lead to obscuring of social inequalities. Mapping
significant events and reactions across time; acknowledging resources,
abilities; mapping resistances and survival strategies alongside
oppressions and misuses of power. Paying attention to language,
differences of positioning and sense-making. Recognising difference but
avoiding 'othering'. Situating personal accounts within the wider
socio-political narratives. Recognition of embodiment as a psychosocial
process where oppressive practices become internalised and interact with
identity formation. Centrality of the client. De-centredness of the
therapist, who offers non-expert 'solidarity' with the person, the
emerging accounts of victimisation and the social plights that underpin
these. Naming of power processes and abuses. Creating of further
opportunities for disclosure of abuse or other inequalities. Embargos on
the expression of distress are acknowledged and explored in terms of
culture, gender, and personal narratives. Deconstruction of
symptoms/diagnosis: jettisoning of burdens, useless or disempowering
concepts (abnormality, medical model) -- reclaiming of ownership, power
to resist, challenge, contesting and talking back to the ascribed
diagnoses. Constructions of alternative models of distress.
Collaborative or participatory formulation. Does it promote peaceful,
respectful and equitable processes whereby people have meaningful input
into decisions affecting their lives? Is the client constructed as
active/ passive in this formulation? What does the formulation act upon?
Does it promote respect for diversity (identities, meanings, actions)?
Does it address issues of social justice?

Acknowledgements I would like to thank Joe Miller for his helpful
comments on this reformulation. References Aitken, G. and Dennis, M
(2004) Gender in supervision. In Steen, L. and Fleming, I. (eds)
Supervision and Clinical Psychology: Theory, Practice and Perspectives.
London: Brunner-Routledge.

140

Lynn McClelland

Aldorondo, E. (ed.) (2007) Advancing Social Justice through Clinical
Practice. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Allen, M., Allen, J.,
Hogarth, S. and Marmot, M. (2013) Working for Health Equity: The Role of
Medical and Health Professionals. London: IHE UCL. Almeida, R.,
Dolan-Del Vecchio, K. and Parker, L. (2007) Foundation concepts for
social justice-based therapy. In E. Aldorondo (ed.) Advancing Social
Justice through Clinical Practice. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates. Appleton, L., Hagan, T., Goward, P., Repper, J. and Wilson,
R. (2003) Smail's contribution to understanding the needs of the
socially excluded: the case of Gypsy and Traveller women, Clinical
Psychology, 24, 40--46. Baker, A. and Duncan, S. (1985) Child sexual
abuse: a study of prevalence in Great Britain, Child Abuse and Neglect,
9, 457--467. Bates, P. (2002) Working for Inclusion: Making Social
Inclusion a Reality for People with Severe Mental Health Problems.
London: Sainsbury Centre for Mental Health. Beckwith, J.B. (1993) Gender
stereotypes and mental health revisited, Social Behaviour and
Personality 21 (1), 85--88. Bentall, R. (2009) Doctoring the Mind: Why
Psychiatric Treatments Fail. London, New York: Allen Lane. Bleakley, A.
(2000) Adrift without a life belt: reflective self-assessment in a
postmodern age, Teaching in Higher Education, 5, 4, 405--418. Bostock,
J. (2003) Addressing power, Clinical Psychology 24, 36--39. ------(2004)
Addressing poverty and exploitation: challenges for psychology, Clinical
Psychology 38, 23--26. Bourdieu, P. (2000) The Weight of The World:
Social Suffering in Contemporary Society. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford
University Press. Boyle, M. (1997) Clinical psychology theory: making
gender visible in clinical psychology, Feminism and Psychology 7 (2),
231--238. ------(2002) Schizophrenia: A Scientific Delusion? (2nd edn)
London: Routledge. ------(2011) Making the world go away, and how
psychiatry and psychology benefit. In Rapley, M., Moncrieff, J. and
Dillon, J. (eds) De-Medicalizing Misery: Psychiatry, Psychology and the
Human Condition. London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 27--43. British
Psychological Society (2008) Socially Inclusive Practice. Discussion
Paper. Leicester: British Psychological Society. ------(2012) Guidelines
and Literature Review for Psychologists Working Therapeutically with
Sexual and Gender Minority Clients. Leicester: British Psychological
Society. Chesler, P. (1994) Heroism is our only alternative. Cited in
Women and madness: a reappraisal, Feminism and Psychology, 4 (2),
298--305. Crociani-Windland, L. and Hoggett, P. (2012) Politics and
affect, Subjectivity 5, 161--179. Dalal, F. (2002) Race, Colour and the
Processes of Racialisation. London: Routledge. ------(2012) Thought
Paralysis. London: Karnac. Department of Health (2003) Women's Mental
Health Strategy: Into the Mainstream. London: Department of Health.
------(2009) Tackling Health Inequalities: 10 years on. London:
Department of Health.

Reformulating the impact of social inequalities

141

------(2010) Equity and Excellence: Liberating the NHS. London:
Department of Health. Dillon. J., Johnstone, L. and Longden, E. (2012)
Trauma, dissociation, attachment and neuroscience: a new paradigm for
understanding severe mental distress, Journal of Critical Psychology,
Counselling and Psychotherapy, 12 (3), 145--155. Fatimilehin, I..,
Raval, H. and Banks, N. (2000) Child, adolescent and family. In N.
Patel, E. Bennett, M. Dennis, N. Dosanjh, A. Mahtani, A. Miller and N.
Nadirshaw (eds) Clinical Psychology, 'Race' and Culture: A Training
Manual. London: BPS Books. Fernando, S. (2010) Mental Health, Race and
Culture. London: Routledge. Fernando, S. and Keating, F. (2008) Mental
Health in a Multi-Ethnic Society: A Multidisciplinary Handbook. London:
Routledge. Foucault, M. (1980) Power/knowledge: Selected Interviews and
Other Writings. London: Harvester Wheatsheaf. Fraser, N. and Honneth, A.
(2003) Redistribution or Recognition: A Political-Philosophical
Exchange. London: Verso. Friere, P. (1970) Pedagogy of the Oppressed.
New York: Continuum. ------(1978) Education for a Critical
Consciousness. New York: Seabury Press. Fryer, D. (1998) Mental health
consequences of economic insecurity, relative poverty and social
exclusion, Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology 8, 75--80.
------(2008) Community psychologies: what are they? What could they be?
What does it matter? The Australian Community Psychologist, 20 (3),
7--15. Gergen, M. (1999) An Invitation to Social Constructionism.
London: Sage. Gillis, S., Howie, G. and Munford, R. (2007) (2nd edn)
Third Wave Feminism: A Critical Exploration. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gracia, E. and Musitu, E. (2003) Social isolation from communities and
child maltreatment: a cross-cultural perspective, Child Abuse and
Neglect 27, 2, 153--168. Hagan, T. and Smail, D. (1997a) Power-mapping
I. Background and basic methology, Journal of Community and Applied
Social Psychology, 7, 4, 257--284. ------(1997b) Power-mapping II.
Practical application: the example of child sexual abuse, Journal of
Community and Applied Social Psychology 7, 269--284. Hardy, K. and
Laszloffy, T. (1995) The cultural genogram key to training culturally
competent family therapists. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy 3,
227--237. Harper, D.J. (2011) The social context of paranoia. In Rapley,
M., Moncrieff, J. and Dillon, J. (eds) De-medicalizing Misery.
Psychiatry, Psychology and the Human Condition. Basingstoke and New
York: Palgrave Macmillan. Hester, M., Pearson, C. and Harwin, N. (2000)
Making an Impact: Children and Domestic Violence: A Reader. London:
Jessica Kingsley. Hoggett, P. (2006) Conflict, ambivalence, and the
contested purpose of public organizations. Human Relations 59 (2):
175-194. Hook, D. (2011) A Critical Psychology of the Post Colonial: The
Mind of Apartheid. London: Routledge. Institute of Health Inequalities
(2012) The Impact of Economic Downturn on Policy Changes on Health
Inequalities. London: UCL. Johnstone, L. (2000) Users and Abusers of
Psychiatry: A Critical Look at Psychiatric Practice, (2nd edn) London,
Philadelphia: Brunner-Routledge.

142

Lynn McClelland

Jones, O. (2011) Chavs: The Demonisation of the Working Class. London:
Verso. Kagan, C., Burton, M., Duckett, P., Lawthom, R. and Siddiquee, A.
(2011) Critical Community Psychology: Critical Action and Social Change.
BPS Blackwell for John Wiley and Sons. Knight, T. (2012) Can the mental
health system cause paranoia? Asylum Magazine, Spring. Korbin, J. (2003)
Neighbourhood and community connectedness in child maltreatment
research, Child Abuse and Neglect 27, 2, 137--140. Marmot, M. (2012)
Executive summary in: Fair Society, Health Lives: The Marmot review
Strategic review of Health Inequalities in England post-2010. London:
UCL. May, R. (2000) Routes to recovery from psychosis: the roots of a
clinical psychologist, Clinical Psychology Forum 146, 6--10. McGoldrick,
M. and Hardy, K.V. (2008) (2nd edn) Revisioning Family Therapy: Race,
Culture and Gender in Clinical Practice. New York: The Guilford Press.
McMullen, R. (1990) Male Rape: Breaking the Silence of the Last Taboo.
London: Gay Men's Press. Miller, J. and Bell, C. (1996) Mapping men's
mental health concerns, Journal of Community and Applied Social
Psychology 6, 317--327. Miller, J. and McClelland, L. (2006) Social
inequalities formulation. In L. Johnstone and R. Dallos (eds)
Formulation in Psychology and Psychotherapy: Making Sense of People's
Problems. London: Routledge, pp. 26--153. Morgan, E., Bird, L., Burnard,
K., Clark, B., Graham, V., Lawton-Smith, S. and Ofari, J. (2001) An
Uphill Struggle: A Survey of People who use Mental Health Services and
are on a Low Income. London: Mental Health Foundation. Newnes, C. (2012)
Introduction to the Special Issue: The Journal of Critical Psychology,
Counselling and Psychotherapy, 12 (3), 145--155. Ng, S.H. (1980) The
Social Psychology of Power. San Diego: Academic Press. Orford, J. (2008)
Community Psychology: Challenges, Controversies and Emerging Consensus.
Chichester: Wiley. Patel, N. (2004) Power in supervision. In Steen, L.
and Fleming, I. (eds) Supervision and Clinical Psychology: Theory,
Practice and Perspectives. London: BrunnerRoutledge. Prilleltensky, I.
and Nelson, G. (2002) Doing Psychology Critically: Making a Difference
in Diverse Settings. Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Prilleltensky, I., Dokecki, P., Frieden,G. and Ota-Wang, V. (2007)
Counselling for wellness and justice: foundations and ethical dilemmas.
In E. Aldorondo (ed.) Advancing Social Justice through Clinical
Practice. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Rapley, M.,
Moncrieff, J. and Dillon, J. (eds) (2011) De-Medicalizing Misery:
Psychiatry, Psychology and the Human Condition. London: Palgrave
Macmillan. Read, J., Bentall, R. and Fosse, R. (2009) Time to abandon
the bio-bio-bio model of psychosis, Epidemiologia e Psichiatria Sociale
18, 299--310. Rose, N. (1985) The Psychological Complex. London:
Routledge. ------(1989) Governing the Soul: The Shaping of the Private
Self. London: Routledge.

Reformulating the impact of social inequalities

143

Rust, M-J. and Totton, N. (2012) Vital Signs: Psychological Responses to
Ecological Crises. London: Karnac. Ryde, J. (2009) Being White in the
Helping Professions: Developing Effective Intercultural Awareness.
London, Philadelphia: Jessica Kingsley Publishers. Sashidharan, S. P.
(2003) Inside Outside: Improving Mental Health Services for Black and
Minority Ethnic Communities in England. Maryland, US: National Institute
for Mental Health. Sewell, H. (2009) Working with Ethnicity, Race and
Culture in Mental Health. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers. Sheppard,
M. (1998) Social profile, maternal depression and welfare concerns in
clients of health visitors and social workers: a comparative study,
Children and Society 12, 125--135. Shohet, R. (ed.) (2008) Passionate
Supervision. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers. Smail, D. (1993) The
Origins of Unhappiness: A New Understanding of Personal Distress,
London: Secker and Warburg. ------(2011) Psychotherapy: illusion with no
future? In Rapley, M., Moncrieff, J. and Dillon, J. (eds)
De-medicalizing Misery. Psychiatry, Psychology and the Human Condition.
Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 226--238. Sue, D.W.,
Capodilupo, C.M., Torino, G.C., Buceri, J.M., Holder, A.M.B., Nadal,
K.L. and Esquilin, M. (2007) Racial micro-aggressions in everyday life:
implications for clinical practice, American Psychologist, 62(4),
271--286. Tamasese, K. and Waldegrave, C. (1993) Cultural and gender
accountability in the 'Just Therapy' approach, Journal of Feminist
Family Therapy, 5, 229--245. Timini, S. (2011) Medicalizing masculinity.
In Rapley, M., Moncrieff, J. and Dillon, J. (eds) De-medicalizing
Misery. Psychiatry, Psychology and the Human Condition. Basingstoke and
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 86--97. UNICEF (2011) State of the
World's Children Report: Adolescence: An Age of Opportunity. New York:
UNICEF. Ussher, J. (1991) Women's Madness: Misogyny or Mental Illness?
Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press. Van Scoyoc, S. (2000)
Perfect Mothers, Invisible Women. London: Constable and Robinson.
Walkerdine, V. (1996) Working-class women: psychological and social
aspects of survival. In Wilkinson, S. (ed.) Feminist Social
Psychologies. Philadelphia: OUP. Watkins, B. and Bentovim, A. (1992) The
sexual abuse of male children and adolescents: a review of current
research, Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied
Disciplines, 33, 197--248. Watkins, M. and Shulman, H. (2008) Towards
Psychologies of Liberation. London: Palgrave Macmillan. White, M. (1995)
Reflecting teamwork as definitional ceremony. In M. White (ed.)
Re-Authoring Lives: Interviews and Essays. Adelaide: Dulwich Centre
Publications. ------(2004) Working with multiple trauma, International
Journal of Narrative Therapy and Community Work, 1. Wilkinson, S. (ed.)
Feminist Social Psychologies. Philadelphia: OUP.

144

Lynn McClelland

Wilkinson, R. and Pickett, K. (2009) The Spirit Level: Why More Equal
Societies Almost Always Do Better. London: Allen Lane. Williams, J.
(1999) Social inequalities and mental health. In C. Newnes, G. Holmes,
and C. Dunn, (eds) This is Madness: A Critical Look at Psychiatry and
the Future of Mental Health Services. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books. Williams,
J. and Watson, G. (1988) Sexual inequality, family life and family
therapy. In Street, E. and Dryden, W. (eds) Family Therapy in Britain.
Milton Keynes: OUP. Woollett, A. and Phoenix, A. (1997) Deconstructing
developmental psychology accounts of mothering, Feminism and Psychology,
7 (2) 275--282 World Health Organisation (2009) Mental Health,
Resilience and Inequalities. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe.

Chapter 7

Formulation in personal and relational construct psychology Seeing the
world through clients' eyes David Winter and Harry Procter

Personal Construct Psychology Personal Construct Psychology (PCP) was
originated by the American psychologist George A. Kelly. His two-volume
magnum opus appeared in 1955 and further writings were collected
posthumously by Maher (1969). The approach has continued to be
elaborated in a rich literature to this day (e.g. Fransella, 2003;
Neimeyer, 2009; Walker and Winter, 2007; Winter and Viney, 2005). PCP
developed out of the pragmatist philosophy of Peirce and Dewey, in which
people are seen as involved in a process of inquiry, of making
hypotheses and developing an understanding of the world through
discovery and experiment. A person is thus like a scientist. Central to
Kelly's approach, therefore, is the notion that the person is constantly
responding to the validation or invalidation of his or her hypotheses.
Just like scientists in 'real life', the experience of invalidation of,
and having to change, our ideas is a highly passionate affair.
Scientists do not operate on the basis of bland, unemotional progression
of testing and refutation but become attached to their theories and can
experience joy, anger, distress, despair, and even a sense of
annihilation when their theories, perhaps encompassing a lifetime of
work, are refuted. So it is with our world views, or 'core constructs'.
In therapy this means that both client and therapist are already
involved in formulation, making sense of things and making choices in
accordance with how they construe the situations in which they find
themselves. PCP is often classified under the larger category of
constructivism, which typically includes the work of Piaget, the radical
constructivists, Von Glasersfeld and Maturana, and others. Social
constructionism (see chapter 5) is also sometimes included in this wider
category (Raskin, 2002). Constructivism could be defined as 'the study
and application of how human beings create systems of meaning in making
sense of and acting in the world'. One of the main distinguishing
features of PCP is its contention that we function by developing and
utilising a unique set of bipolar constructs. Giving meaning to an
experience involves seeing similarities as well as

146

David Winter and Harry Procter

differences. If a person sees him or herself as reserved, a comparison
is being made to another particular state s/he has in mind such as
happy, active or sociable. To understand a person's judgement involves
knowing what specific distinction s/he is making as well as the
similarities that are being drawn. Constructs thus have two poles. They
govern a person's unique experience as well as structuring his or her
actions, as s/he makes choices between two alternatives. Psychological
change involves either moving along the dimension of the construct from
one pole to the other, or revising the meaning of the construct, or
replacing it with a different construct dimension. The construct is a
rich psychological notion that allows us to unite many different areas
of human functioning which are usually seen as distinct, for example
cognition, emotion, action and relational interaction (Procter, 2009a).
As mental health workers, we need to be very aware of the professional
and diagnostic as well as personal constructs we may be applying as we
conduct the business of formulation (Procter, 2009b). The origin of a
person's construing will be in the culture, belief systems and
discourses in which s/he grows up (Procter and Parry, 1978) but within
this each one of us develops our own way of construing the world as we
negotiate the unique events of our biography. Even common problems and
complaints are made sense of by each person in idiosyncratic ways
(Wright, 1970), and so PCP is wary of standardised ways of explaining
difficulties and manualised ways of addressing them. The process of
formulation must therefore be conducted afresh with every new client and
situation, taking account of the particular construings of the person
him/herself and those of the people who surround him/her, especially
families, friends, colleagues, and the professionals involved. PCP can
therefore operate at two levels. It is a theory about how clients make
sense of their worlds, and at the same time it can be used reflexively
as an overarching perspective in which the construing involved in
different psychological or therapeutic approaches can be compared and
utilised (Procter, 2009b). Each therapeutic model, such as those
presented in this book, involves applying particular sets of constructs.
'Negative automatic thoughts', 'projective identification' and
'symmetrical escalation', for example, are all professional constructs
used within cognitive-behavioural, psychoanalytic and systemic models
respectively. PCP thus becomes an excellent meta-therapeutic framework
as we organise and integrate different ways of understanding the
client's predicament. In the spirit of Kelly's constructive
alternativism, we are not limited to looking at things in one way. PCP
provides its own methods and language but we are free to note the
construing used by other models and frameworks, bearing in mind that
these may not always be philosophically compatible with PCP. The spirit
of the approach is one of experiment and playfulness: 'Let's try this
new way of looking at this!' Therapy often involves re-construing a
situation in an entirely new way that opens up new choices and
possibilities for a way forward.

Formulation in construct psychology

147

Personal construct formulation Although the concept of formulation has
often been regarded as deriving from the cognitive-behavioural tradition
(Bruch, 1998), in fact it was central to Kelly's approach. He
distinguished between two types of formulation, which he termed
structuralisation and construction (Kelly, 1955: 454). The former is
more tentative, and essentially involves the clinician roughly
structuring the clinical information for future reference. In doing so,
the clinician will construe the client's behaviours, both from the
normative viewpoint of society, and from the viewpoint of what the
client considers, and believes that others consider, to be the problem.
For example, after an initial meeting with Jack the clinician might note
how, from a normative viewpoint, his construing is deviant and
'delusional', but would also note Jack's own view of his problems, not
only the themes expressed in his 'delusions' but also his concerns about
his family. In addition, the clinician would compare Jack's view with
what Jack regards as his family's view of his problems, which had led
them to request his hospital admission. In a structuralisation, some
attention is also likely to be given to the client's validational
fortunes, namely the extent to which he or she has been able to
anticipate events successfully. Kelly's second type of formulation,
construction, involves organising the client's behaviours in terms of
the client's inferred personal constructs, and then construing, or
'subsuming', these constructs. Subsuming involves bringing another
person's construct into one's own construct system with as little as
possible interference from one's own personal construing and values --
"stepping into their shoes", as it were. For this purpose, Kelly
developed a 'subsuming construction system' consisting of professional,
diagnostic constructs, described in the next section, which the
clinician could use in order to construe the client's construing. For
example, when we come to consider Jack, we shall see that the clinician
will not only be concerned to identify some of his major constructs but
also, by applying what Kelly called 'diagnostic constructs', to consider
how Jack's constructs are structured, used and revised. Kelly's system
constitutes a radical alternative to Kraepelin's nosological approach
which is the foundation of psychiatric diagnosis. He was at pains to
point out that his system of diagnostic constructs was 'not a
nomenclature of diseases', in that these constructs could be applied to
the construing of any individual (including, reflexively, that of the
clinician), whether or not he or she is regarded as presenting a
psychological disorder. As he said, 'In themselves, they are neither
good nor bad, healthy nor unhealthy, adaptive nor maladaptive' (Kelly,
1955: 453), and they are therefore very different from psychiatric
classifications. Rather than pigeonholing the client in a fixed
diagnostic category, the personal construct approach is to formulate a
'transitive diagnosis', which highlights the avenues of movement open to
the client. Before outlining Kelly's diagnostic constructs, we shall
consider more generally the personal construct theory perspective on
psychological disorder.

148

David Winter and Harry Procter

As we have seen, Kelly viewed the person as, like a scientist, forming
hypotheses (or constructions) about the world, testing these out, and
revising them if they are invalidated or consolidating them if they are
validated. He referred to this cyclical process as the Experience Cycle
(Kelly, 1970), and indeed formulation can be seen to involve just such a
cycle, in which the clinician formulates, tests, and refines his or her
constructions of a client. The optimal process of construing described
in the Experience Cycle can be contrasted with that involved in a
psychological disorder, which Kelly (1955: 831) defined as 'any personal
construction which is used repeatedly in spite of consistent
invalidation'. In effect, the construing process in the person with a
psychological disorder has become blocked, and it has been argued that
the earlier in the Experience Cycle the blockage occurs, the more severe
the disorder (Neimeyer, 1985). Thus, from this perspective, the
inability to frame any coherent anticipations about the world would be
regarded as indicative of a more severe disorder than the failure to
revise construing following its invalidation. In both these cases,
though, the person is essentially not adequately testing out his or her
construing, or is in what Walker (2002) has termed a state of
non-validation. He or she thereby avoids having their constructs
invalidated, which, as Leitner (1988) has argued, may be a terrifying
experience if the constructs involved are central to the person's view
of the self in relation to others. Diagnostic constructs For Kelly, the
essence of all interpersonal relationships is what he termed sociality,
the attempt to construe the other person's construction processes, or
see the world through his or her eyes. The clinician's diagnostic
constructs are essentially a means of facilitating sociality with the
client, providing goggles through which various aspects of the client's
construing can be viewed. Covert construing

Although Kelly did not use the concept of the unconscious, he did
acknowledge that some of a person's construing may be at a low 'level of
cognitive awareness'. For example, preverbal constructs are those which
have no consistent verbal symbols, perhaps having been developed before
the person had the use of words. For some constructs, one pole may be
relatively inaccessible, or submerged, and this may prevent it from
being tested. Occasionally, constructions may be suspended, or held in
abeyance, if their 'implications are intolerable' (Kelly, 1955: 474) in
that they are incompatible with the rest of the person's construct
system. Some aspects of the client's predicament may therefore be
explained in terms of such features of covert construing, and one focus
of therapy may then be to raise the client's level of awareness of his
or her construing.

Formulation in construct psychology

149

Structure of construing

A person's constructs differ in their importance to the individual.
Kelly considered that construct systems are hierarchically organised,
with superordinate constructs, those at the top of the hierarchy,
subsuming other, more subordinate, constructs. A personal construct
formulation is therefore likely to include some indications of what the
client's superordinate constructs might be. The importance of
identifying these constructs is indicated by research findings that they
are resistant to change (Hinkle, 1965). The clinician would therefore do
well to avoid challenging such constructs, at least in the early stages
of therapy. The same applies to core constructs, those which, in
contrast to peripheral constructs, are central to the client's
maintenance of his or her 'identity and existence' (Kelly, 1955: 482).
Strategies of construing

People employ various strategies in an attempt to make better sense of
their world or avoid invalidation of their construing. As might be
expected in a theory which emphasises the bipolarity of constructs,
Kelly (1995) presented some of these strategies as polar opposites,
namely dilation and constriction; and loose and tight construing. In
dilation, the person who is faced with incompatible constructions
extends his or her perceptual field in an attempt to reorganise the
construct system at a more comprehensive level. In Kelly's words (1955:
477), the person 'jumps around more from topic to topic, he lumps his
childhood with his future, he sees vast ranges of events as possibly
related, he participates in a wider range of activities, and, if he is a
client undergoing psychotherapy, he tends to see everything that happens
to him as potentially related to his problem'. In disorders involving
dilation (such as in people who might be labelled 'manic' or
'paranoid'), 'the person's exploration has outrun his organization'
(Kelly, 1955: 846). The converse strategy, constriction, involves
delimiting the perceptual field to minimise apparent incompatibilities
in construing. However, this runs the risk that 'it may let issues
accumulate which will eventually threaten a person with insurmountable
anxiety' (Kelly, 1955: 908). Disorders involving constriction may be
particularly apparent in people who are regarded as 'phobic' or
'depressed'. In loose construing, a person's constructions are vague and
variable. Their imprecision makes them very difficult to invalidate, and
therefore an individual may loosen his or her construing in an attempt
to avoid repeated invalidation. Bannister (1960, 1962) provided evidence
that this is the case in clients diagnosed as thought-disordered
schizophrenics. Tight construing, by contrast, involves very precise
predictions and a construct system with 'no loose fits which might let
anxiety seep in' (Kelly, 1955: 849). However, such a system is very
vulnerable to invalidation and therefore brittle.

150

David Winter and Harry Procter

Most of us at times show constriction and at other times dilation; or
oscillate between loose and tight construing, a cyclical process which
Kelly regarded as being necessary for creativity. It is the exclusive
use of a particular strategy, without use of the converse strategy,
which may be found in psychological disorders. In such cases, therapy
may usefully involve attempts to balance the client's use of strategies,
for example by attempting to tighten some of the constructions of the
habitually loose construer. Control

A further cycle described by Kelly (1955) is the
Circumspection--Preemption-- Control (C-P-C) Cycle, which is involved in
decision making. In the circumspection phase of this cycle, the person
considers the issues involved in a decision; in the pre-emption stage,
the most superordinate issue, or construct, is selected; and in the
control phase, the choice is made of applying a particular pole of this
construct to an event. Again, it is failure to complete the cycle, for
example by excessive rumination in the circumspection phase or
foreshortening this phase and acting impulsively, that may characterise
a disorder. Indeed, in Kelly's (1955: 927) view, 'all disorders of
construction are disorders which involve faulty control'. 'Emotions'

As we have seen, Kelly (1955) took a holistic view of the person and did
not make traditional distinctions between cognition, emotion, and
motivation. A construct involves emotion and feeling just as much as it
does cognition and action (Procter, 2009a). As Kelly says, 'Human
discrimination may take place also at levels which have been called
"physiological" or "emotional." Nor is discrimination necessarily a
verbalized process. Man discriminates even at a very primitive and
behavioral level' (Kelly, 1969: 219). For Kelly, what would normally be
regarded as emotions involve awareness of transitions in construing.
These may be experienced as embodied states, which of course are
themselves construed. Some of these transitions will be the result of
invalidation, and the emotions concerned characterise particular types
of disorder. For example, threat occurs when one becomes aware of an
imminent comprehensive change in core structures. Anxiety occurs when
one finds one's world unconstruable, and therefore attempts to avoid
invalidation of construing in effect to aim to reduce anxiety by
ensuring that the world remains predictable. Guilt is experienced when
one perceives a dislodgement from one's core role, one's characteristic
way of interacting with others. Aggression is the active elaboration of
one's perceptual field, and may be problematic when, for example, it
occurs with scant regard for the construing of other people. Hostility
is the attempt, when faced with invalidation, to make the social world
fit with one's constructions rather than vice versa. For

Formulation in construct psychology

151

example, a belief that one is unlovable may lead someone to behave in
such a way that makes sure that anyone who does show love for them will
eventually be rejecting. Dependency

Kelly (1955) viewed optimal functioning as involving a variety of
different types of dependency relationships, whereas in psychological
disorder there may be undispersed dependency. The person may either
depend on only one person, or very few people; or, conversely, be
undiscriminating and turn to a large number of people for every need.
Although dependency was not a principal axis of Kelly's system of
diagnostic constructs, it may be an important aspect of the formulation
of a client's difficulties, and of the consequent focus of therapy.
Content of construing

Kelly's diagnostic constructs primarily concern the process and
structure of construing, but he did indicate that disorders may arise
out of 'the content rather than the form of personal constructs' (Kelly,
1955: 935). Since, unlike rationalist cognitive approaches, his theory
does not assume that there is a correct way of viewing the world, it is
not surprising that he paid relatively little attention to such
disorders. Nevertheless, a personal construct formulation will consider
the predominant content of the client's constructs as this will indicate
the pathways open to, and thereby help to explain the choices made by,
him or her. In particular, it may identify the dilemmas posed by logical
inconsistencies in the client's construing, as when the preferred pole
of one construct is associated with the non-preferred pole of another
(e.g. 'I do not want to be depressed; I want to be sensitive; but
depressed people are sensitive'). Developments in the personal construct
view of disorder Although the writing in Kelly's (1955) two-volume
exposition of the psychology of personal constructs is generally very
systematic, this is less so in the two chapters presenting his taxonomy
of psychological disorders (Winter, 2009). He prefaced this section with
the statement that 'It is not practical to attempt to catalogue all the
typical psychological disorders -- even if he could, who would have the
stomach for writing that kind of cook book?' (Kelly, 1955: 836). These
chapters in some respects reflect his lack of enthusiasm for the task.
Even the term disorder itself appears too mechanistic to be consistent
with Kelly's theory, and a possible alternative (reflecting, for
example, the predominant use of one of a contrasting pair of strategies)

152

David Winter and Harry Procter

might be 'imbalance' (Walker and Winter, 2005; Winter, 2003a). Kelly's
diagnostic constructs have, nevertheless, provided the basis for
personal construct formulations of a wide range of different clinical
problems, many of them supported by research findings and leading to
evidence-based personal construct therapeutic approaches for the
problems concerned (Winter, 1992; Winter and Viney, 2005). Sociality is
a major component of an alternative personal construct view of disorder
proposed by Leitner and his colleagues, as is the individual's
developmental history (Leitner et al., 2000). They consider that
childhood traumas may cause 'developmental/structural arrests' in
construing of the self and others, which effectively becomes 'frozen'.
This then impacts upon the person's attachment style, and particularly
on interpersonal styles concerning dependencies and distancing of self
from others. Central to this view of disorder is retreat from role
relationships, or in other words, those relationships that involve
construing the other's construction processes. Intimate relationships
such as these, in which people attempt to construe the most central
aspects of each other's experience, and act accordingly, pose a risk of
invalidation of one's core role, or 'deepest understanding of being
maintained as a social being' (Kelly, 1955: 502). Difficulties with
sociality, or the related concepts of theory of mind or mentalisation,
may also be central to the difficulties presented by people diagnosed
with autistic spectrum or other psychiatric disorders (Bateman and
Fonagy, 2012; Procter, 2001). Kelly's concept of sociality in comparison
with theory of mind and mentalisation is discussed in Procter (in
press). Fonagy's mentalisation consists more of reflection on one's own
inner mental states as opposed to the mental states of others. This was
anticipated by Kelly and Procter has extended this by recognising that
there is also an awareness of the sharing and interaction of people's
mental states (see below). Relational extension of PCP An area of
development in personal construct theory and formulation is its
extension to interpersonal construing (Dallos, 1991; Procter, 1981,
1985). Kelly's constructs apply not only to the construct systems of
individuals but also to those of families or broader social systems
(Procter, 1981). A personal construct formulation will therefore also
generally consider the patterns of interaction between different
members' construing within their family and social system and the
position(s) that he or she takes up within this wider system. This
allows us to see how relational patterns and discourses constrain,
structure, and facilitate the development of individual construing and
experience. We could even argue that these constructs do not 'exist' in
a preordained manner but are created continuously as we anticipate, act,
and interact with each other. This is compatible with the spirit of
Kelly's original theorising. These developments give more equal weight
to

Formulation in construct psychology

153

relationships and persons, allowing us to re-title the approach as
'personal and relational construct psychology' (Procter, 2009b). This
allows us to recognise that many human difficulties are relational, and
involve, for example, loss, conflict, invalidation, neglect, abusive
power relationships or individual dysfunction (for example, alcohol
abuse or dementia) in another family member. Relationality and levels of
interpersonal construing

Part of this programme of development involves an extension of Kelly's
idea of sociality to include not just one person's construing of
another's construing but their construing of the relationships between
people, including their own relationship with others. For example, a
person construes the relationship between two people (dyadic construing)
as being very similar or different, as agreeing with each other or not,
as being close or misunderstanding each other. We can thus consider the
levels of interpersonal construing involved (Procter, in press; Ugazio
et al., 2008). Thus, the monadic level involves one person's construing
of another person and their constructions, the dyadic level is as above,
and the triadic level concerns the relationship between three people. An
example of the latter might be to construe a situation where two people
are seen as excluding and disempowering a third, or a situation of
rivalry between two people for the attentions of a third. The higher
levels of construing will include construing at the lower levels, dyadic
containing monadic sociality and triadic containing the dyadic and
monadic levels (Procter, 2011). This method of analysis is exemplified
in the formulation provided below in the case of Janet. Personal
construct assessment methods In arriving at a personal construct
formulation, the clinician may draw upon a range of methods of
assessment of construing (Caputi et al., 2011), and we shall briefly
describe some of these. Interviews

A fundamental component of any such assessment is to seek the client's
view of his or her problem, as well as of what others believe the
problem or complaint to be. As Kelly (1955: 797) indicated, 'From the
standpoint of the psychology of personal constructs the statement of the
client is, by definition, a true formulation of the problem'. This is a
'credulous approach', in which the client's view is respected and taken
at face value, whether or not the clinician may also entertain an
alternative formulation of the problem. Such an approach is neatly
expressed in Kelly's so-called 'first principle': 'If you don't know
what's wrong with a client, ask him; he may tell you' (Kelly, 1955:
201). The

154

David Winter and Harry Procter

primary focus of an initial interview is therefore likely to be the
complaint: 'the layman's formulation of the clinical issues' (Kelly,
1955: 789). The elaboration of the complaint may be aided by various
interview questions suggested by Kelly (1955: 963), which as well as
seeking the client's view of his or her problems, attempt to enable the
client to see these on 'a time line' and 'as fluid and transient'.
Examples of these questions are 'Under what conditions did these
problems first appear?' and 'What changes have come with treatment or
the passing of time?' (Kelly, 1955: 962). The interview is then likely
to go on to explore other aspects of the client's construing. Particular
forms of questioning have been proposed for the elicitation of core
constructs (Leitner, 1985a), or for use if the client is a child
(Procter, 2007; Ravenette, 1980) or family (Procter, 2005).
Self-characterisation

The client's self-construing may be explored further by asking him or
her to write a character sketch, which in Kelly's original method would
be written in the third person as if by someone who knows the client
very well and sympathetically. Repertory grid technique

Repertory grid technique is the principal assessment method derived from
personal construct psychology (Fransella et al., 2004). It generally
commences with the elicitation of a series of elements, usually aspects
of the self (e.g. current self; ideal self; future self) and significant
other people, from the client. In our hypothetical example of Jack's
grid, we have used the elements of self now, ideal self, self as a
child, self in the future, father, mother, his three sisters, Robbie
Williams, and his ex-boss. The client's personal constructs are then
elicited, usually by presenting the client with successive triads of the
elements and asking, for each triad, how two of the elements are alike
and thereby different from the third. The client's own words are then
used for the constructs. In Jack's case, we are hypothesising that
constructs such as 'successful -- hopeless mess' and 'abusive -- abused'
emerged from this process. Finally, the client sorts the elements in
terms of the constructs, usually by rating or ranking each element on
each construct. Thus, Jack might be asked: 'How successful do you think
'yourself now' is, on a scale from 1 to 7?' The content of the client's
constructs may be analysed, and the grid can also be subjected to
various methods of quantitative analysis by software packages. Such
analyses provide, amongst others, measures of the degree of similarity
in the client's construing of different elements; relationships between
their constructs; structural properties of construing, such as
tightness; and conflicts and dilemmas in construing. The use of
principal

Formulation in construct psychology

155

component analysis allows a graphical representation of the client's
construing to be produced. This may be shared with the client, providing
a focus for therapy, and completion of another grid at the end of
therapy can allow an individualised assessment of therapeutic outcome in
terms of changes in the client's construing (Winter, 2003b). Qualitative
grids and the 'bowtie'

Several variations on repertory grid technique have been developed,
including qualitative grids. Amongst the latter is the perceiver element
grid (Procter, 2005), in which each member of a family, or other group,
indicates how s/he sees him/herself and each of the others, and these
views are entered into a grid in which the columns refer to the family
members as perceived (or as elements) and the rows refer to these
individuals as perceivers. This method, as well as the perceiver dyad
grid (Procter, 2002), in which construing of relationships is explored,
are exemplified in the formulation of Janet, below. This case also
illustrates the 'bowtie' diagram (Procter, 1985), a method for examining
the construing and actions of people caught in self-perpetuating
patterns of interaction. These methods are useful in the therapy process
itself, where the construing of different figures in the client's life
are displayed side by side, facilitating a more dispassionate reflection
and understanding of situations. Tracing of construct implications

Superordinate constructs may be identified by laddering (Hinkle, 1965),
a procedure in which the client is successively asked which pole of a
construct s/he would prefer to be described by and why. Each construct
thus elicited is considered to be more superordinate than the last. The
ABC technique (Tschudi and Winter, 2011) involves elicitation from the
client of the positive and negative implications of each pole of a
construct, often one relating to the client's symptom. Jack and Janet
The task that we have been set, of providing formulations of clients'
situations on the basis of brief vignettes, although challenging, is
similar to one that Kelly (1961) himself undertook when he was invited
to contribute to a book in which clinicians from different theoretical
perspectives considered the case of a suicidal client. Kelly (1961: 259)
noted that this challenge involved making 'precarious inferences from
the slimmest available evidence'. This will also be the case for our
formulations of Jack and Janet, in which we fully acknowledge that the
clients are open to alternative constructions, as indicated in the other
chapters in this book.

156

David Winter and Harry Procter

Jack Validational history

The shared construct system of Jack's family, itself perhaps rooted in
shared ways of construing family life and relationships in the Italian
community, seems to have provided a fairly firm basis for predicting
events for the first ten years of his life. The way in which Jack
developed during this time, as reflected in his progress at school and
in his interpersonal relationships, must only have served to validate
the construction of him as destined to lead a successful and rewarding
life. However, it is clear that his and his family's construct system
then suffered a series of major invalidations. Not only did these
involve his view of his father, but also his and his family's views of
himself and of the future. His first experience of employment, and of
another male authority figure, must also have been profoundly
invalidating. With the loss of his father, his mother may well have
become a particularly important validating agent of his constructions,
and it is likely that his arguments with her, culminating with his being
thrown out of the house, will have been experienced as yet further
significant invalidations, as may his admission to psychiatric hospital
at his family's request. Jack's invalidating experiences over the last
15 years may be viewed as having involved a series of losses. He has not
only lost his father but also his visions of himself and of the future.
As contemporary constructivists might describe this, his self-narrative
has suffered profound disruption (Neimeyer, 2004). Just as in many
people who have been bereaved, he has had to search for meaning, which
he has perhaps found in his 'delusional beliefs'. Jack's constructs

With no access to Jack's own account of his situation it is difficult,
if not impossible, to infer the constructs that he may be employing in
an attempt to anticipate his world. However, the problem areas that he
identified do indicate some of the superordinate issues for him, such as
being deprived of what is due to him; fear; physical and sexual abuse;
concern for his family; missing his father; and confusion. A further
superordinate construct for him appears to concern being a hopeless
mess, in contrast to the success and prosperity that had been
anticipated for him as a child and that he continued to anticipate would
be the case when he received the royalties that were owing to him. Given
his experiences of powerful men in his life as being abusive, and less
powerful figures such as his mother and sisters as being abused, it is
possible that he construed abusiveness as being associated with power
and success. This would also seem to be reflected in his construing of
Robbie Williams. Such a dilemma would make it difficult for him to move
towards seeing

Formulation in construct psychology

157

himself as successful as to do so would imply that he would also be
likely to have to see himself as abusive. Structure and process of
construing

The switches in Jack's constructions and behaviour are indicative of
what Kelly (1955: 38) referred to as 'slot rattling', in which an
individual's construing of a person or event moves from one pole of a
construct to the other. Thus, Jack switches from being 'high' to feeling
hopeless, and from loving to hating his father, and his history has
involved a pattern of oscillation between the relative stability of
holding down a job and 'going off the rails'. Such inconsistencies, and
his feelings of confusion, suggest that his construct system may be
generally loosely structured. It may be that this is a response to the
invalidation of his construing that he experienced, for example by being
exposed to his father's violence and the abuse by his ex-boss. As we
have seen, loosening one's construing makes it less vulnerable to
further invalidation. However, it may be that his 'delusions' about
Robbie Williams serve the purpose of providing an island of tight
structure in an otherwise loose system. The persistence of his
'delusional disorder' is therefore comprehensible as the delusions do at
least provide him with a means of making sense of his world. His
'tendency to escape into fantasy' may reflect a constrictive process in
which Jack attempts to delimit his world to those areas where his
construing is relatively well elaborated rather than, for example,
facing the chaos of the 'real world' issues that his psychologist would
prefer to discuss. However, within the sphere of his 'delusions' it is
likely that his construing is dilated, with more and more events being
explained in terms of his persecutory themes. Constructs of transition

Jack's history indicates that his foundations were severely shaken as a
child, and these will have been threatening times as he became
increasingly aware of fundamental changes in his core construing. His
current confusion, for example concerning his feelings for his father,
would appear to indicate an area of anxiety in which his constructs do
not allow him to make sense of his experiences. It may be that he has
suspended some constructions about his father because their implications
are intolerable, and because of the threat that they pose. This may also
be the case for his experience of sexual abuse, and it is possible that,
as Sewell (1997) describes in regard to post-traumatic stress, he has
been in a state of 'constructive bankruptcy' concerning this experience.
His reluctance to discuss it will have denied him an opportunity to
elaborate his construing of the abuse. There is also evidence of guilt
in his departure from his early core role as a popular, sociable person
who was likely to succeed. It is possible that, as

158

David Winter and Harry Procter

with many other survivors of sexual abuse (Erbes and Harter, 2005;
Freshwater et al., 2001), he now sees himself not as sociable but as
very different from others. Paradoxically, although the role that had
been cast for him in his family was essentially to follow in his
father's footsteps, he is now, in effect, doing so not as head of the
family business but as the failing heavy drinker that his father became.
Small wonder that he experiences fear and self-loathing when he looks in
the mirror and sees his father's face looking back at him. Kelly (1955:
512) considered that 'one may keep his face away from the dark empty
void of guilt by taking a hostile attitude towards people'. Jack's
hostility may well have been manifested in fabricating evidence for his
beliefs about Robbie Williams. These allowed him to retain a view of
himself as someone who was at least potentially successful, and who was
only denied current success by injustice. Jack's retreat into his
'delusional' world may also have served the purpose of allowing him to
escape from role relationships, those in which a person attempts to
understand another's construing. Such understanding on Jack's part is
likely to have been very limited in his significant relationships, and
the inconsistency in his own behaviour will probably also have meant
that significant others found it difficult to show sociality with him.
His experience of role relationships is therefore likely to have largely
been one of invalidation of his core role, and the conglomeration of
associated 'negative' emotions that Leitner (1985b) refers to as terror.
He will therefore probably have approached future significant
relationships with profound distrust, 'the expectation of invalidation
of one's core construing' (Rossotti et al., 2006: 165). Towards
intervention

Fundamental to a therapeutic relationship with Jack, as with many
survivors of sexual abuse (Cummins, 1992), will be the establishment of
some degree of trust by such means as the therapist taking care not to
provide further major invalidation of his construing. As with any other
client, the personal construct psychotherapist would adopt a credulous
attitude with Jack, taking seriously his view of the world, even though
this might appear delusional. As Bannister (1985) has described, this
would involve considering the superordinate themes of his beliefs, their
metaphorical aspects, rather than their specific content. Thus, issues
such as his being denied what is due to him and his fear of abuse can be
discussed without consideration of the particular evildoings for which
he considered Robbie Williams to be responsible. Subsequent
interventions with him, as with other people who have experienced
losses, may be regarded as attempting to further a process of meaning
reconstruction (Neimeyer, 2001), perhaps with the elaboration of a more
viable means of anticipating his world than is provided by his
'delusions'.

Formulation in construct psychology

159

As we have indicated, his construing might usefully be explored further
by means of personal construct assessment methods such as the repertory
grid. Figure 7.1 is the plot derived from principal component analysis
of a grid that Jack might hypothetically have produced. The relative
proximity of elements and constructs in this plot indicates that he
contrasts himself with Robbie Williams on such constructs as 'deprived
of their dues -- privileged', 'confused -- certain', 'hopeless mess --
successful', 'afraid -- fearless', and 'abused -- abusive'. He views
himself now as much further from his ideal self than he was as a child.
The grid also reveals that he is, indeed, faced with dilemmas concerning
success, which for him is, for example, associated with being abusive
and uncaring. If this was the case, techniques described by Feixas and
Saúl (2005) might be used to resolve these dilemmas by, for example,
elaborating ways in which it is possible to be both successful and
caring. This might include the use of what Kelly (1955: 1075) termed
time binding, acknowledging that his dilemmatic constructions (e.g.
'successful people are abusive') served a purpose in helping him to make
sense of events in his early life, but limiting their application to
these events and thereby freeing him to develop alternative ways of
construing present and future events. Therapeutic elaboration of a new
role for Jack might usefully draw upon his interest and skills in music.
At the very least, music might be used as a fairly non-threatening means
of exploring his identity (Button, 2006; Scheer, 2006), provided that
this could be done without further elaborating his 'delusions'. Music
might also enable him to begin to find a way of expressing
constructions, for example, of traumatic past events, that are at a low
level of awareness and to which he may not have attached verbal labels.
Finally, it may be that, as with other survivors of sexual abuse (Harter
and Neimeyer, 1995), joining a group of people who have had similar
experiences might provide for Jack an experience of 'universality'
(Yalom, 1970) in which he is enabled to view himself as less different
from other people. Group therapy might also provide a means of
developing his capacity for sociality. Another means of achieving this
might be by family therapy, perhaps including the use of techniques such
as the perceiver element grid (Procter, 2005) to facilitate family
members' understanding of each other's construing. Given Jack's history,
therapeutic gains will not be expected to come quickly or easily.
Nevertheless, as with every client, the personal construct
psychotherapist would approach Jack with the attitude that, since 'there
are always some alternative constructions available to choose among in
dealing with the world ... no one needs to be the victim of his
biography' (Kelly, 1955: 15).

uncaring

• ex-boss

• Robbie Williams

• father

unmusical

• self in future • ideal self • self as a child

Figure 7.1 Hypothetical repertory grid analysis for Jack

abusive

fearless

successful certain privileged

loves self confident

sociable

Comp 2

musical

Comp 1

• sister 1 • mother • sister 3

• self • sister 2

unsociable

lacks confidence loathes self

deprived of their dues confused hopeless mess

afraid

abused

cares for the family

Formulation in construct psychology

161

Janet In personal and relational construct psychology, we only
understand human problems to the extent that we understand the
construing of the people involved in a situation and how the different
positions that they take relate to each other in the present and over
time. The protocol provided for Janet contains very little about the
family members' construing, which makes formulation within this approach
very challenging. However, it is very typical of a referral letter to
child services (let's call it the 'referral') and the lack of
information allows us to elaborate the kind of thinking that our
approach involves. We shall organise the discussion in accordance with
the levels of interpersonal construing (Procter, in press) described
above. For Kelly (1955: 687--700), it is vital to understand a person's
cultural background. We are not merely a product of it: each person
builds a construing system anew using its materials, but it provides a
lot of validational evidence about what we see as 'true'. Janet's Romany
culture is likely to have much bearing on our formulation. Romany or
Gypsy travelling communities are subject to enormous hostility and abuse
from the 'settled community' or 'Gorgios' in the UK. They feel their way
of life is under threat and in an attempt to protect it many feel great
ambivalence to education and literacy, as involving 'brainwashing', and
yet are aware these are means of empowering their children (Levinson and
Silk, 2007; Silk, 2011). Thus, in interacting with 'Gorgio' services
they may hide their construing and use strategies to get help for their
children amidst a strongly held fear of the child being taken into care.
This may throw light on Mary's use of the accident and emergency
department as opposed to 'settled' services such as the GP. Medical
construing of problems may be one of the few areas of overlap and
communication in the contact between the cultures (Silk, 2011). We need
to establish how central or peripheral Mary is in her own Romany group.
Have Mary's partners also been Gypsies? Her pride in her older teacher
son may indicate a more peripheral membership but Andrew's wish to join
the police may still be seen as a capitulation to the dominant culture.
The children are likely to have experienced significant ethnic abuse,
for example being called 'pikeys', etc., especially given the area in
which they live. Monadic construing

It is useful to start by drawing up a type of qualitative grid, a
perceiver element grid or PEG (see Figure 7.2). The arrow clarifies that
perceivers on the left construe the people or 'elements' listed along
the top. With more space, more perceivers could be added, for example
the Romany view, school friends, etc. The elements here are all people,
but other elements could include, for example, the services, school,
Gorgios, how I would like things to be, the family or particular
relationships, as we shall see later. Selecting individuals as

162

David Winter and Harry Procter FAMILY MEMBERS

Janet

Referrer

Mother

A&E 'no abuse' 4 older children Developmental Proud of older worries: no
physical probs. son & grandchildren Fears transport Poor bond with
Janet: Walks to guilt school

Father

Janet

?Romany

Sad, depressed long time after Janet's birth

Mother

Concern re her weight loss, I wish she behaviour at could be taken home,
refusal away to use transport Feel guilt at my bonding with Needs Janet
-- don't wheelchair understand this Prisoner in Heart/mobility own home
problems

Cindy

Doing well at school

Special relationship with Janet

Lives nearby Recent overnight contact stopped Still sees Janet

Close to Cindy Heavy drinker Low appetite Violent to School: friends,
Heart op. due Mother joins in Limited Sexual abuser? enthusiastically,
mobility achieving Romany beliefs adequately ?Don't like mother's food
?Poisoning me ?Worry she might die

Brother

Don't want to stay with him overnight ?Scary behaviour

Wants to join police when older

Takes an interest in her

?Approves of wish to join police

Violent Heavy drinker ?He is responsible for Janet's problems ?Positive
view of him when first together

Clairvoyance

Father

Figure 7.2 Perceiver element grid: Janet's family (hypotheses in
italics)

?Helpful

Formulation in construct psychology

163

elements teases out construing at a monadic level. The method can be
drawn up and shared with the client or family, or used mainly as a guide
to the professional in formulation or supervision. The first row looks
at the referrer's construing as summarised from the referral. Putting
this into the grid emphasises that it is construing -- it is easy for
case material to be presented impersonally, 'objectively' as 'facts',
but actually any description always 'belongs to someone', in this case a
doctor, social worker, or school nurse. Ignoring this can lead us to
overlook the fact that any observers have personal and ideological
positions based in their culture, agency and profession which carry
enormous implications and power issues; for example, attitudes about
gender, the Romany culture, class, medical, social and religious
constructions. The material in this row is likely to be construed with
suspicion by the family as 'Gorgio'. The gaps or blank squares in a PEG
are often as useful as those that are filled out. Frequently in this
work we tend to attend to what we do know and forget whole areas of
which we are unaware. In this case, it may be the source of data that is
inadequate, but gaps may also indicate subjugated voices, secrecy, or
inability or unwillingness to articulate or be aware of their own
construing by the members themselves. We can overlook the construing of
certain figures, particularly children and young people, people with
special needs, absent parents such as Colin, siblings, grandparents,
etc. We must keep in mind the construing of all the members, even if we
are not going to work with them directly. Concentrating first on Janet,
even though we have no information about her construing (the items in
italics are our hypotheses or questions), we may speculate about some
aspects of her world. Reading down the first column of the PEG, we see
that we don't know anything about how she, her father, Cindy, Andrew, or
her friends construe her, but the referrer and her mother make her the
subject of a great deal of quite elaborated medical construing. In spite
of some reassurance that there is no evidence of physical problems or
abuse, we hear about visits to accident and emergency, paediatric
involvement, low weight and appetite, mobility problems requiring a
wheelchair, and concerns for her overall development. She has been seen
as ill and disabled, possibly for much of her life. Such experience may
be associated with high levels of invalidation affecting her own
attempts to construe the world with a confidence in her own resources
and personal development and a positive sense of self-worth, health,
agency, and power. This may be offset by her walking to school, having
friends there, joining in enthusiastically, knowledge that she is
achieving 'adequately', and a positive view of her by Cindy and her
friends. This may be where to start a first interview with her, to draw
out and elaborate her interests and spontaneous choices, to hear
something of what she enjoys and is good at in school, who she likes and
who likes her, and the constructions of self that she holds in these
situations (Procter, 2005, 2007).

164

David Winter and Harry Procter

This will be done ideally with other members of the family present,
maybe Mary, Andrew and Cindy, which will begin already to boost her
status in the family's construing of her and counter the current
elaborated problematic identity placed upon her. In a session with
Andrew, can we find some good and enjoyable times that the children can
remember? We are aiming to elicit some of her constructs in various
ways, particularly superordinate constructs (see the laddering method,
above) allowing us to understand what governs her choices and to enhance
her feeling of being understood and valued. This will function to
elaborate her and the others' construing of her as a person instead of
only in terms of medical problems and disabilities. And is Janet already
developing her own views as regards a Romany identity and aspirations?
This could be underlying the conflict between her and her mother and be
regarded as disloyalty. At the level of psychological construing there
is also much construing of her as anxious, fearful and phobic. In spite
of her walking, she is seen as avoiding the outside world, a 'prisoner
in her own home', wishing to end overnight stays with her father, and
terrified of public transport, including something about a white van. As
noted earlier, in PCP terms anxiety is seen as an awareness that events
lie outside the range of convenience of one's construing -- a fear of
the unpredictable or uncontrollable. This may apply, or possibly threat
is more here at stake -- an awareness of comprehensive change in core
construing of self. She seems to be dealing with events through
constriction, narrowing her range of construing by avoiding the outside
world and public transport, and trying to cut her father out of her
life, at least in terms of overnight stays. The white van invokes
various hypotheses -- has she had bad experiences, for example bullying
or ethnic abuse on a school bus? Has she had some kind of threat of
abduction or witnessed criminal activity involving a white van? Is it
more about an ambulance that may come and take her mother away, with
Janet terrified about a heart operation and that her mother might die?
It resonates with her mother having feelings that she wishes Janet could
be taken away. It is also noteworthy that, coming from a Romany culture,
her mother or ancestors lived in trailers as a way of life. Construing
around abduction, removal, abandonment, being thrust into an
unpredictable and terrifying world, and no longer 'being my mother's
girl' could be at stake. Added to this are issues around her father (see
below). All this will need to be explored sensitively in a session in
which Janet has invested enough trust and safety with the therapist.
Dyadic construing

We could continue looking at Mary, Colin and others at a monadic level,
but let us now look at how we and the members themselves could construe
the various key dyadic relationships.

Formulation in construct psychology

165

DYADS

Mother/ Janet

Father/ Janet

Mother/ Father

Andrew/ Janet

Cindy/ Janet

Poor Bonding Sleeping together Referrer

Janet refuses mother's food ?'Munchausen by Proxy' S

Overnight contact stopped at Janet's request ?Abuse

Couple split when Janet was 3

Special Relationship

Conflict and Violence

Cindy takes a close interest in Janet

?Observed conflict and violence

?Does Janet return these feelings

?Don't like mother's food ?Harming me Janet

?Worry she might die ?Cares more about others than me

Don't want to stay with Dad ?His scary behaviour ?Dilemma

?Furious with Mum

Hard to love her from the start Mother

Clingy We fight

Conflict Violent to me

Dog incident

Father

Figure 7.3 Perceiver dyad grid: Janet's family (hypotheses in italics)

166

David Winter and Harry Procter

We can again use a qualitative grid to organise our formulation at this
level, a perceiver dyad grid (PDG) as in Figure 7.3. Again there is
really almost no detail of how the members construe their relationships,
an understanding of which is of key significance in formulation in
personal and relational construct psychology. However, the dyad grid is
useful in focussing on the relational aspects of the case. Constructions
of relationships tend to vary much more than those of individual traits,
and are therefore a source of therapeutic optimism and realisation that
changes can take place. The Mother/Janet relationship will be central to
the difficulties and seems to have got off to a difficult start. We may
wonder if she found it hard to love little Janet because she didn't want
a sixth baby, because the baby was a girl and seemed to have
developmental difficulties, or because her own relationship with Colin
was falling apart. She may feel guilt at her own feelings and find them
hard to understand. To not want a child is likely to be a particular
anathema in a Romany culture (Silk, 2011). Currently they may be caught
in a vicious circle in which their constructions of each other are
maintained by the evidence of the other's actions. This is illustrated
in the so called 'bowtie' diagram (Procter, 1985), shown in Figure 7.4,
in which each person's construing of the other is maintained in a cycle
of tension and conflict. Mary is exhausted with her own heart problem
and feels overwhelmed by Janet's behaviour, temper, fears and
clinginess. Expressions of this construing confirm to Janet that her
mother doesn't love her (especially in contrast to her siblings and
nephews). She therefore feels major insecurity, fear and anger and
behaves in a challenging way, which validates her mother's construing.

Mother

Janet

Don't love her

She doesn't love me

She's ill, disabled

Prefers sibs, grandchildren

Construct:

Fear of outside world Wish she could be taken away Sets dog on Mother

Action: Takes her to A & E

Refuses food; clingy, sleeps in her bed

Figure 7.4 Hypothetical 'bowtie' diagram of construing between Mother
and Janet

Formulation in construct psychology

167

The fact that Janet had been going to stay with her father regularly for
several years may indicate acceptance and love between them. However,
this seems to have been overwhelmed by his heavy drinking, which could
be an issue particularly in the evenings. The possibility of less
satisfactory relating must be questioned, and statistics indicate that
drinking and violence to a partner can be associated with physical and
sexual abuse towards children as well (Hester et al., 1998). For Janet
this could create an intense dilemma, in which her love and loyalty to
her father conflict with construing based on frightening or
inappropriate contact. She may have totally rejected him, with further
invalidating feelings of loss and abandonment. We shall want to
understand the construing of other dyads too; for example, her
relationship with Andrew and particularly Cindy, which are likely to
involve more satisfactory experiences and sources of positive
construction of self. Triadic construing

At the triadic level (Procter, in press; Ugazio et al, 2008), there are
likely to be issues around Janet comparing her mother's relationship
with her to the much more positive relating between her mother and her
other children and grandchildren. Mary may even say to Janet, 'Why can't
you be more like the others?' compounding the issues of Figure 7.4. The
mother/father/Janet triad is likely to be the source of much trouble,
which may well involve intense 'fragmentation' or incompatible
construing as she struggles to reconcile loyalties to two parents who
have fallen out, and who probably blame each other and argue to the
extent of physical violence. She is likely to have witnessed this
violence and this could go further in helping us understand her phobic
reactions and lack of eating, which may well also entail a 'hostile'
attempt to force her parents together, hoping for a shared parental
concern for her needs. We may speculate that her mother is concerned
about Janet's relationship with her father. This is a common feature of
many divorced/separated families. Likewise, Janet is likely to be very
concerned about her mother and father's relationship. Many children
experience considerable ambivalence since they want their parents to
re-unite but are also scared by memories of their conflicts and fights.
Hence, at dyadic or triadic levels, their construing may contain in PCP
terms 'implicative dilemmas' (Feixas et al., 2009): "I want them to be
together but that reminds me of fights/I don't want them together
because that makes me sad that my Mum and Dad hate each other".
Discussion Formulations, especially based on referral information, very
often turn out to be way off the mark. PCP emphasises how each of us is
unique, even when from identical backgrounds. We are exploring the
'uniqueness of common

168

David Winter and Harry Procter

complaints' (Wright, 1970) in which even very similar experiences arise
out of very different construings. For these reasons, PCP is very
cautious about elaborating tight formulations at this stage. Their
purpose must always be paradoxically to open the therapist's mind to the
client's unique construing and situation. However, a consciously
constructed formulation may be easier to revise or dispose of by raising
the level of cognitive awareness of the therapist's presuppositions and
prejudices. It is important that a formulation makes sense to the
particular therapist involved. He or she should not automatically take a
formulation wholesale from a supervisor, although this obviously depends
on the experience level of the therapist. To quote Kelly (1961: 277),
discussing the man who attempted suicide: 'If his therapist is a
psychoanalyst, it would be best to lay out the therapeutic plans in
analytic terms rather than to risk the confusion of trying to follow
personal construct plans seen through analytic spectacles'. This
underlines the flexibility and openness to different ways of construing
psychological situations that characterises the personal construct
approach both as a metatherapeutic frame and as an approach to
psychological therapy in its own right. Key characteristics of Personal
Construct Psychology formulation • •

• • • • • •

PCP assumes that people constantly formulate constructions about their
world, which are open to replacement by alternative constructions.
Formulation involves recognising that people's behaviour, experience and
difficulties are shaped and structured by the way they construe them,
which they do by utilising a unique set of personal constructs which are
bipolar in nature. Formulation must be based on a good understanding of
the way the client construes his or her situation as well as the
construing of other key figures in his or her life. The therapist is
encouraged to take a credulous and accepting approach towards clients'
views and beliefs, attempting to see the world through their eyes. PCP
provides a set of professional or diagnostic constructs and assessment
methods to aid the process of formulation. Formulations may consider not
only individual, but also broader family and social constructions, and
not only monadic but also dyadic and triadic construing. A formulation
should be loosely held, allowing maximum openness to the unique
situation and construing of the client's predicament. PCP's inherent
reflexivity, or ability to account for itself as a psychological theory,
makes it ideally suited to reflective practice through clinicians'
continual awareness and examination of their own constructs and actions
as they work with a client.

Formulation in construct psychology

•

•

169

Formulations may be developed and discussed with clients, and personal
construct assessment methods such as the ABC technique, laddering, the
bowtie, repertory grids or qualitative grids may be used to aid this
process. A formulation should be designed and structured to anticipate
and facilitate the process of psychological movement and therapeutic
change. It may remain in the therapist's mind as a guide but more likely
it will be shared in an appropriate way with the client in discussion or
in letters written to the client or family between sessions.

Acknowledgements Thanks to Patricia Stewart, Avril Silk, Bernadette
O'Sullivan and of course Rudi Dallos and Lucy Johnstone for their
valuable suggestions. References Bannister, D. (1960) Conceptual
structure in thought-disordered schizophrenics, Journal of Mental
Science, 106, 1230--49. ------(1962) The nature and measurement of
schizophrenic thought disorder, Journal of Mental Science, 108, 825--42.
------(1985) The psychotic disguise in W. Dryden (ed.), Therapists'
Dilemmas, London: Harper and Row. Bateman, A.W. and Fonagy, P. (2012)
Handbook of Mentalizing in Mental Health Practice, Washington: American
Psychiatric Association. Bruch, M. (1998) The development of case
formulation approaches, in M. Bruch and F.W. Bond (eds.), Beyond
Diagnosis: Case Formulation Approaches in CognitiveBehavioural Therapy,
Chichester: Wiley. Button, E. (2006) Music and the person in J.W. Scheer
and K.W. Sewell (eds.), Creative Construing: Personal Constructions in
the Arts, Giessen: Psychosozial-Verlag. Caputi, P., Viney, L.L., Walker,
B.M. and Crittenden, N. (2011) Personal Construct Methodology,
Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell. Cummins, P. (1992) Reconstruing the
experience of sexual abuse, International Journal of Personal Construct
Psychology, 5, 355--65. Dallos, R. (1991) Family Belief Systems, Therapy
and Change, Milton Keynes: Open University Press. Erbes, C.R. and
Harter, S.L. (2005) Personal constructions in therapy with child sexual
abuse survivors in D.A. Winter and L.L. Viney (eds.), Personal Construct
Psychotherapy: Advances in Theory, Practice and Research, London: Whurr.
Feixas, G. and Saúl, L.A. (2005) Resolution of dilemmas by personal
construct psychotherapy in D.A. Winter and L.L. Viney (eds.), Personal
Construct Psychotherapy: Advances in Theory, Practice and Research,
London: Whurr. Feixas, G., Saúl, L.A. and Avila, A. (2009) Viewing
cognitive conflicts as dilemmas: implications for mental health, Journal
of Constructivist Psychology, 22, 141--169.

170

David Winter and Harry Procter

Fransella, F. (2003) International Handbook of Personal Construct
Psychology, Chichester: Wiley. Fransella, F., Bell, R. and Bannister, D.
(2004) A Manual for Repertory Grid Technique (2nd Edition), Chichester:
Wiley. Freshwater, K., Leach, C. and Aldridge, J. (2001) Personal
constructs, childhood sexual abuse and revictimization, British Journal
of Medical Psychology, 74, 379--397. Harter, S.L. and Neimeyer, R.A.
(1995) Long term effects of child sexual abuse: towards a constructivist
theory of trauma and its treatment in R.A. Neimeyer and G.J. Neimeyer
(eds.), Advances in Personal Construct Psychology, Vol. 3, Greenwich,
CT: JAI. Hester, M., Pearson, C. and Harwin, N. (1998) Making an Impact:
Children and Domestic Violence, Barnardo's; School for Policy Studies;
University of Bristol; NSPCC; Department of Health. Hinkle, D. (1965)
The Change of Personal Constructs from the Viewpoint of a Theory of
Construct Implications, unpublished PhD thesis, Ohio State University.
Kelly, G.A. (1955) The Psychology of Personal Constructs, Vols 1 & 2,
New York: Norton. (2nd edn, London: Routledge, 1991) ------(1961)
Suicide: The personal construct point of view in E. Schneidman and N.
Farberow (eds.), The Cry for Help, New York: McGraw-Hill. ------(1969)
The psychotherapeutic relationship in B.A. Maher (ed.), Clinical
Psychology and Personality: The Selected Papers of George Kelly
(pp. 216--223), New York: Wiley. (Original work written 1965.)
------(1970) A brief introduction to personal construct theory in D.
Bannister (ed.), Perspectives in Personal Construct Theory, London:
Academic Press. Leitner, L.M. (1985a) Interview methodologies for
construct elicitation: searching for the core in F. Epting and A.W.
Landfield (eds.), Anticipating Personal Construct Psychology, Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press. ------(1985b) The terrors of cognition: on
the experiential validity of personal construct theory, in D. Bannister
(ed.), Issues and Approaches in Personal Construct Theory, London:
Academic Press. ------(1988) Terror, risk and reverence: experiential
personal construct psychotherapy, International Journal of Personal
Construct Psychology, 1, 299--310. Leitner, L.M., Faidley, A.J. and
Celentana, M.A. (2000) Diagnosing human meaning making: an experiential
constructivist approach in R.A. Neimeyer and J.D. Raskin (eds.),
Constructions of Disorder: Meaning-Making Frameworks for Psychotherapy,
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Levinson, M. and
Silk, A. (2007) Dreams of the Road: Gypsy Life in the West Country,
Edinburgh: Berlinn. Maher, B. (1969) Clinical Psychology and
Personality: The Selected Papers of George Kelly, New York: Wiley.
Neimeyer, R.A. (1985) Personal constructs in clinical practice in P.C.
Kendall (ed.), Advances in Cognitive-Behavioral Research and Therapy,
Vol. 4, New York: Academic Press.

Formulation in construct psychology

171

------(2001) Meaning Reconstruction and the Experience of Loss,
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. ------(2004)
Fostering posttraumatic growth: A narrative contribution, Psychological
Inquiry, 15, 53--59. ------(2009) Constructivist Psychotherapy:
Distinctive Features, London: Routledge. Procter, H.G. (1981) Family
construct psychology: An approach to understanding and treating
families, in S. Walrond-Skinner (ed.), Developments in Family Therapy.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. ------(1985) A construct approach to
family therapy and systems intervention, in E. Button (ed.), Personal
Construct Theory and Mental Health, Beckenham: Croom Helm. ------(2001)
Personal Construct Psychology and Autism, Journal of Constructivist
Psychology, 14, 105--124. ------(2002) Constructs of individuals and
relationships, Context, 59, 11--12. ------(2005) Techniques of personal
construct family therapy in D.A. Winter and L.L. Viney (eds.), Personal
Construct Psychotherapy: Advances in Theory, Practice and Research.
London: Whurr. ------(2007) Construing within the family in R. Butler
and D. Green, The Child Within: Taking the Young Person's Perspective by
Applying Personal Construct Theory, 2nd Edition, London: Wiley.
------(2009a) The construct in R.J. Butler (ed.), Reflections in
Personal Construct Theory, Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell. ------(2009b)
Reflexivity and reflective practice in personal and relational construct
Psychotherapy in J. Stedmon and R. Dallos (eds.), Reflective Practice in
Psychotherapy and Counselling, Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
------(2011) The roots of Kellian notions in philosophy: The categorial
philosophers Kant, Hegel and Peirce in D. Stojnov, V. Džinović, J.
Pavlović and M. Frances (eds.), Personal Construct Psychology in an
Accelerating World, Belgrade: Serbian Constructivist Association/EPCA.
------(in press) Qualitative Grids, the Relationality Corollary and the
Levels of Interpersonal Construing, Journal of Constructivist
Psychology. Procter, H.G. and Parry, G. (1978) Constraint and freedom:
The social origin of personal constructs in F. Fransella (ed.) Personal
Construct Psychology 1977, London: Academic Press. Raskin, J.D. (2002)
Constructivism in psychology: personal construct psychology, radical
constructivism, and social constructionism, American Communication
Journal, 5, 3. Ravenette, A.T. (1980) The exploration of consciousness:
personal construct intervention with children in A.W. Landfield and L.M.
Leitner (eds.), Personal Construct Psychology: Psychotherapy and
Personality, Chichester: Wiley. Rossotti, N.G., Winter, D.A. and Watts,
M.H. (2006) Trust and dependency in younger and older people in P.
Caputi, H. Foster and L.L. Viney (eds.), Personal Construct Psychology:
New Ideas, Chichester: London.

172

David Winter and Harry Procter

Scheer, J. (2006) Living with jazz: Construing cultural identity in J.W.
Scheer and K.W. Sewell (eds.), Creative Construing: Personal
Constructions in the Arts, Giessen: Psychosozial-Verlag. Sewell, K.
(1997) Posttraumatic stress: towards a constructivist model of
psychotherapy in R.A. Neimeyer and G.J. Neimeyer (eds.), Advances in
Personal Construct Psychology, Vol. 4, Greenwich, CT: JAI. Silk, A.
(2011) Personal communication. Tschudi, F. and Winter, D. (2011) The ABC
model revisited in P. Caputi, L.L. Viney, B.M. Walker and N. Crittenden
(eds.), Personal Construct Methodology, Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Ugazio, V., Fellin, L., Colcagio, F., Pennachio, R. and Negri, A. (2008)
1 to 3: From the monad to the triad. A unitizing and coding system for
the inference fields of causal explanations, TPM. Testing,
Psychometrics, Methodology in Applied Psychology, 15: 171--192. Walker,
B.M. (2002) Nonvalidation vs. (In)validation: implications for theory
and practice in J.D. Raskin and S. Bridges (eds.), Studies in Meaning:
Exploring Constructivist Psychology, New York: Pace University Press.
Walker, B.M. and Winter, D.A. (2005) 'Psychological disorder and
reconstruction' in D.A. Winter and L.L. Viney (eds.), Personal Construct
Psychotherapy: Advances in Theory, Practice and Research, London: Whurr.
------(2007) The elaboration of personal construct psychology, Annual
Review of Psychology, 58, 453--477. Winter, D.A. (1992) Personal
Construct Psychology in Clinical Practice: Theory, Research and
Applications, London: Routledge. Winter, D.A. (2003a) Psychological
disorder as imbalance, in F. Fransella (ed.), International Handbook of
Personal Construct Psychology, Chichester: Wiley. Winter, D.A. (2003b)
'Repertory grid technique as a psychotherapy research measure',
Psychotherapy Research, 13, 25--42. Winter, D.A. (2009) The personal
construct psychology view of disorder: did Kelly get it wrong?, in L.M.
Leitner and J.C. Thomas (eds.), Personal Constructivism: Theory and
Applications, New York: Pace University Press. Winter, D.A. and Viney,
L.L. (2005) Personal Construct Psychotherapy: Advances in Theory,
Practice and Research, London: Whurr. Wright, K.J.T. (1970) Exploring
the uniqueness of common complaints, British Journal of Medical
Psychology, 43, 221--32. Yalom, I. (1970) The Theory and Practice of
Group Psychotherapy, New York: Basic Books.

Chapter 8

Integrative formulation in theory Rudi Dallos, Jacqui Stedmon and Lucy
Johnstone

Integrative formulations In the preceding chapters we have presented an
overview of how formulation is conceptualised and developed within a
range of therapeutic models of intervention. This includes ideas about
the content of formulation: what the ingredients are, and also the
process: how it is done. An important question, though, is whether and
how we can combine or integrate the various models in ways that are most
helpful for guiding our clinical work. We believe that one way forward
is through a change of focus from formulation, or
formulationas-an-event, to formulating, or formulating-as-a-process. In
this chapter we will discuss the strengths and limitations of some
current approaches to integrative formulation and then attempt to move
towards a more complex and dynamic model of integration which draws on
the therapeutic relationship, personal meaning, personal development,
and the idea of formulating as a fluid collaborative process.
Professional guidelines generally specify that clinicians should be able
to draw from a number of different models in their therapeutic work, and
hence presumably in their formulations as well. For example, Health
Professions Council (2009: 3a.1) criteria for clinical psychologists
require them to 'Understand psychological models related to how
biological, sociological and circumstantial or life-event-related
factors impinge on psychological processes to affect psychological
well-being'. Surveys consistently show that some kind of eclecticism is
the single most popular approach for psychotherapists and counsellors
(McLeod, 2009). Curiously though, there is little consensus about how to
construct an integrative formulation, although a number of different
frameworks have been suggested (Lapworth and Sills, 2009; Gardner, 2005;
Eells, 1997; Ingram, 2006; Weerasekera, 1995; Journal of Psychotherapy
1996, 6, 2; Corrie and Lane, 2010). Attempts to solve the problem as
discussed in the related literature on integrative therapy are also only
partially successful. This is not surprising if we consider that even
within so-called 'single model' perspectives such as CBT, psychodynamic,
or systemic, psychological therapy and formulation is bedevilled by
divisions and splits (Norcross and Goldfried,

174

Rudi Dallos, Jacqui Stedmon and Lucy Johnstone

2005; Palmer and Woolfe, 2000; Lapworth and Sills, 2009). These include
differences about person-specific versus problem-specific formulations,
about emphasising the individual versus the social context, and about
the 'truth' versus the 'usefulness' of the resulting product (see
Divison of Clinical Psychology (DCP), 2011 for further discussion).
Furthermore, models have different philosophical roots which make
varying assumptions about the nature of human beings and their
relationship to the world (Howard, 2000). For example, the models we
have explored so far differ in the following set of implicit assumptions
(among others): Origin of the problem. Is the 'problem' primarily
located in our biology/body/ brain chemistry (psychiatry); in our minds
(cognitive therapy, psychology in general); in our family and
relationships (relational/systemic); or in wider society (feminist,
community psychology)? Agency. Are we in control of our lives and
actions (humanistic therapies); or simply responding to our environments
(behaviourism); or our internal drives (psychoanalysis); or biochemical
imbalances (psychiatry)? Ethics. Are we essentially loving and well
intentioned (humanistic); or in a constant battle to keep instinctual
drives under control (psychoanalysis); or do we react to our environment
in a morally neutral way (strict behaviourism)? The immediate response
-- that all of these perspectives have an element of truth -- fails to
address the fundamental question, which in integrative therapy and
integrative formulation is: can we combine these elements in a
conceptually coherent way? Do we simply throw all our chosen components
into a common pot as in eclecticism? Or do we instead attempt to tease
out what the underlying conceptual connections are, by way of a
conceptual synthesis/integration? This choice goes further than the
pragmatics of any given piece of clinical work since arguably,
conceptual synthesis can pave the way to developments in clinical theory
and models of aetiology, and stimulate new approaches to intervention.
Integrative formulation which attempts a conceptual synthesis aims to
identify and combine the core features of different models in order to
create a fresh, vibrant and effective new model of formulation and
intervention. This is an important point, since in a context of
financial uncertainty, restricted budgets and long waiting lists, new
developments typically have to compete with more established practices
for these limited resources by claiming to be more cost-effective and
more effective with difficult cases. As a result, proponents of new
integrative developments may feel pressure to make strong claims about
effectiveness to justify themselves to purchasers. Perhaps this is also
why many so-called integrative models are pragmatically driven and do
little more than combine models, or aspects of models, based on
strategies that appear to be supported by the evidence and/or seem to
work in practice. We will now take a closer look at both these main
approaches to integration in psychotherapy, eclecticism and conceptual
synthesis. Some, but not all, have outlined the kind of formulation that
might result from this.

Integrative formulation in theory

175

Eclecticism In an eclectic approach we are not particularly concerned
about reconciling and integrating the conceptual features of different
models. Instead, the combination is a pragmatically driven one,
combining models or aspects of models and based on strategies that are
supported by the evidence, and/or seem to work in practice (Wachtel,
1991). Eclecticism is implied by professional guidelines which, while
requiring counsellors, clinical psychologists and others to incorporate
a wide range of factors into their practice, do not specify how these
are to be synthesised. The various versions of simple eclecticism may
not have an official name as such. However they are likely to derive
from one of the following positions: 1

2

The matching of 'diagnosis' or 'symptoms' to the type of therapy. This
can involve considering, for example, the clinical utility of
exploratory (brief psychodynamic) versus prescriptive (e.g. CBT)
therapies for a given problem such as depression. This approach has also
been described as drawing on a medical or 'drug metaphor' (Stiles and
Shapiro, 1994; Green and Latchford, 2012), whereby we reach for the
appropriate drug or treatment for a particular diagnosis. It often
claims to be guided by a research 'evidence-base' which points towards
integration. This assumes that we know and can identify the active
ingredients of a helpful therapy for clinical conditions; for example, a
combination of CBT and systemic therapy has been said to be an effective
treatment for adolescents with eating disorders (Dare et al., 1990). It
also assumes the validity of the notoriously unreliable psychiatric
diagnostic system in order to match intervention to 'illness'. In fact
there is very little support for this medically based model of how
therapies work, as extensively discussed elsewhere (e.g. Green and
Latchford, 2012). Developmental stages. These approaches are based on
the finding that different therapeutic approaches may be suitable for
the same client at different stages in therapy. Two of the best known
include the Assimilation Model (Stiles and Shapiro, 1994) and Stages of
Change Model (Prochaska and DiClemente, 1982). These suggest that
clients may be at different stages of preparedness for therapeutic
intervention. For example, at a 'pre-contemplation' stage they have not
yet become aware of or started to contemplate the fact that they have
problems which may benefit from help. It is suggested that exploratory
approaches may be helpful at this stage in order to raise awareness and
start to generate motivation for change. At the 'contemplation' stage
there is some awareness and recognition of the problems, and cognitive
approaches may be helpful in starting to reveal the underlying beliefs
and thoughts. It is suggested that this may lead to awareness of
contradictory thoughts and feelings which are holding back the next

176

3

4

Rudi Dallos, Jacqui Stedmon and Lucy Johnstone

stage of contemplating and 'enacting change'. A psychodynamic approach
may also be employed to help expose defences which are preventing
change. Collections of techniques and strategies. This is sometimes
known as 'technical eclecticism'. One example is the multimodal approach
developed by Lazarus (2005) for therapists who employ 'effective
techniques from many orientations without subscribing to the theories
that spawned them' (p. 103). He uses the acronym BASIC ID to prompt
therapists to consider interventions in relation to the areas of
behaviour, affect, sensation, imagery, cognition, interpersonal and
drugs/biology. Another example is Gerard Egan's The Skilled Helper
(2009), which guides the trainee therapist through a very comprehensive
set of communication and problem-solving skills and strategies suitable
for various stages and tasks within therapy. While it is made clear that
all the work has to happen within an empathic helping relationship,
there is no explicit attempt to integrate the skills at a conceptual
level. Collections of clinical hypotheses. Two of the best-known
examples of integrative formulation fall into this category. Ingram
(2006) provides an ambitious list of 28 core clinical hypotheses which
are claimed to embrace all theories and orientations. The headings
include loss, biological causes, faulty information processes, lack of
social support, and so on. She explicitly describes this framework as
summarising core ideas from all models, rather than attempting
conceptual synthesis. Arguably, Weerasekera (1995) also fits into this
category, as discussed below.

Conceptual synthesis As described above, these are attempts to do more
than simply combine approaches; the aim is to achieve theoretical
integration in order to develop new, more effective and comprehensive
models. It has been argued that therapies that develop within the same
broad tradition (humanistic, behavioural and psychodynamic) are more
likely to be compatible; indeed, each named therapy is likely to contain
elements of concepts from its related family of therapies anyway
(Lapworth and Sills, 2009). Attempts at conceptual synthesis are likely
to fall into one of the following categories: 1

Off-the-shelf integrative models. These use standardised integrative
formats for all formulations. A good example is Cognitive Analytic
Therapy (Ryle, 1995) which combines a number of other models such as
Personal Construct Theory (chapter 7) and Object Relations Theory (see
chapter 3). Lapworth and Sills (2009, chapter 9) also outline a detailed
integrative framework that can be used as the basis for an integrative
formulation and

Integrative formulation in theory

2

3

177

intervention. These approaches probably represent the most sophisticated
attempt at conceptual integration to date. A recent addition to this
category is Attachment Narrative Therapy (Dallos, 2006) which will be
explored in detail in the next chapter. It aims to integrate different
levels of ideas about the origins of the problem, namely relational
(systemic) and individual (attachment and narrative). Common factors
integration. The search for more conceptually coherent integrations has
in part been fuelled by a wider interest in the idea that it may be
possible to identify common active ingredients across different
psychotherapies -- the 'Holy Grail' of psychotherapy researchers. The
most consistent and useful findings are related to what is called the
'therapeutic alliance', which encompasses the relationship between
client and therapist, and the degree of agreement on the aims of the
therapy and on how to achieve change (Toukmanian and Rennie, 1992; Paley
and Lawton, 2001; Wampold, 2001; Luborsky et al., 2002; Green and
Latchford, 2012). There is also the finding that effective therapy
involves a 'transformation of meanings' (Sluzki, 1992), that is, a
fundamental shift in how the problems are seen and in the person's view
of themselves. Examples of approaches which use the therapist--client
relationship as an integrating factor are outlined by Michael Kahn in
Between Therapist and Client (1996) and by Petruska Clarkson in The
Therapeutic Relationship (2003). Kahn argues that 'the relationship is
the therapy' (1996: 1), and believes it can be most effective through a
synthesis of the warmth and openness of the humanistic therapists and
insights into transference and counter-transference derived from the
psychoanalysts. Clarkson takes a slightly different angle. She
explicitly distances herself from the task of conceptual integration,
arguing that 'all stories are true at certain times and from certain
perspectives' (2003: xxiii). Instead, she proposes a metatheoretical
framework which encompasses the five different aspects of the
relationship that may be present at any one time: the working alliance,
the transference/counter-transference, the developmentally needed
relationship, the person-to-person or 'real' relationship, and the
transpersonal relationship. We will look at the therapeutic relationship
as an integrating factor in more detail later. Idiosyncratic
integration. Finally, we acknowledge that experienced clinicians have
generally, over a period of years, evolved their own personal approach
to therapy and formulation, drawing on the models, concepts and
strategies which make most sense to them and appear to achieve the best
outcomes. The extent to which this represents true integration, as
opposed to simple eclecticism, is of course hard to judge in any
particular case. At the end of the chapter, we will suggest some general
principles which help to support the former rather than the latter
position.

178

Rudi Dallos, Jacqui Stedmon and Lucy Johnstone

Some reflections: implicit integration in practice

An interesting wider question concerns the extent to which all models
(and hence to an extent all formulations, at least in their
formulating-as-a-process sense) necessarily involve integration in
actual practice. We have witnessed many conversations where therapists
from different schools have levelled criticisms of each others'
approach; for example, CBT is sometimes accused of emphasising
techniques for changing dysfunctional cognitions at the expense of
ignoring the therapeutic relationship. In defence, CBT practitioners
typically reply that they are very sensitive to the need to build a
therapeutic relationship and that clients will not undertake the
laborious homework tasks involved in CBT unless they have faith in and
trust the therapist. Interestingly, this is borne out by a qualitative
study by Borrill and Foreman (1996) of CBT therapy for clients who had a
fear of flying. The clients reported that the most important factor for
them was establishing a good relationship with the therapist. This was
poignantly illustrated by one of the core themes which was expressed as
'being able to borrow belief'' from the therapist that they would be
able to overcome their fear. In a similar vein, psychoanalytic
therapists are often criticised for being too concerned with
predisposing intra-psychic processes and not paying adequate attention
to the current interpersonal dynamics that may be maintaining problems.
In defence they typically argue that in practice there will be
considerable discussion about current circumstances and how to work with
these dynamics in order for progress to be possible. Part of this
discussion turns around the question of whether what therapists say they
do in terms of their theory corresponds with what they do in practice. A
classic investigation of this is Truax's (1966) study, which showed that
Rogerian (Rogers, 1955) non-directive counselling could be
conceptualised not so much in existential terms of acceptance and trust,
but in terms of subtle changes in reward contingencies during the
process of therapy. Thus, the therapist was seen as differentially
encouraging types of behaviours such as self-disclosure, insight and
self-acceptance in clients by nods and smiles, by vocalisations such as
'Yes I see' and 'That's interesting', by paralinguistic messages
('ahhmms'), and by non-verbal communication by posture and so on. It is
also true that as the basic models have developed and become more
sophisticated, they have increasingly borrowed ideas from each other,
though often without acknowledgement. For example, CBT has incorporated
a concept very like the unconscious in its recent focus on 'schemas',
which are deeply rooted core beliefs of which the client may not be
aware. Similarly, Bertrando (2007) describes how systemic therapists
such as the Milan team drew on their previous psychoanalytic training in
calibrating their interventions to the emotional tones of the family
members. It is highly likely that therapists are influenced by other
models in their formulating and their practice even if this is not
overtly stated in their work.

Integrative formulation in theory

179

To take an obvious example, it would be hard for any therapist not to be
aware of ideas about the therapeutic relationship originating from
psychodynamic theory even if they disagreed with many of the tenets of
the underlying model. Such an awareness is likely to influence the
therapy even if it is expressed in terms of patterns of reinforcement
and rewards. Moreover, it is well established by research that
experienced therapists from different theoretical orientations resemble
each other more closely than novices trained within particular
approaches (Luborsky et al., 2002; Wampold, 2001.) This suggests, in
line with the point made above, that over time all clinicians develop
their own synthesis, and furthermore that it is likely to be implicitly
based on certain core relational factors. Research indicates that
so-called 'supershrinks', whose outcomes are as much as 10 times better
than average, are 'hypersensitive to threats to the alliance with the
client' and work extremely hard to maintain the therapeutic relationship
(Okiishi et al., 2003). Finally, returning to the topic of formulation,
we should note, along with the DCP Guidelines, that formulations are
designed for particular situations and purposes. A simple, single-model
CBT diagram illustrating the link between anxious thoughts, panicky
feelings and avoidance behaviours may be the most appropriate starting
point with a client at a given point in time. 'Clearly, most
formulations in day-to-day practice will not cover the whole range of
possible contexts and causal factors'; a fully integrated formulation is
not always necessary or helpful. However, 'a narrower or single-model
formulation needs to be a conscious and justifiable choice from a wider
field of possible models and causal influences' (DCP, 2011: 15). In
other words, the clinician always needs to be able to hold a
sophisticated, multi-model formulation in mind. Weerasekera's framework
We will now take a more detailed look at an approach to integrative
formulation which illustrates both the benefits and the challenges of
attempting this task. It uses the 4 Ps framework (Predisposing,
Precipitating, Perpetuating, Protective) as a starting point. The
inclusion of 'Presenting issues' as a first step, that is, a summary of
the difficulties that a client brings to therapy, means that it is
sometimes described as 5 Ps (see chapter 2 for a more detailed outline).
Weerasekera's (1995) model has two axes. The first axis comprises the
origins of the problems (individual and systemic/relational) and the
second uses the PPPP framework. The first axis also includes different
therapeutic approaches, such as CBT, psychodynamic approaches and
behavioural interventions at the individual level (see Figure 8.1).
These two axes are an over-arching framework for deciding on the
intervention package. The model also considers coping styles --
characteristic aspects of clients' ways of dealing with problems in
their various different

180

Rudi Dallos, Jacqui Stedmon and Lucy Johnstone Individual Factors:

Systemic Factors:

1.  Biological -- e.g. temperament, physical disabilities, genetic
    factors

2.  Behavioural -- e.g. learning, modelling

3.  Cognitive -- e.g. NATs, schemas, core schemas

4.  Psychodynamic -- e.g. defences, attachments

5.  Couple -- communication, intimacy, support

6.  Family -- family dynamics, traditions

7.  Occupational/ school -- employment, school

8.  Social -- race, gender, class, community resources

Predisposing : factors that make the person or t he system vulnerable to
experiencing difficulties Precipitating: events that are close in time
to the development of the problem Perpetuating: factors that are
involved in maintaining the problem. Protective : factors that
contribute to resilience

COPING STYLES \*

CHOICE of TREATMENT

- characteristic ways of reacting to stress and distress:

1.  
2.  
3.  
4.  

dispositional -- enduring personal styles episodic -- varying from
situation to situation individual -- biological, behavioural, cognitive,
psychodynamic systemic -- couple, family, occupational or social

Figure 8.1 Weerasekera's grid

contexts, such as home, work, leisure and so on. Family relationship
patterns of coping are also included; this corresponds to the systemic
family therapy concept of 'attempted solutions'. Jack: formulation using
Weerasekera's framework Assessment

The first stage is to carry out an assessment using the 4 Ps as an
initial guide. This involves thinking about each of the Ps in relation
to both the individual and systemic factors. The information required
for this is drawn widely from

Integrative formulation in theory

181

case notes, referral information and the assessment interviews with the
client and their family, perhaps supplemented by diaries of behaviours
and thoughts, and observation of and reflections on family interactions.
As this assessment proceeds, ideas about characteristic family coping
styles are developed. The grid also serves to highlight gaps in our
knowledge and information. Once the grid is filled in, consideration is
given to which of the therapeutic models may be utilised to address the
4 Ps at either the individual or systemic levels. This decision is
further guided by the client/s' preferred coping style. For example, if
the client/s express a preference for an action-oriented approach, a
behavioural strategy may be the best starting point. The grid can also
indicate consecutive as opposed to simultaneous combinations of models.
As therapy progresses, there may be a shift from a behavioural to a
psychodynamic perspective in order to explore underlying defences and
feelings. In some cases the grid may suggest that two or more models may
be employed at the same time: for example child-focused CBT work
alongside systemic therapy to address issues in the family relationships
(see Figure 8.2). Individual coping styles

It appears that Jack is currently most accepting of a biological
perspective in taking medication and finding it 'useful'. There is a
sense that actionorientated techniques might be more acceptable to him
as a first step towards engagement. He appears not to have been able to
tell his family about some very upsetting experiences, such as abuse.
Perhaps he has tried to keep things to himself in order to protect them.
However, this coping style means that unresolved problems may escalate
until they explode. Systemic coping styles

Like Jack, his family appears to value a medical input at this point.
Given their traumatic experiences it seems likely that their coping
style is also action-orientated, for example needing to feel safe and to
have strategies to manage Jack and get help when they need it.
Advantages and limitations of the Weerasekera framework and the 4 Ps The
Weerasekera framework has some advantages, which also apply to the 4 Ps
when used on their own. For example, they encourage a thorough
assessment and analysis which alert us to look for factors that we might
miss or ignore. In its full version, the Weerasekera framework also
offers some guidance about the timing and ordering of intervention, and
also considers coping styles. Matching the intervention to client/family
styles of coping can promote a collaborative stance and strengthen the
therapeutic alliance.

182

Rudi Dallos, Jacqui Stedmon and Lucy Johnstone

Predisposing : factors that the person or the system vulnerable to
experiencing difficulties

Precipitating : events that are close in time to the development of the
problem

Perpetuating: factors that are involved in maintaining the problem

Protective: factors that contribute to resilience

Individual Factors

Systemic Factors

Individual: Jack has experienced sexual abuse and family disintegration.
He has witnessed family violence and possibly been a victim of it, his
father became alcoholic, the family business failed, and there was loss
of contact with his father and the family's cultural base. He has had a
broad experience of loss and failure in this transition from a bright,
capable student to abandoning his studies. Jack's 'paranoid' symptoms
appear to coincide with his mother developing 'serious' health problems
and the family finances becoming 'even more stretched'. Jack's problems
are likely to be maintained by his low self-esteem, negative beliefs
about himself, insecure attachments and his many fears. He may continue
to identify with his father but experience great ambivalence about this.
His identity as inadequate, failed and 'ill' is now likely to be
maintained by his position as a 'psychiatr ic patient'. In addition, the
medication he is taking may further reinforce the idea that there is
something wrong with him and may make it harder to engage in therapeutic
activities due to lethargy and so on. Jack is reported to have been an
intelligent, sociable and creative child. He is also described as
'compliant' which perhaps indicates a potential for forming a good
therapeutic alliance. Despite his difficulties, he displays care and
concern about his family, for example worrying about his sister's
safety.

A similar pattern of stress and distress appears to have resulted in the
family feeling overwhelmed, threatened and inadequate. There has also
been a severing of their connections with the Italian community.

Family rows may have played a part in triggering Jack's problems.

The family may feel that they are failing, and may also feel anxious
about and afraid of Jack. This cycle of a sense of rejection and fear
may be serving to maintain Jack as excluded from the family. The
family's anxiety may mean that they continue to require psychiatric
support and hence Jack is maintained in an 'ill' identity. In effect,
the psychiatric system can be seen as co-parenting Jack. This can
establish a self perpetuating dependency.

Despite adversities the family appears to remain connected and have
survived financially. We do not know much about Jack's sisters but it is
possible that they have strengths and successes on which the family
could draw.

Figure 8.2 Illustration of the use of Weerasekera's grid for Jack and
his family

Integrative formulation in theory

183

The framework also has some clear limitations from the perspective of
the themes of this book, and these may also apply to the 4 Ps when used
on its own. These limitations fall into the following areas:
Colloborative versus expert-based. There appears to be an assumption
that the formulation is largely carried out by the therapist from an
expert position as opposed to a more collaborative, co-constructed
process of meaning-making. Reflexivity. This, for example a
consideration of the therapist's own assumptions, values and beliefs, is
absent from both frameworks. Compatibility of different models.
Individual and systemic therapies imply different kinds of causation and
responsibility for the problems. Weerasekera appears to assume that an
'illness' model can be unproblematically combined with the psychological
one, and similarly that a systemic model can simply be added to an
individual focus (see chapters 10 and 12 for further discussion of this
issue). Compatibility of interventions. Similarly, there is no debate
about whether the interventions that may flow from the models are
compatible with each other; for example whether medication can simply be
added onto family therapy without undermining it, either by reducing the
ability to feel or by conveying a message about the origin of the
problem. Certainty and pattern matching. As noted earlier, there is
little support for the assumption that particular therapies can be
matched to particular types of problems in an 'off-the-shelf' way.
Cultural and other contexts. There is no consideration of power and the
ideological dominance of some of the models, such as the biomedical
model, or of cultural issues that may shape the emergence and
presentation of difficulties. Impractical. An obvious practical point is
that busy clinicians may not have the time to undertake assessment in
such detail, and it is even less likely that the whole list of resources
and interventions indicated by the assessment will be available. But
perhaps the most serious limitations from the perspective adopted by
this book are in the following areas: Conceptual integration. The
Weerasekera framework does not clarify how the different models might be
used together. In other words it is essentially eclectic and not
conceptually synthesised. This is also true of the 4 Ps. Either could be
used as an initial step towards this goal, but neither on their own
attempts to do this, or indicates how it could be done. The therapeutic
relationship. As discussed earlier, the most widely supported common
feature in effective therapy of all orientations is the therapeutic
alliance. This is not acknowledged in either the Weerasekera or the 4 Ps
framework, apart from some discussion about increasing client
co-operation by matching models of therapy to the client's coping style.
Personal meaning. There is a risk in both the 4 Ps and the Weerasekera
framework that the numerous possible influences on a client's life will
simply

184

Rudi Dallos, Jacqui Stedmon and Lucy Johnstone

be listed in an additive fashion without reference to their personal
meaning. In this respect the end result may be similar to the axes, or
additional dimensions, of psychiatric diagnosis in the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual (DSM). We might thus end up with what has been
referred to as a 'list-offactors' formulation: for example, 'Jack's
parents separated following arguments and domestic violence. His father
was alcoholic. He was sexually abused by his boss. He misses his father.
His family have faced many social stresses. He has developed
depression'. This list of Ps can only be developed into a formulation by
the inclusion of personal meaning, elicited through sensitive
collaborative discussion, which shows how these factors are linked by
their impact on Jack's identity, self-confidence and feelings and views
about himself and others. In summary, the Weerasekera and the 4 Ps
frameworks are perhaps best understood as assessment methods, tools for
gathering information systematically, and as such, a useful first step
in developing a formulation. They do not, however, fulfil the criteria
of a best practice formulation, and have not achieved, or even
attempted, the conceptual synthesis that is essential for a fully
integrated formulation. Moreover, by focusing on formulation-asan-event
rather than formulating-as-a-process, they do not allow for the large
body of research showing the primacy of the quality of the therapeutic
relationship. Integrative formulating: towards some principles in
practice To summarise the arguments so far: Historically there has been
an excessive focus on outcome research that purports to demonstrate the
superior effectiveness of some models of therapy over others, with
'head-to-head' comparisons of different treatments. Despite the
inappropriateness of 'attempting to fit the round peg of psychotherapy
into the square hole of medicine', this approach 'remains attractive for
several reasons, including the general acceptance of the
medico-scientific view in Western society and harsh economic realities
of our healthcare system' (Miller, et al., 2004: 4). One danger is that
the most heavily researched therapies, which tend to be those like CBT
that fit this paradigm most easily, assume an unwarranted dominance
based on their apparently stronger claims for effectiveness.
Paradoxically, the extensive literature on evidence-based practice in
therapy generally ignores the fact that 'one of the most consistent
findings in over 30 years of psychotherapy research is that despite
different philosophical emphases and applications, models of therapy
tend to achieve broadly similar outcomes' (Paley and Lawton, 2001:13;
see also Wampold, 2001; Luborsky et al., 2002). This can be explained by
the well-supported finding that it is the quality of the relationship
that is the most important factor within the therapy room in

Integrative formulation in theory

185

achieving change -- for example, warmth, attention, understanding and
encouragement. In fact the therapeutic alliance has been found to
account for between 30--60 per cent of the variability in outcome,
whereas models and techniques only account for 5--10 per cent (Miller,
2006). This leads Paley and Lawton (2001) to argue for 'empirically
supported relationships' over 'empirically supported treatments', with
profound implications for research, practice and training. They also
argue that: It is too early to argue for either the supposed superiority
of any approaches or to define adequately an eclectic or integrative
model of therapy. In our current state of not knowing, all approaches
will have to be respected as valid methods of travelling the therapeutic
route ... The challenge to researchers, trainers and practitioners is to
embrace this diversity as different manifestations leading to the
primacy of the therapeutic relationship. (Paley and Lawton, 2001: 16) In
recent elaborations of these findings, it has been shown that therapy
outcomes can be significantly enhanced if the therapist works closely
alongside what is known as 'the client's theory of change'. In other
words, 'rather than the client having to accommodate the therapist's
theory of how change occurs ... the views of the client are central and
therapy is tailored to their views about what is helpful or unhelpful'
(Robinson, 2009: 60; italics in the original). This is consistent with
the requirement, in best practice formulation, for collaboration and
respect for the client's perspective, and on our emphasis on
formulating-as-a-process rather than formulation-as-an-event. In Duncan
and Sparks' (2004: 31) words: 'The client's theory of change is not an
anatomical structure in the client's head to be discovered by your
expert questioning. Rather, it is a plan that co-evolves via the
conversational unfolding of the client's experience, fuelled by your
caring curiosity'. Responses (and, by implication, formulations) that
fit with the client's world of subjective meanings are experienced as
helpful and, moreover, are significantly more likely to achieve good
outcomes over the course of therapy. So-called 'supershrinks' are
flexible enough to employ almost any therapeutic means to achieve the
client's ends. In summary, all models, and hence all formulations based
on those models, have their own, often complementary, strengths and
limitations. This is one of the reasons for offering a wide range of
approaches to formulation in this book. Recognition of this, rather than
a partisan allegiance to a particular model and hostility towards
others, allows us to draw from different approaches as needed. We will
thus be more able to offer clients the kind of intervention that fits
with their theory of change. 'While remaining respectful to each
approach, integrative psychotherapy draws from many sources in the
belief that no one approach has all the truth' (Humanistic and
Integrative Psychotherapy Section of the UK Council for Psychotherapy
1999: xiv quoted in Lapworth and Sills, 2009: 9).

186

Rudi Dallos, Jacqui Stedmon and Lucy Johnstone

Conceptually integrated formulation, like conceptually integrated
therapy, is a goal that has yet to be reached. However, there are some
useful signposts along the way. The most relevant clues, in our view,
lie in the recognition that formulation is best understood as a verb not
a noun, a process not an event. This suggests that the most clinically
useful type of integration needs to happen through
formulating-as-a-process, which is an activity inseparable from the
therapeutic relationship itself. There are of course different theories
about the nature of the therapeutic relationship and how to foster it.
Nevertheless, the emphasis on formulation as a flexible, fluid activity
with a strong focus on the therapeutic relationship is characteristic of
experienced clinicians from a variety of theoretical backgrounds. They
are likely to have developed an idiosyncratic set of preferred concepts
and strategies which make up their own personal style, but will also be
drawing on qualities such as intuition, capacity to listen and to
synthesise disparate information, and to hold a tentative position which
includes a number of different perspectives. This position, sometimes
described as 'both/ and', can be seen as the end result of many years of
working in therapeutic settings, and is primarily reached by starting at
the clinical and relational end rather than being top-down and
theory-driven. The implication is that in the real world of clinical
practice, 'there will be as many integrative psychotherapies as there
are integrative psychotherapists' (Lapworth and Sills, 2009: 15). By
extension, the same applies to integrative formulation. Integration
through formulating in the therapeutic relationship If we accept this as
a guiding principle, the following emphases will inform our integrative
formulating. Formulating as an active process

Formulating is an interactive and vibrant activity. It is not simply an
intellectual pursuit but a subjective and interpersonal one, as we
interact with our clients within a dynamic social context. Nor is it
simply about collecting facts in a rational 'objective' manner, but
rather takes place within the context of an evolving therapeutic
relationship. Thus, the process implies reflexivity, collaboration and a
constant willingness to re-formulate at its heart. This emphasis on
formulation as a dynamic, recursive process is a central theme of this
book and the subsequent chapter. Personal meaning as the central
integrating factor in formulation

As discussed in relation to Weerasekera's framework, there is a risk
that the numerous possible influences on a client's life will simply be
listed in an

Integrative formulation in theory

187

additive fashion. A strong focus on personal meaning as a central
integrating thread will help to avoid this. This is consistent with the
DCP Guidelines (2011:15): 'Personal meaning is the integrating factor in
a psychological formulation' (italics in the original). Personal
development and integration

It has long been established that the clinician's selection of preferred
therapeutic approaches is not random or strictly evidence-based; rather,
personality and value systems play a part in the choice of orientation
(Horton, 2000). As an extension of this argument, Fear and Woolfe (2000)
suggest that it is our job as therapists to use our primary preferred
model as a basis for extending our therapeutic repertoire in the service
of our clients. Thus, 'The counsellor's journey towards integration
mirrors the client's central if unconscious task in therapy: to join up
the discontinuities of one's life so that ... "cut off" parts (are)
reintegrated and accepted ... It is the task of the counsellor to ...
achieve a personal integration' (p. 328). This fits with the finding
that the success of treatment is much more closely related to the
characteristics of the therapist than to the type of treatment (Miller,
et al., 2007). We may all need to notice which models and approaches we
prefer, to ask what this says about us, and to make a conscious attempt
to balance our choices with knowledge and awareness of the strengths of
other perspectives. Checklist of best practice integrative formulation

Finally, it may be helpful to refer to a best practice checklist in
order to help assess an integrative formulation's quality and
completeness. The DCP Guidelines audit tool (2011: 29--30) lists the
essential characteristics of both formulation and formulating, and
includes the issues discussed in this chapter. Summary Integrative
formulation raises a variety of complex issues. We have outlined some of
the difficulties in achieving a conceptually integrated, as opposed to
eclectic, formulation model and have looked at the characteristics,
strengths and limitations of some current attempts at this task. We have
also outlined some general principles of an effective and clinically
useful integrative approach to formulation based on the following
principles: • • • •

Formulating as a process, and as an intrinsic aspect of the therapeutic
relationship. Formulating and re-formulating sensitively,
collaboratively and reflexively. Using personal meaning as the central
integrating factor. Linking professional to personal development.

188

Rudi Dallos, Jacqui Stedmon and Lucy Johnstone

In this way, our formulating will most closely fit the definition in the
first chapter of a process of fluid, dynamic, collaborative shaping of
meaning. In the next chapter, these integrating principles will be
illustrated through the use of Attachment Narrative Therapy. We will
attempt to show not only what a formulation from this perspective might
look like, but also how we might work collaboratively with Jack to
develop one. In other words, we will consider integration both in
formulation and in formulating. References Bertrando, P. (2007) The
Dialogic Therapist, London: Karnac. Borrill, J. and Foreman, E.I. (1996)
Understanding cognitive change: a qualitative study of the impact of
cognitive-behaviour therapy on fear of flying, Clinical Psychology and
Psychotherapy 3(1): 62--74. Clarkson, P. (2003) The Therapeutic
Relationship (2nd edn), London, Philadephia: Whurr. Corrie, S. and Lane,
D. (eds) (2010) Constructing Stories, Telling Tales: A Guide to
Formulation in Applied Psychology, London: Karnac Books. Dallos, R.
(2006) Attachment Narrative Therapy, Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Dare, C., Eisler, I., Russell, G.F. and Szmukler, G.I. (1990) The
clinical and theoretical impact of a controlled trial of family therapy
in anorexia nervosa, Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 16: 39--57.
Division of Clinical Psychology (2011) Good Practice Guidelines on the
Use of Psychological Formulation, Leicester: British Psychological
Society. Duncan, B.L. and Sparks, J.A. (2004) Heroic Clients, Heroic
Agencies: Partners for Change. A Manual for Client-Directed
Outcome-Informed Therapy and Effective, Accountable, and Just Services,
E-Book: ISTC Press. Eells, T.D. (ed.) (1997) Handbook of Psychotherapy
Case Formulation, New York: Guilford Press. Egan, G. (2009) The Skilled
Helper (9th edn), Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole. Fear, R. and Woolfe, R.
(2000) In S. Palmer and R.Woolfe (eds) Integrative and Eclectic
Counselling and Psychotherapy, London: Sage, pp. 329--340. Gardner, D.
(2005) Getting it together: integrative approaches to formulation,
Clinical Psychology Forum 151, 10--15. Green, D. and Latchford, G.
(2012) Maximising the Benefits of Psychotherapy: A PracticeBased
Evidence Approach, Chichester: John Wiley and Sons. Health Professions
Council (2009) Standards of Proficiency: Practitioner Psychologists,
London: Health Professions Council. Horton, I. (2000) Principles and
practice of a personal integration. In S. Palmer and R. Woolfe (eds)
Integrative and Eclectic Counselling and Psychotherapy, London: Sage,
pp. 315--328. Howard, A. (2000) Philosophy for Counselling and
Psychotherapy: Pythagoras to PostModernism, Basingstoke: Palgrave
MacMillan.

Integrative formulation in theory

189

Ingram, B.L. (2006) Clinical Case Formulations: Matching the Integrative
Treatment Plan to the Client, New Jersey: John Wiley and Sons. Kahn, M.
(1996) Between Therapist and Client: The New Relationship (2nd edn), New
York: W.H. Freeman/Owl Books. Lapworth, P. and Sills, C. (2009)
Integration in Counselling and Psychotherapy (2nd edn), London: Sage.
Lazarus, A.A. (2005) Multimodal therapy. In J.C. Norcross and M.R.
Goldfried (eds) Handbook of Psychotherapy Integration, New York: Basic
Books, pp. 105--120. Luborsky, L., Rosenthal, R., Diguer, L., Andrusyna,
T.P. et al. (2002) The Dodo bird effect is alive and well -- mostly,
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 9, 1, 2--12. McLeod, J.
(2009) An Introduction to Counselling (4th edn), Buckingham: Open
University Press. Miller, S. (2006) ShrinkRapRadio no.66, Dec 14.
Available at: www.ShrinkRapRadio. com (accessed 18 September 2012).
Miller, S.D., Duncan, B.L. and Hubble, M.A. (2004) Beyond integration:
the triumph of outcome over process in clinical practice, Psychotherapy
in Australia, 10, 2, 2--19. Miller, S.D., Hubble, M. and Duncan, B.
(2007) Supershrinks: what is the secret of their success? Psychotherapy
in Australia, 14 (4), 14--22. Norcross, J.C. and Goldfried, M.R. (eds)
(2005) Handbook of Psychotherapy Integration, New York: Basic Books.
Okiishi, J., Lambert, M.J., Neilson, S.L. and Ogles, B.M. (2003) Waiting
for supershrink: an empirical analysis of therapist effects, Clinical
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 10, 6, 361--373. Paley, G. and Lawton, D.
(2001) Evidence-based practice: accounting for the importance of the
therapeutic relationship in UK National Health Service therapy
provision, Counselling and Psychotherapy Research, 1, 1, 12--17. Palmer,
S. and Woolfe, R. (2000) Integrative and Eclectic Counselling and
Psychotherapy, London: Sage. Prochaska, J.O. and DiClemente, C.C. (1982)
Transtheoretical therapy: towards a more integrative model of change,
Psychotherapy, Theory, Research and Practice 20, 161--173. Robinson, B.
(2009) When therapist variables and the client's theory of change meet,
Psychotherapy in Australia, 15, 4, 60--65. Rogers, C. (1955)
Client-Centred Therapy, New York: Houghton Mifflin. Ryle, A. (1995)
Cognitive Analytic Therapy, Chichester: Wiley. Sluzki, C.E. (1992)
Transformations: a blueprint for narrative changes in therapy, Family
Process, 31, 217--230. Stiles, W.B. and Shapiro, D.A. (1994) Abuse of
the drug metaphor in psychotherapy process-outcome research, Clinical
Psychology Review, 9, 521--543. Toukmanian, S.G. and Rennie, D. (eds)
(1992) Psychotherapy Process Research: Paradigmatic and Narrative
Approaches, London: Sage. Truax, C. (1966) Reinforcement and
non-reinforcement in Rogerian psychotherapy, Journal of Abnormal
Psychology 71(1), 1--9.

190

Rudi Dallos, Jacqui Stedmon and Lucy Johnstone

Wachtel, P.L. (1991) From eclecticism to synthesis: towards a more
seamless psychotherapy integration, Journal of Psychotherapy Integration
45, 709--720. Wampold, B.E. (2001) The Great Psychotherapy Debate:
Models, Methods and Findings, Hillside, NJ: Erlbaum. Weerasekera, P.
(1995) Multiperspective Case Formulation, Florida: Krieger.

Chapter 9

Integrative formulation in practice A dynamic, multi-level approach Rudi
Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

Formulating and the therapeutic relationship We concluded in the last
chapter that formulating is an active process in clinical work. It is an
interactive, vibrant and fluid activity during which we start to get to
know and engage with the uniqueness of our clients. In this chapter we
will suggest that this view offers a basis for conceptualising the
process of integrative formulation, and that the formation, maintenance
and development of the therapeutic relationship is at the core of this
dynamic process. Formulation can thus be seen as occurring through a
number of central processes. 1 2 3 4

Focusing on the beliefs, feelings and stories of the client. Attending
to the nature of the interactions between the client/s and therapist.
Considering the external factors influencing our client/s, for example
their family context. The therapist processing personal beliefs and
feelings as the interview unfolds.

The different therapeutic models arguably make relative contributions to
each of these components, allowing for various integrative combinations.
For example, CBT, psychodynamic, narrative, PCP and attachment
perspectives can all contribute to 1; systemic, attachment and
psychodynamic perspectives particularly contribute to 2; narrative and
systemic models are particularly weighted toward 3; and psychodynamic,
attachment, PCP and systemic perspectives toward 4. We shall employ a
piece of transcript to illustrate the process of formulating 'in action'
as a therapeutic interview progresses. Using this we hope to show how
different models can be woven into a moment-by-moment dynamic process of
formulating 'in the moment' as well as building up over-arching
formulations. We shall then exemplify how integrative formulating
happens in this process by describing our attempt at developing an
integrative model

192

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

which combines attachment, systemic and narrative perspectives. Of
course it is equally possible to consider our extract through the lens
of different integrative combinations of models. As already pointed out,
formulating is not simply an intellectual activity but a subjective and
interpersonal one, as we interact with our clients within a dynamic
social context. It is not merely about collecting facts in a rational
'objective' manner, but rather takes place within the context of an
evolving therapeutic relationship. The therapist must stay attuned to
clients' levels of engagement, pacing the flow of communication to
scaffold new meanings, avoiding ruptures to the working alliance and
responding sensitively to signs of distress. The act of formulating
therefore requires 'use of self' and has considerable overlap with
reflective practice (Stedmon and Dallos, 2009); formulating then is not
a dispassionate process, but a passionate one! Another important link
with reflective practice is that formulating, in the sense of
formulation-as-a-process, occurs in the moment as well as offering
meanings about the moment. Indeed therapeutic work, by its very nature,
requires us to formulate in the heat of the moment, making spontaneous
clinical decisions as we respond in the here and now to the client's
feedback during the flow of our interactions. For example, the questions
we ask, the topics that we decide to pursue, and conversely what we
choose not to ask or deliberately avoid, our hesitations, pauses and
emotional reactions can all be seen to constitute micro-formulations
which may be part of a wider over-arching formulation. This process can
also be described as 'assessment', but we suggest that the questions we
ask, and the paths we choose to explore with clients, are in fact guided
by such micro-formulations unless we attempt to stick extremely rigidly
to a pre-determined assessment protocol. As we proceed, our
conversations and interactions with a client, family or team may be
peppered with bursts of feelings, or momentary intrusions of thoughts,
memories and visual images that connect with our own experiences. Indeed
the process of formulating is a multi-sensory activity and we access
information at the verbal--semantic levels of representation as well as
the non-verbal, procedural and embodied, emotional levels. In short,
when we work therapeutically we are not only listening but also
employing all our senses; visual, olfactory, emotional and empathetic
mentalisation, and reflection. Arguably, it is perhaps only later, for
example during supervision, when we can reflect in a calm manner, that
it is possible to develop a more theoretically informed map of
formulation which forms the basis of 'the formulation-as-an-object or
event', which is written up in notes, communicated to other
professionals, and guides the therapist's preparation for the next
clinical session. This distinction is similar to Schon's (1983)
distinction between reflection 'in' action and 'on' action.

Integrative formulation in practice

193

Hypothetical conversation with Jack Since it is difficult to illustrate
these experiential and dynamic features of formulating by talking about
cases, we invite you to consider this hypothetical extract of a
therapeutic/clinical interview with Jack that demonstrates how the
on-going process of building a therapeutic alliance between the client
and therapist is central to evolving formulations that are guided by
reflexive practice (see Stedmon and Dallos, 2009). This extract is based
on an edited version of a real client who had similar difficulties to
Jack. We have incorporated some details of the interview with this
'real' client to indicate how in the process of formulating new
information may emerge; for example, that both of Jack's parents had had
problems with alcohol, contributing to the escalating patterns of
violence that Jack describes. We have not systematically offered
indications of how Jack might also be formulating in this interview to
produce co-constructed meanings and shared formulations. However, we do
suggest some important points where he appears to be doing this.
Activity: Try to read this transcript first without looking at our
commentary and notice some of your emerging ideas, explanations and
feelings. What formulations begin to come to mind for you? What
questions might you have added, developed or possibly excluded in order
to pursue your own process of formulating? What formulations appear to
be in the mind of the therapist/ interviewer? Therapist (in bold)

Commentary: Reflections and emerging formulations

Jack, can you remember some of the times when things were difficult
between your parents?

In this first question the therapist appears to be exploring the
possibility (shaped by a systemic relational framework) that there were
problems between the parents. This is adding a different slant to the
dominant formulation that Jack's father was 'abusive'. He is also
exploring whether Jack is able to remember some of these events or
whether they have become dissociated and somatised.

Hmmm, (long pause), I mean when they were having an argument and I was
quite young and erm, me and, I always tried to split them up even when I
was a little kid you know, shout or whatever but it just never took
effect, ever. Yeah and getting violent, that is what I call distracted
and stressed really.

It is also significant here that Jack remembers trying to intervene,
which could have been physically and emotionally dangerous for him.

194

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

Therapist (in bold)

Commentary: Reflections and emerging formulations

So were there violent arguments? Yeah quite a lot (nodding), yeah.

This reinforces a formulation that his exposure to violence associated
with repeated traumatic states underlies the development of his
'psychotic' symptoms.

You mentioned that your father had been drinking quite a bit? How do you
understand that?

This appears to be an attempt to explore a formulation about Jack's
beliefs and his narrative about why his father was drinking heavily.
Perhaps drinking was not simply due to problems in the marriage.
Implicit here in the therapist's mind is the idea from an attachment
perspective that drinking may be a form of self-soothing.

Well yeah just the same kind of thing really with arguing and erm
drinking and I didn't really register that drinking was kind of, like a,
er you know, a tool for burying your head or that I just thought it was
normal but then I kind of put two and two together in my later years.

Here Jack appears to offer a formulation that drinking may have served
the function of helping his father to manage his emotions. Next the
therapist might explore through further questions a formulation (jointly
developing with Jack) about the role that alcohol plays in offering
emotional comfort or avoidance of distressing feelings. This hypothesis
draws on an attachment model linking how feelings are managed through
different attachment strategies -- (see ANT final section). However,
going down such a potentially emotional pathway for Jack may require a
judgement about the safety and trust provided by the therapeutic
relationship. Is it too early to take this risk?

Was it always your father who drank or did anyone else drink as well,
your mother?

This starts to explore a formulation that there may be some systemic
processes in the family around drinking, introducing the possibility
that his father is not simply to blame for all the problems; another
formulation may be that drinking was a form of coping with painful
feelings shared by the parents.

Yes, she did quite a bit as well. Drinking is always, when she drinks
there's always normally an argument (hand gestures) two and two must be
connected.

Here Jack starts to consider a connection between his mother's drinking
and the onset of arguments. In moving his hands he may be unconsciously
remembering the physical violence, in a relatively unprocessed form,
stored perhaps as embodied memories. The therapist may register these
gestures as a sign that Jack is emotionally aroused in this process of
recall. A rapid clinical decision must now be made by the therapist. The
next sequence could move onto encouraging Jack to make semantic,
reflective connections contributing to the emerging process of
collaborative formulating but this may be harder if he is in an
emotionally aroused state. Possibly at this point the therapist instead
responded to non-verbal emotional communication and decided (perhaps
intuitively) to explore Jack's feelings instead.

Integrative formulation in practice

195

Therapist (in bold)

Commentary: Reflections and emerging formulations

Can you remember a specific time when that happened?

The therapist here is possibly attempting to focus on a specific
situation in order to assist Jack in teasing out what the sequence of
events were that triggered violence between his parents. Attachment
theory also attends in detail to individual recall of traumatic episodic
events, so this question draws on the therapist's conceptual knowledge
base.

Yeah when they were just fighting quite a few of them and it was always
in the kitchen, or the living room, always downstairs (sigh ... pause)
Yeah just the same thing, arguing, fighting, drunk, drink fuelled
violence.

Jack locates the time and place and as he gives the details his language
shows a rhythmic, depressedsounding repetitive listing. The same thing,
arguing, fighting, drunk. He has also moved into the present, possibly
indicating his emotional pre-occupation and the bubbling up of traumatic
memories.

How old were you at the time?

This factual question may reflect the therapist attuning to Jack's
emotional state and taking care to monitor the pace of further
exploration. This straightforward question allows space for Jack to
decide whether he is ready to talk more about these memories. However,
the question simultaneously implies a formulation about the impact that
witnessing these events might have had on Jack at a potentially
vulnerable age. The therapist might have reflected on the moment,
explicitly inquiring how Jack is feeling and reassuring him that he need
not continue if this felt too difficult for now. This hereand-now
processing in therapy helps to maintain a collaborative framework and
may guard against rupturing the working alliance.

Er, I can only remember it when I was, from when I was 5 or 6, yeah I
can't remember being any younger than that. Yeah I wouldn't have been
able to shout loud enough.

Jack clarifies and interestingly uses a little humour, 'not being able
to shout loud enough' at his parents, in order perhaps to distance
himself a little from the emotional intensity of these memories. This
levity may have prompted the therapist next to pursue the violence a
little further, but arguably Jack's vulnerability could also have been
explored by asking about what the experience might have felt like and
whether he still feels so helpless now.

196

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

Therapist (in bold)

Commentary: Reflections and emerging formulations

So can you tell me a bit more about what happened next? How often would
drinking lead to violence? Was it physical? Like hitting out? Was it
both of them?

Jack has already made a connection that when his mother drank it often
led to violence. However, it is not clear yet what the violence was like
and whether this constituted systematic abuse by his father or whether
his mother was also violent. This is also a sensitive area of
exploration in terms of cultural contexts, inequality between the
genders and male oppression. In the process of therapy the therapist may
be aware of a core dilemma for Jack. Already he has indicated that he
might have felt frightened and one possible formulation is that he
feared that his father would hurt his mother. This certainly seems to be
Jack's and the family's dominant formulation about his father's
behaviour. However, this leaves Jack potentially confused and conflicted
if he feels some loyalty to his father, or even thinks that maybe his
mother was jointly responsible for the violence. The therapist must
tread a delicate balance, neither wishing to indirectly support or
condone 'abusive' behaviour through a systemic formulation of the
relationship being out of control nor assuming the contrasting
formulation of abusive behaviour by his father.

I can't exactly remember how often they would fight but it became like
normal, it wasn't a surprise if there was an argument. At least two
times a week. Yeah I'm sure it was that regular, I could be wrong but it
wasn't once a month and it wasn't once every two weeks. When it did
become violent it was, yeah it was really quite upsetting. My mum would
normally, it varied, my mum would sometimes hit my dad when she's drunk
and then obviously then (sigh) I dunno then my dad would hit her back,
and I kind of thought, that's bad. I don't know, her hitting him is bad
but I don't know because she was drunk, so I didn't really know or kind
of blame him because she's you know hitting him in face, doing this,
doing that, and you know it kind of reaches a point where it can't go
any further or it's going to get really out of

Jack starts to suggest that the fighting assumed 'normality' in his
life. Jack appears to be formulating the violence in different ways,
including provocation by his mother and the unjustifiability of male to
female violence. He also appears to struggle with attributing
responsibility and blame, oscillating between seeing the violence as
wrong and upsetting and developing a competing formulation in which
violence is minimised as 'making mistakes' and 'not really beating'.

Integrative formulation in practice Therapist (in bold)

197

Commentary: Reflections and emerging formulations

hand and then sometimes my dad would. (pause) People make mistakes.
Sometimes he would be hit, and then he would hit mum, it would never be
like really beating it wouldn't be beating, it would be a slap in the
face, or a slap on the back, it wouldn't be punching or headlock,
pushing yeah a lot of pushing, grabbing hold. It would start from
pushing; sometimes like out of the blue a slap in the face, or something
like that. Where were you when this was happening ? How did it make you
feel? Can you remember what you did?

In asking this question the therapist is exploring a formulation that
Jack was distressed by these events, perhaps formulating that this may
have influenced his later behaviours. Witnessing these events may have
led him to develop an insecure attachment representation. Jack's sense
of insecurity and anxiety may have contributed to his later
'problematic' behaviours. The therapist notices that Jack has shared a
lot of information now, implying that he is experiencing their
relationship to be both trusting and safe, so it seems timely to explore
feelings in more depth.

Yeah I mean we (him and his sisters) wouldn't be in the same room but
obviously I couldn't help myself I can't sit and watch TV and hear my
mum and dad shouting their heads off and then someone go 'argh' you know
and hear slapping and stuff like that. Hilary (older sister) I think she
kind of tried to stop it as well, we would normally start to cry because
you're seeing your mum and dad do that and that's normal to cry.

Interestingly Jack starts to talk again in the present tense: 'I can't
sit and watch ...' and he uses different representational systems, for
example he makes the sound of violence 'Argh', slapping, makes a vivid
visual reference -- 'shouting their heads off '. This again suggests
that he is becoming emotionally aroused by these memories but then goes
on to distance himself from these memories by eventually referring to
himself and his mum and dad in the third person ... 'you're seeing your
mum and dad do that' and then normalising this as a common reaction and
'that's normal to cry'. The therapist is formulating that this pattern
of discourse indicates an avoidant attachment strategy.

So sometimes you and your sister tried to intervene to stop it? Can you
remember how you felt when you did that?

In asking this question the therapist appears to be further exploring
the developing formulation that being caught up in the violence between
his parents has had a significant impact on Jack's current mental state.

198

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

Therapist (in bold)

Commentary: Reflections and emerging formulations

I think I was pretty upset and bit scared, sometimes I was crying like
Carla. I said 'Please stop, don't shout at each other' but often I was
so scared we just sat there and cried ...

Jack seems to again show arousal as he remembers. He goes into dialogue
as if re-living the experience. Some of the finer details such as Jack's
use of the present tense may not have been consciously noted by the
therapist at the time, though might have been registered at a
semi-conscious level through monitoring Jack's higher level of arousal.

Do you see any connection here between what you're describing and what
you said earlier about how you were being abused but you never told your
parents about it?

The therapist's question now suggests he is developing a formulation
that Jack's parents may have been distracted by their own conflicts and
unavailable to respond to the abuse that he subsequently experienced. It
is possible that this question was a little too ambitious at this point
and Jack needs some more time to regain his calmness after talking about
these distressing events.

There could be a connection but I've never kind of thought of it. It's
never come to me to think that. Could be, but ...

Jack here appears to be indicating that he has not considered this
formulation previously but is willing to contemplate it. This exchange
is an attempt to link the therapist's formulation with Jack's and thus
test it out. It starts to indicate how a collaborative framework and
formulation is gradually built up, though Jack's dominant discourse that
he is 'mentally ill' might still be more influential in his thinking.
The therapist must now take care gradually to co-construct alternative
meanings with Jack so as not to impose his own formulation.

How different were your interpretations at various points to those
suggested here? What models did you bring to looking at this transcript?
Firstly, we will make some general points about the dynamic and shifting
nature of clinical work and formulating in action. In the commentary we
can see some evidence of the therapist's use of conscious formulations
guiding the conversation with Jack. Secondly, we can see how, perhaps in
later supervision, we might reflect on some other possible formulations
and consider what the therapist might have been formulating implicitly
or semi-consciously. The commentary in practice was influenced by a
combination of systemic, narrative and attachment perspectives, but
arguably represents shared concepts from a range of models. There are
likely to be some fundamental commonalities in how we think 'in action'
in therapy. Also, ideas drawn from these three models have gained a wide
utilisation in the psychological map that most experienced therapists
employ (see previous chapter). In the analysis of this hypothetical
conversation between Jack and his therapist we have attempted to
indicate the fluid, dynamic and evolving

Integrative formulation in practice

199

nature of formulating 'in action'. In the moment-by-moment analysis of
this conversation the therapist is continually engaged in formulating,
moving between systemic/relational and individual hypotheses in an
elaborate dance, caught between the emotional valence of Jack's
reactions to key questions and the underlying theories that guide the
following questions. Though the analysis above has focused on the
therapist's formulating Jack is also actively engaged in meaning-making,
each of them receiving reciprocal feedback, prompting further
understanding, emotional reactions and formulations to emerge. In effect
what appears to be a challenging division between individual and
systemic levels of analysis conceptually, melts away as the conversation
about Jack's life unfolds. This raises the question of whether the
therapist here is engaged in an eclectic or conceptual form of
integration. This distinction becomes blurred in practice because the
responses between Jack and the therapist occur at various levels of
conscious awareness. At times the therapist appears to ask questions
that are consciously informed by explicit knowledge of psychological
models, yet other responses feel much more empathic and attuned to
Jack's emotional tone. There is movement between drawing on explicit
declarative knowledge to inform questions and intuitively relying on
implicit procedural knowledge to regulate and maintain the therapeutic
relationship. For any approach outlined in this book it would be
important to ensure that Jack is both emotionally safe and that he has
sufficient cognitive resources to process any new information that
particular questions elicit to build on our shared and evolving
collaborative narrative. Arguably employing a psychodynamic or
attachment-focused model might allow us to be more sensitive to these
dual processes of communication. As therapists we need to monitor how
Jack is feeling, how we are resonating with the emotional climate of our
developing relationship and how this builds the potential to establish
collaborative and co-constructed meaning. Subsequently we may bring our
theories together to formulate 'on' what has occurred in the session and
what avenues we think may be worth exploring next time. In this chapter
we set out an approach to formulation that offers a dynamic and
collaborative framework, built upon a platform of established security
and safety within the therapeutic relationship, and which supports
clients to take risks and explore difficult memories and experiences.
The Attachment Narrative Therapy Approach described below moves towards
a conceptual synthesis that utilises the core psychological features of
three models, systemic, narrative and attachment, retaining at its heart
a recognition of the therapeutic relationship as central to both the
content of formulation and the process of formulating. Attachment
Narrative Therapy (ANT) formulation In the 'live' transcript with Jack
we have illustrated how a therapist attends to the level of safety and
security she is providing for her client and this creates a relational
context that mirrors Bowlby's idea of a secure base. Bowlby (1973)

200

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

described therapy as the process of creating a sensitive and emotionally
attuned 'secure base' across the age range: For not only young children,
it is now clear, but human beings of all ages are found to be at their
happiest and to be able to deploy their talents to best advantage when
they are confident that standing behind them are one or more trusted
persons who will come to their aid should difficulties arise. The person
trusted provides a secure base from which his (or her) companion can
operate. (Bowlby, 1973: 359) ANT builds on Bowlby's broad approach and
provides a synthesis with systemic, narrative and individual models of
therapy that is compatible at both a theoretical and pragmatic level.
Dallos and Vetere (2009) have developed this approach into a common
framework for understanding complex problems as diverse as ADHD, eating
disorders, trauma and domestic violence. Importantly this model attempts
a conceptual integration that is also sympathetic to the idiosyncratic
attempts made by many practising clinicians to blend different
approaches. Attachment Narrative Therapy (ANT) brings together models
which operate at different levels: systemic (inter-personal); individual
(attachment theory); and societal (narrative theory). Integration based
on a conceptual synthesis of complementary models

The starting point for ANT (Attachment Narrative Therapy) was an
awareness of the conceptual overlaps between attachment, systemic and
narrative models in the context of our work in the field of eating
disorders and bereavement. Further to this was an awareness that in
itself each model had deficiencies which could be complemented by the
other. The attempted integration of the three approaches was therefore a
conceptual one in that it is not merely a juxtaposing of the models but
a synthesis of their central conceptualisations. The core of this
synthesis relates to Bowlby's view of therapy as akin to the creation
and maintenance of a secure base. We suggest further that the concept of
the secure base and how this is created forms an embracing
conceptualisation of these three models. Furthermore, attachment theory
is in itself an integrative model in that Bowlby drew on systems theory
to explain how the child and parent achieve a homeostatic emotional
balance in their relationship. Subsequently, Main et al. (1985) extended
attachment theory to focus on how these early experiences shape the
structure and content of our individual narratives. In turn the other
models extend attachment theory; systems theory moves beyond a dyadic to
a triadic analysis and narrative therapies take account of the wider
culturally shared narratives that shape family relationships and
attachments.

Integrative formulation in practice

201

Connections and differences between systemic, attachment and narrative
therapeutic models Systemic therapy

As we saw in chapter 4, systemic formulations emphasise the
inter-personal nature of problems. Specifically, the formulation assumes
that 'problems' serve a function in terms of the family dynamics. In
addition, systemic formulations emphasise the 'here and now' current
family processes that are maintaining the symptoms. Though there is an
acknowledgement that problems may have been precipitated by historical
events such as life cycle changes, the main focus is on current problems
in achieving change. This leaves the single application of systemic
models with central weaknesses. 1

2 3 4

5

It is not clear why a particular type of problem, for example, anorexia
as opposed to depression or substance abuse, develops; nor why different
members of the family develop their individual problems and ways of
coping. It is not clear how the family dynamics shape each individual
family member's internal world, their feelings and beliefs. Systemic
formulation has less to say about the wider socio-cultural context, for
example, how ideas of gender, family roles and morality shape the family
processes. There is a long-standing concern that systemic models, while
explicitly less blaming of the individual, have in effect moved blame up
one level to the family. Usually this means locating blame in the
parents of the identified client. Systemic models pay scant attention to
the individual emotions of different family members and fail to
integrate a theory of feelings alongside the predominance given to
accounts of beliefs and actions.

Narrative therapies

Narrative therapies have many similarities to systemic therapies,
especially in their emphasis on the importance of communication
processes in therapeutic change (White and Epston 1990; Sluzki 1992;
Tomm, 1988; chapters 4 and 5 this volume). Above all, they highlight the
centrality of meaning in human experience, suggesting that the meanings
we give to events shape our feelings and actions. Correspondingly if
meanings shift, if we can see things in a 'new light', changes in
feelings and behaviour will follow. Drawing on social constructionist
ideas (see chapter 5), they emphasise that meanings are co-constructed
in relationships and that language is the means whereby this occurs. In
contrast to systemic approaches, the emphasis is on patterns of
meanings, especially stories, rather than patterns of actions or
behaviours in

202

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

families. Vygotsky (1978) has proposed that the child learns by
internalising the speech of adults around her. The child's inner world
is said to be made up of conversations which later become internalised,
and can include both supportive and punitive voices. In addition,
through constructing narratives events are given meanings and connected
over time. Bruner (1990) and Vygotsky (1978) further argued that parents
provide 'scaffolding' to help their child make sense of his or her
experiences. We might speculate that this process parallels the
therapeutic relationships in so far as the therapist provides a
scaffolding to help the client to reach new understandings. Narrative
approaches stress that we strive to form coherent stories which enable
us to connect events both negative and positive, to consider alternative
possibilities, and to allow reflection on and integration of the events
in our lives. Importantly, narrative therapy often makes use of writing
as a natural medium to enable clients to organise and clarify their
stories. These aspects of narrative therapy complement systemic
approaches but also share similar deficits. For example, there is very
little explanation about how particular narratives develop nor of
differences between stories held by the various family members. Rather,
as in the systemic model, the emphasis in formulation is on describing
dominant narratives that appear to actively maintain problems and to
offer practical ways of altering these. One of the important ways that
narrative approaches combine with systemic perspectives is in drawing
attention to the wider socio-cultural contexts. Language is understood
as conveying and perpetuating a range of beliefs and practices that can
serve to subjugate and oppress. For example, many families are
influenced by diagnostic terminology (e.g. 'ADHD' and 'depression').
Rapley et al. (2011) have developed social constructionist arguments
that challenge the dominant 'medicalisation of misery' in Western
cultures. Indeed these wider culturally shared ideas or discourses about
mental illness and organic causes of problems are taken on by the family
and individual family members and can profoundly influence and shape its
dynamics. Narrative therapy also addresses how these same discourses may
shape the treatment and provision of services, such as specialist ADHD
clinics or running compassionate mind groups for people with 'borderline
personality disorder'. One of its key aims is to help clients to resist
the negative aspects of such labels which they often accept for
themselves. In effect, narrative therapy aims to assist individuals and
families to 're-formulate' their problems in less self-denigrating ways.
People vary in the extent to which they can link their experiences in
detailed and coherent narratives. This has been termed 'narrative skill
'; a complex ability which is fostered and built by the ways that
parents talk with their children (McAdams, 1993; Habermas and Bluck,
2000). Clinically this is an important issue since it is evident that
narrative therapy requires a skill and sophistication with language that
some people do not possess. The formulation needs to take this into
account and to consider an educative or skill-acquisition

Integrative formulation in practice

203

component to the therapy; or else other forms of therapy may be
indicated until these abilities become more established. Attachment
theory

John Bowlby's (1988) attachment theory consists of an integration of
theories in that it incorporates a mixture of ideas from psychodynamic
(object relations) theory, systems theory, cognitive neuro-science
(representational systems -- working models) and the naturalistic
observations of animal behaviours. He argued that like other species,
young human beings have an evolutionarily based instinct to seek safety
and comfort from their parents when confronted with danger. Parents are
said to respond to their child's need for comfort in a variety of ways
which shape important aspects of the child's internal world.
Specifically, where parents respond in a predictable and reassuring way
the child develops a sense of the world as secure and of themselves as
worthy of love and comfort. Where the parents respond reluctantly or
inconsistently, make the situation less safe or are themselves a source
of danger, infants are likely to develop a view of the world as unsafe
and of themselves as unworthy and not good enough. Attachment theory was
initially based on natural observation of children who had been
separated from their parents, and later on the systematic observation of
structured parent--child separations in the 'Strange situation' research
paradigm (Ainsworth, 1989). This led to the classification of attachment
behaviours displayed by children into three patterns: secure, avoidant,
and anxious/ambivalent. Bowlby (1969) proposed that the child's
experiences become held as a 'working model', a set of beliefs or
stories about fear, comfort, their parents and themselves (Main et al.,
1985; Crittenden, 1998). This was developed to reveal that defensive
processes are indicated in 'how' people speak about their early and
current family experiences. Broadly differences in defensive processes
employed are summarised as follows: Secure -- able to use both emotional
and cognitive information to make sense of past experiences, and able to
access memories of both negative and positive events with an ability to
reflect on these experiences and integrate them. Dismissive -- this
corresponds to the avoidant patterns with infants and is characterised
by accounts in which feelings are minimised, and the style deployed is
overly rational and semantic. There is little access to early memories;
painful memories and rejections from parents are particularly shut down
and there may be an idealising of the parents along with a dismissing of
the self, 'I am not good enough'. Preoccupied -- this corresponds to the
anxious/ambivalent pattern found with infants. The transcripts show an
over-concern with feelings, little ability to connect events in a
coherent way, blaming of others for problems, with a pre-occupation with
the self.

204

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

Mixed/disorganised -- Many people who, like Jack, have experienced abuse
and traumatic events exhibit a complex mixture of both the insecure
strategies. This can sometimes involve a rapid switching from one to the
other, often accompanied by powerful bursts of feelings. Although these
might seem like chaotic or dysfunctional strategies, they are frequently
attempts to manage confusing emotional dilemmas in their lives.
Attachment theory therefore fills some of the key deficits in systemic
and narrative approaches in that it offers a developmental account of
the emergence of family patterns, the shaping of the child's internal
world, and the development of narrative skills. However, like systemic
approaches, it does not centrally focus on the wider socio-cultural
contexts. To take an example; the development of girls and boys may
differ in families due to cultural expectations of how they 'should'
learn to deal with danger. Likewise, there may be broader cultural
differences in what are seen as appropriate ways of expressing distress
and expectations of comfort (Crittenden, 1998). Attachment theory places
emphasis on historical rather than current interactional processes.
Arguably, patterns of attachments are maintained not just by the
internalisation of past experiences with parents but also by adult,
ongoing relationships with them and other intimate partnerships. ANT
formulation for Jack This consists of weaving together the three models
presented above by taking account of their contributions to the
individual, inter-personal and sociocultural levels of analysis. Though
the models operate at different levels of analysis regarding the view of
the origins of the problems, these different perspectives can be
considered to provide an overall integrative framework. This rests on
the conceptualisation that individual experience (Jack's as an example)
is influenced by the nature of the family dynamics and these in turn are
influenced by wider cultural factors. Also family dynamics are shaped by
the individual features of each member of the family. The ANT approach
attempts to offer an explanation of how features of the different
models, operating at different levels can be inter-woven: •

•

Individual. This includes the ways in which early experiences in the
family serve to shape emotionally valenced beliefs about the
availability of others to offer support, and feelings of self-worth.
Importantly this includes an emphasis on the form and structure of the
stories that people hold about these experiences. Inter-personal. This
includes an analysis of both historical and current patterns of relating
in families which shape the child's or adult's beliefs and feelings, and
those of his or her parents. The shaping and maintaining of current
patterns of actions and the attempts that families make to solve their
difficulties will also be considered.

Integrative formulation in practice

•

205

Socio-cultural. This consists of an exploration of wider culturally
shared beliefs and expectations and the ways in which they influence the
ideas that family members hold about 'appropriate' ways of relating and
dealing with distress and conflicts.

Jack ANT formulation attempts to connect all three levels of analysis.
However, the guiding focus is on the narratives, in the broader sense of
stories which constitute both meanings and emotional states, and which
shape our choices about actions. In practice the ANT formulation of Jack
revolves around these three core concepts: • • •

That his past and current attachment experiences shape how he manages
distress, including his ability to place these experiences into
narratives. That the meanings he holds about these experiences are
crucial, and that re-storying these can help him to think about the
past, himself, and the future in different ways. That the narratives
that Jack and his family hold take place within a wider social-cultural
context, which can include ideas about attachment and gender
expectations and cultural differences about emotional expressiveness.

Centrally, it might be possible to help Jack and his family to think
about his father in a less negative way. It often turns out in such
cases that the abuser has himself experienced abuse. This might help
Jack to see his father's actions as less personally motivated towards
him. A revision of his story about these events could help him to
develop some different attachment narratives which might free him from
his overwhelming sense of inadequacy and rejection. ANT, in short, gives
a greater weight in formulation to meaning-making and our power to
're-story' the past than is typically the case either in attachment
theory alone or early systemic formulations. Central to an attachment
analysis is a consideration of the patterns of actions in families,
particularly how they deal with danger, threat and anxiety. Jack has
clearly faced many dangers, both within and outside the family. He had
both witnessed and also been the victim of domestic violence. It is
extremely confusing and distressing for a young child when the people
who are supposed to offer comfort and support are instead sources of
danger. This is likely to generate very ambivalent feelings, especially
in regard to seeking protection and comfort. It is likely that Jack came
to understand that his father was dangerous and his mother not available
because she too was distressed and frightened. Although he might have
understood his mother's

206

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

situation, he would also have felt angry and resentful at not being
looked after and comforted as he needed. A typical attachment strategy
in such situations is for a child to attempt to become a 'carer', to
sacrifice his own needs and try to look after his parents instead. This
strategy could also have helped to alleviate the guilt he felt for
feeling resentful and angry towards his mother for not looking after
him, even though intellectually he knew why she was unable to do this.
The fact that he was such a 'good' boy at school, well-liked, talented
and sociable suggests that he was superficially quite successful in
covering up, to the outside world at least, the distress and fear
experienced at home. This pattern of pleasing is described as 'false
affect' and is a typical component of a role-reversal, 'compulsive
care-giving' (Crittenden, 1998). It is likely that this pattern became
more deeply entrenched when Jack's father left as he would have become
the 'man of the house'. Jack, his mother and sisters would likely have
been deeply worried about how they would cope emotionally and
financially. In this situation the need to be a 'good' and helpful boy
who did not worry his mother with his own problems might have become
ever more important. Attachment theory suggests that the nature of the
internal model (set of core beliefs and emotions) that is likely to
develop from such family experiences might include the following: • • •
• • • •

My family is not safe. I cannot rely on my parents to protect and
comfort me. One of my parents (if not both) is a source of danger. I
need to try to please and look after my parents, and perhaps they might
argue less if I do. The only person I can rely on is myself. Talking is
dangerous and leads to violence. I should try not to think about my
parents' actions or my own needs.

These thoughts are not necessarily conscious but are likely to be
manifest in how Jack behaves, including his style of talking about
himself and events in his family. To categorise Jack's attachment
'style' runs the danger of oversimplification, but on the other hand it
can provide us with a starting point for our thinking about his
potential needs and ways of emotional coping. A formulation which
includes reference to some features of attachment styles may be helpful
as long as we hold these as propositions or hypotheses rather than
absolutes. For example, we can see some aspects of an 'avoidant' pattern
of shutting down feelings and not talking, as well as signs of
compulsive caregiving and self-reliance in the transcript. However, this
may have changed as Jack became older and experienced extreme forms of
distress and abuse. Furthermore, although this strategy may have been
effective earlier, it did not seem to work so well later on since it did
not halt the violence, the divorce or the abuse that Jack experienced.
Taking the Saturday delivery job may have

Integrative formulation in practice

207

been Jack's attempt to 'care for' and help his family; but this action
in itself led to further abuse. Subsequently, Jack may have adopted an
increasingly anxious/ambivalent approach. At its extreme this leads to a
sense of deep distrust in others which might come to be labelled as a
'paranoid' style of relating, characterised by a pre-occupation with the
past, current and future potential dangers. It is possible that Jack has
developed a mixed strategy of oscillating from one insecure attachment
pattern to the other, neither of which is effective, so that he
eventually abandons both strategies and becomes 'ill'. This may help to
resolve his attachment dilemma of trying to please and be 'good' while
also being pre-occupied with feelings of anger, hurt and resentment. An
ANT approach takes this basic attachment formulation further by
considering how the family constellation shapes the ways that Jack made
sense of, or processed, events in his life. Specifically, Jack's
'narrative skills' may have been under-developed. It is quite likely
that he had little experience of his parents discussing difficult
feelings, problems and dangers in a calm and contained manner. Rather,
he appears to have witnessed escalating interactions, possibly with
angry shouting, accusations and threats leading to physical violence.
Most likely, Jack would have developed a sense of language and
communication as untrustworthy and dangerous, particularly where intense
feelings are involved, rather than a safe vehicle for conveying comfort
and resolving problems. Jack would therefore be less likely to
communicate about such matters and also less able to make sense of
events internally to develop a reflective and coherent story about his
life. During relatively safe periods of their life youngsters may be
able to function reasonably adequately with this pattern, but for Jack a
series of life events continued to be very dangerous and unsafe. Jack's
vulnerability would leave him swept around by emotional currents with
little opportunity to integrate and resolve conflicting feelings and
events. He might stay locked in his current ways of attempting to solve
his emotional problems, for example, through denial of his needs,
selfdestruction, paranoia and anger. This pattern may also have made
Jack vulnerable to people who appeared to show him affection and care,
possibly contributing to him becoming the victim of sexual abuse, since
Jack may have learned to minimise signs of danger as a way of trying to
cope within his family. Subsequently it seems that he was unable to
confide in his mother. Keeping this to himself may have increased his
sense of shame and distress to the point where he resorted to managing
his feelings with drugs and alcohol. In Jack's case, this was more about
self-medication than thrill-seeking. It is interesting to note that
alcohol and barbiturates have the effect of shutting down cognitive,
analytical and semantic processing and leave the person, initially at
least, in a kind of warm emotional glow. However, such a state is
unlikely to lead to insight. For a young man like Jack without the
education and drive to engage in productive, integrative activities,
drugs

208

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

would leave him increasingly emotionally numb and could also prompt
psychotic or paranoid reactions. An ANT formulation would suggest that
this may be because drugs strip away the defensive strategy of actively
avoiding painful thoughts of danger, abandonment, lack of comfort and
rejection. Without practice in experiencing and integrating such
thoughts and images these can become overwhelming, leading to feelings
of terror and paranoia. While experimenting with drugs it is unlikely
that Jack was able to access comforting and reassuring conversations
with his parents to make the bad images, feelings and thoughts he was
having more manageable. Attachments and systemic processes

Attachment theory and systemic theory share an emphasis on examining
patterns of interactions in families and considering how presenting
problems may be 'functional' responses to the dynamics. We suggest that
there are family attachment styles as well as individual ones. This fits
with systemic theory; for example the structural family therapy concepts
of enmeshed and disengaged families corresponds to
ambivalent/pre-occupied and avoidant/ dismissive attachment styles
(Hillburn-Cobb, 1996). Systemic approaches, though, emphasise current
maintaining patterns as well as historical ones. Jack's emotional pain
and patterns of reaction were not just historical; he was in the care of
mental health agencies and had been 'rejected' by his family on the
grounds that he was now a source of danger to them. From being a child
in danger he was now perceived as a dangerous person by his family. His
worries that his sister might be raped by Robbie Williams were seen not
as an indication of concern but a sign of madness. His use of medication
to deal with uncontrollable feelings and his inability to communicate
about problems, however, are almost certainly not just his tendency but
fit with an ongoing family pattern. It would be interesting to know more
about how his sisters and mother coped with distress; perhaps his
mother's solution was also to use medication. Thus, the family pattern
of avoiding difficult issues and feelings had arguably escalated to the
point where Jack, like his father before him, had to leave. Difficult
feelings in the family appear to be solved either by the use of
medication or exiting. A summary of some key features in the family
patterns is suggested opposite (see Figure 9.1). This analysis suggests
that it remains difficult for the members of Jack's family to look after
each other. It is not clear how his sisters are coping; they may have
been able to find sources of support outside of the family. This may be
more difficult for Jack because his fear of danger has extended from his
family to the outside world. However, most likely his sisters may also
be vulnerable and prone to cope in similar ways to Jack in the face of
major threats, losses or abandonments. In fact part of the family's
anger towards Jack may be because he is raising painful and difficult
memories which in effect

Integrative formulation in practice

209

Lack of comfort Self -medication Outbursts Rejection FAMILY

Talk is DANGEROUS

JACK

(mother & sisters) Lack of comfort Rely on yourself Self -medication
Outbursts Rejection

Figure 9.1 Family patterns, attachments and narratives

challenge the family style of forgetting, denying and dismissing
distressing events and feelings. Cultural contexts and narratives

Jack's case is clearly coloured by a number of important socio-cultural
factors. To start with, his family may share a common discourse about
the appropriate ways for men and women to express distress and receive
comfort. These expectations are often less gender differentiated for
infants but become increasingly so with approaching adolescence.
Typically, boys may be expected to restrain their displays of fear and
distress and to become more emotionally independent (Crawford and Unger,
2004). For many young men the process is complicated by the absence of a
father from whom they can learn masculine ways of expressing feelings.
In Jack's case his father was not only absent but had himself been a
source of distress and danger. Jack may have become increasingly
confused about how to express his feelings in a female household; in
this way the cultural imperatives may have aggravated the existing
reluctance to discuss feelings and needs in the family. Jack's family
would no doubt also be influenced by Italian cultural norms, for example
a greater acceptance of emotional expression but within the context of a
'macho' culture.

210

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

Consequently, Jack's feelings find an outlet indirectly through, for
example, seeing his father's face in the mirror. Psychiatric care may
feed into these family patterns by offering management mainly through
medication, thereby reinforcing the family's avoidance of feelings and
locating the cause of the problems in a medical/ organic discourse; Jack
is suffering from an 'illness' or 'psychotic disorder'. Jack is said to
be relatively uncommunicative with his carers and is not engaging in
therapy. However, he does comply with his medication which may indicate
that he has accepted the powerful and prevalent discourse of a mental
illness. This in turn will serve to reinforce the attachment problems
that he and his family are experiencing. Integration

One of the key features of an ANT approach is that the formulation is
based both on the content and the process of the interactional dynamics
and conversations in Jack's family. This requires that the therapist is
able to observe and participate in interactions in Jack's family.
Individual meetings with family members may offer some indication of the
family dynamics but a meeting with the family is also central to the
mechanisms of change. This would facilitate gaining information on which
to base a systemic formulation regarding their dynamics. The interaction
between the family and therapist importantly establishes a secure and
safe emotional base from which both the therapist and family members can
collaboratively engage in reformulating, supporting shift and change in
their co-constructed narratives. Systemic family therapy emphasises a
distinction between the content and process (relational patterns) in the
family which is paralleled in ANT which attends to the content and
process of their problematic narratives. Interpreting transcripts of
sessions serves as an aid to an integrative formulation. If other models
in this book had similar opportunity to access the process of therapy
some common interpretations might be revealed. However, even without
transcripts it is possible to attend to the indicators of defensive
processes in therapeutic conversations. The hypothetical conversation
between Jack and his therapist reveals some patterns in his narratives.
For example, Jack slips into the present tense: 'I couldn't help myself,
I can't sit and watch', indicating that he has become aroused and is
re-living the abuse (a marker of a pre-occupied strategy). In contrast
in describing the violence he says, 'We would normally start to cry
because you're seeing your mum and dad do that and that's normal to
cry'. Here he uses distancing language ('you, your') and says crying is
'normal' to disconnect himself from the painful feelings being aroused
(dismissive strategy). It is interesting to note that he has the
potential for using both these strategies in a more constructive manner
if he were able to integrate them by becoming more aware of how he
switches from one to the other since securely

Integrative formulation in practice

211

attached individuals are typically able to utilise both strategies in
balance. In effect he has access to both his cognitions and feelings,
and this can become a potential for growth. Perhaps Jack also has some
resilient qualities; staff 'like' Jack because he is able both to show
an interest in topics like music and at times also shows his feelings
and vulnerability. In Jack's case both his cognitions about music and
his feelings were at extremes some of the time on the unit. Familiarity
with the techniques for interpreting discourse markers indicating
attachment style as summarised earlier, including some training in AAI
analysis, would be a helpful future development for therapists using an
ANT approach. We do not know how Jack talks about his experiences and
current situation but it is possible that he has, as suggested earlier,
tried to cope by shutting down his feelings and trying to look after
other people's feelings. In attachment terms Jack is showing a mixed
strategy whereby his avoidant-dismissive style of coping is breaking
down and frightening, paranoid thoughts are intruding into his
consciousness. Possibly, for Jack to talk about his feelings and
experiences rather than shutting them down, will require considerable
reassurance and learning. In fact it may be that the pain of his
intrusive thoughts and feelings persuades him to even more extreme
avoidance through obliterating his feelings with drugs as his only
available solution. Implications for interventions

ANT therapy has many similarities to systemic therapy. It can be
conducted with the family and involve live supervision. In Jack's case
this might be difficult initially since the family may be anxious or
resistant to meeting together. A starting point might be to meet with
the women in the family and to explore their views of the problems and
attachment issues, including their relationship with Jack and with his
father. This might be complemented by individual work with Jack, as
illustrated in the earlier transcript. It would be helpful if these two
strands of therapy could be integrated. In our experience it can be very
helpful if the client's individual worker joins some of the family
meetings (obviously with the client's permission) and this can pave the
way to the whole family being seen together. The therapy is not
time-limited and follows a similar path to systemic family therapy in
holding family meetings at intervals of two to three weeks. Typically
trans-generation processes would be explored, for example the nature of
mother's own relationships with her parents, the patterns of parenting,
attachments and comfort, and how these might impact on current family
relationships. There may, of course be cases where family meetings are
not possible. An ANT approach could also be used in individual work with
Jack, although it would be important to keep the family context in mind
and discuss this during the sessions. It may also be feasible to have
some contact with family

212

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

members, for example by phone or e-mail, even when they are physically
separate. ANT encourages us to reflect on the attachments that Jack
might be making with the professionals with whom he is involved. Often
young people like Jack are involved with a succession of different
professionals with little recognition of how this prevents positive
attachments from developing. Secure relationships are essential for Jack
to be able to experiment with different ways of managing his attachment
needs through talking and sharing his feelings to help him face up to
the demons in his life. The context in which we practise A central
consideration of the ANT approach, and arguably for all models, is the
idea that formulation necessarily happens within social contexts (see
Figure 9.2). This shapes the process in two important ways. Firstly,
formulation is grounded in a variety of discourses or ideologies in
terms of how psychological problems are defined (e.g. as individual
deficits or symptoms of an illness). More generally the cultural context
regulates what is seen as 'normal', 'legitimate' and 'appropriate' forms
of thoughts, feelings and actions in contrast to what is deviant and not
acceptable. These cultural frames inevitably influence the activities of
therapists and counsellors since we are subject to laws and ethics of
the society in which we work, irrespective of whether we agree with
them. Secondly there are structural realities about which services are
available and how they are organised. In reality formulation must take
account of wider structural constraints, such as funding restrictions on
the types of treatments and number of sessions provided. For example,
child services typically have an upper age limit of 18 years before
young people are transitioned to adult services. In formulating about
young people we would be foolish not to take the implications of this
arbitrary cut-off into account. Figure 9.2 also helps to summarise the
process of formulating illustrated in the extract from the conversation
with Jack. In particular we can see the recursive dynamic process
whereby the therapist pays attention to the relationship in order to
pace and time the questions, gauging when Jack might be ready to hear a
new perspective or tolerate a submerged feeling to surface. We could
also consider how Jack might himself be formulating through this
process. Perhaps a pertinent example is Jack's response to the simple
question: THERAPIST: How old were you at the time? JACK: Er, I can only
remember it when I was, from when I was 5 or 6, yeah

I can't remember being any younger than that. Yeah I wouldn't have been
able to shout loud enough.

Integrative formulation in practice

213

CULTURAL CONTEXT Discourse: beliefs, expectations, social norms, views
of problems Structure: finance, available service, status, inequalities

FORMULATION

FORMULATION

INTERVENTION

THERAPEUTIC Therapist RELATIONSHIP Family Clinical agencies Professional
systems Work, educational contexts

Client Family Professional system Community Therapeutic relationship/s

REFORMULATION Feedback: As the relationship develops, client/s may trust
the therapist more, reveal more, feel better understood increased
collaborative, reflective formulation

Figure 9.2 A contextual dynamic view of integrative formulation

This allusion to his own vulnerability might lead us to consider that
Jack believes his therapist is interested in him, is asking relevant
questions and can be trusted with his feelings. This captures the
essence of the idea that therapy develops through providing a secure
base from which new ideas can be explored. Formulating in practice
guides the therapist to ask questions that provide a safe scaffold for
further information to be revealed so that a more meaningful narrative
can be co-constructed with Jack. The emotional tone in Jack's response
also suggests that he is ready to trust the therapist with his feelings
of vulnerability and is perhaps asking both for acknowledgement and some
comfort around the distress he felt as a child and may be
re-experiencing in the present conversation.

214

Rudi Dallos and Jacqui Stedmon

Summary In this chapter we have emphasised the idea of
formulation-as-a-process, formulating, and seeing how it is inextricably
linked in practice to the construction and maintenance of the
therapeutic relationship. We have illustrated what a dynamic view of
formulating looks like and the process of formulating 'in' action with
the client as well as 'on' action. Is this sufficient to offer a
framework for an integrative model? Our suggestion is that potentially
this is an important step in the direction of generating an overarching
integrative framework. By exploring the transcript of Jack and his
therapist in conversation we have suggested that the collaborative
process of therapy 'in' action necessary involves an integrative stance
that emphasises beliefs, feelings and meanings of the clients, a focus
on the nature of the interactions between the client/s and therapist and
consideration of the external factors influencing our client'/s, for
example their family context. It also emphasises a reflexive approach
with the therapist attending to her own beliefs, feelings and meanings
as the interview unfolds. We suggest that therapeutic formulation is
inevitably integrative in that all models draw to some extent on other
models in order to include these common factors. However, we can take a
further step in specifying how the different models can be linked
together to offer an integrative framework. This integration, as
discussed in the previous chapter, may be eclectic or a conceptual
synthesis. We have described ANT, an attempt at a conceptual
integration, and have emphasised that a significant contribution of this
model is to indicate how formulation at the relational/systemic level
can be combined with a more individually focused narrative and
attachment framework. ANT is just one example. Arguably different
combinations of models can be considered though we do argue that there
is an important conceptual difference between models which locate
problems within, as opposed to between, individuals. To be specific, we
suggest that integrative models need to contain systemic/relational
components combined with a choice of different intra-psychic approaches.
Key characteristics of integrative formulation • • • •

Formulation can be regarded as a fluid dynamic process which is best
conceptualised as a verb -- formulating. At the centre of this dynamic
process is the co-construction of the therapeutic relationship.
Formulating is a collaborative process and client/s and therapist
construct formulations jointly. Different therapeutic models can be seen
as contributing to this dynamic and collaborative process.

Integrative formulation in practice

•

215

An approach which draws on attachment, narrative and systemic models
(ANT) provides one possible model of how different approaches can
contribute to this over-arching integrative framework.

References Ainsworth, M.D.S. (1989) Attachment beyond infancy, American
Psychologist, 44: 709--716. Bowlby, J. (1969) Attachment and Loss,
vol.1, London: Hogarth Press. ------(1973) Attachment and Loss, vol. 2:
separation, anxiety and anger, London: Hogarth Press. ------(1988) A
Secure Base, London: Routledge. Bruner, J.S. (1990) Acts of Meaning,
Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press. Crawford, M. and Unger, R.
(2004) Women and Gender, New York: McGraw Hill. Crittenden, P. (1998)
'Truth, error, omission, distortion, and deception: the application of
attachment theory to the assessment and treatment of psychological
disorder' in M.C. Dollinger and L.F. DiLalla (eds) Assessment and
Intervention Across the Life Span, London: Lawrence Erlbaum. Dallos, R.
and Vetere, A. (2009) Systemic Therapy and Attachment Narratives:
Applications across Diverse Settings, London: Routledge. Habermas, T.
and Bluck, S. (2000) 'Getting a life: the emergence of the life story in
adolescence', Psychological Bulletin, 126(5): 748--769. Hillburn-Cobb,
C. (1998) 'Adolescent-parent attachments and family problemsolving
styles', Family Process 35: 57--82. Main, M., Kaplan, N. and Cassidy, J.
(1985) 'Security in infancy, childhood and adulthood: a move to the
level of representation' in I. Bretherton and E. Waters (eds) Growing
Points of Attachment Theory and Research, Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 50: (1--2) Serial No. 209. McAdams, D.P.
(1993) The Stories We Live By: Personal Myths and the Making of the
Self, New York: William Morrow. Rapley, M., Moncrieff, J. and Dillon, J.
(eds) (2011) De-medicalizing Misery, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Schon, D.A. (1983) The Reflective Practitioner, How Professionals Think
in Action, New York: Basic Books. Sluzki, C.S. (1992) 'Transformations:
a blueprint for narrative changes in therapy', Family Process, 31,
217--230. Stedmon, J. and Dallos, R. (eds) (2009) Reflective Practice in
Psychotherapy and Counselling, Maidenhead: Open University Press. Tomm,
K. (1988) 'Interventive interviewing: Part 3. Intending to ask circular,
strategic or reflexive questions', Family Process, 27, 1: 1--17.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978) Mind in Society, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press. White, M. and Epston, D. (1990) Narrative Means to Therapeutic
Ends, London: Norton.

Chapter 10

Using formulation in teams Lucy Johnstone

The literature on formulation generally assumes that it is a process
carried out in collaboration with individuals or families, and this is
how it is described and taught in textbooks and on training programmes.
However, recent years have seen a growing literature on the use of
formulation at a team level. Team formulation is the process of
facilitating a group or team of professionals to construct a shared
understanding of a service user's difficulties. Using formulation in
teamwork is recommended by a number of clinical psychology professional
documents such as the Health and Care Professions Council criteria
(Health Professions Council, 2009), the Clinical Psychology Leadership
Framework (Skinner and Toogood, 2010), the Accreditation through
Partnership handbook criteria for training courses (British
Psychological Society, 2010), and others. Team formulation is also
discussed in the Division of Clinical Psychology (DCP) 'Good practice
guidelines on the use of psychological formulation' (DCP, 2011). In this
chapter, I will summarise the current position in relation to practice
and research on team formulation, and illustrate this through a
hypothetical team formulation for Jack. I will then describe and discuss
some of the strategies, benefits and challenges of the team formulation
approach, based on my own experience of facilitating this kind of work
in a range of Adult Mental Health settings. I strongly believe that such
work needs to draw on a range of models in order to formulate at a
sufficiently sophisticated level. As such, team formulation can be a
powerful example of integrative formulation in practice (see chapters 8
and 9). This kind of approach is more familiar in Child and Adolescent
services, where systemic work is common. A version of team formulation
is a central feature of systemic practice (see chapter 4). In this,
family therapy teams discuss and develop formulations together and use
reflecting team conversations to share them with families. In addition,
some services hold regular network meetings in order to develop shared
formulations with other agencies. Where appropriate, I will indicate
some of the differences that may apply to team formulation work with a
child like Janet.

Using formulation in teams

217

Defining the team formulation approach In one of the few studies looking
at the practice of team formulation, Christofides et al. (2011) found
that clinical psychologists in a range of Adult Mental Health settings
reported a number of ways in which they attempted to introduce
formulation into their day-to-day work in multi-disciplinary teams. They
mainly described informal strategies such as using formulationbased
thinking to make suggestions in a variety of contexts including team
meetings, case presentations, ward rounds and staff training days; joint
working with clients; informal conversations about clients; staff
discussion groups about complex clients (often called 'reflective' or
'support' groups); supervision of team members; and in summary,
generally encouraging curiosity and reflectiveness and 'chipping in'
(the title of the paper) whenever they could. The term 'formulation' was
not always explicitly used, but this process was seen as a first step
towards introducing more structured formulation-based work: 'And we've
actually got to the point now, where it's become identified as
"formulation" and we are doing a team day in early September in a few
weeks' time, where they are actually saying "you do us a session on
formulation" ... stuff I've been doing very, very gently sort of round
the edges, now it's actually got a name' (p. 2). There are a few
descriptions in the literature of more formal and explicit ways of using
the team formulation approach, mainly implemented by clinical
psychologists and psychiatrists. They can be broadly divided as follows.
Co-constructing a team formulation in response to a particular request

Offering to help the team to think about someone who is presenting
challenges or seems 'stuck' can be valuable in its own right, and can
also serve as a way of familiarising staff with the approach as a first
step towards introducing regular formulation meetings for the whole
team. The facilitator (psychologist or other professional) might proceed
as follows: • • • • • • •

review the notes; meet with key staff in order to get a feel for the
current difficulties and the staff feelings and reactions; draw up a
tentative formulation; set up a meeting with the staff in order to get
feedback on the formulation; revise the formulation into an agreed
version; use the formulation to develop a shared intervention plan with
the staff; share an appropriately worded version of the formulation with
the service user, and incorporate his/her feedback into the plan.

218

Lucy Johnstone

Variations on this theme are described by Meaden and Van Marle (2008) in
Assertive Outreach; Walton (2011) in Adult services; Ingham (2011) in
Learning Disability; Dunn and Parry (1997) in CMHTs; Hewitt (2008) in a
rehabilitation service; Clarke (2008) on an adult inpatient unit; and
Wainwright and Bergin (2010) on an older adult inpatient ward.
Facilitating regular formulation meetings for the whole team

Models for facilitating formulation meetings for the whole team, usually
weekly, have been developed by Lake (2008) with community mental health
teams; Whomsley (2009) in Assertive Outreach; Down (Down 2010; Davies
2010) in a residential children's home; Kennedy (Kennedy et al., 2003;
Kennedy, 2008) in an inpatient unit; Davenport (2002), Summers (2006)
and Berry et al. (2009) in rehabilitation services; and Martindale
(2007) in an early intervention team. In some cases where the approach
was well embedded within the service, the aim was to provide a
formulation for every client (e.g. Kennedy et al., 2003; Whomsley, 2009;
Down, 2010). Most of these projects used designated timeslots of up to
90 minutes. A typical format would be: review background information and
reasons for referral; develop the formulation in discussion with the
team; outline possible interventions; write up and disseminate the
report afterwards. The facilitator's role is to reflect, summarise,
clarify, encourage creativity and free-thinking and ask questions, not
provide 'solutions'. Some of the clinicians drew from a core model,
often CBT (Kennedy, 2008; Ingham, 2011; Berry et al., 2009; Clarke,
2008) but sometimes psychodynamic (e.g. Davenport 2002; Martindale
2007). Others used a more integrative approach (e.g. Lake, 2008; Meaden
and van Marle, 2008). This is particularly likely to be the preferred
approach in work with young people, families and carers where
attachment, developmental and systemic issues are foremost in
clinicians' thinking (Down, 2010). Whomsley (2009) described the use of
different versions of the formulation for different aspects of clients'
care: engagement, risk, resources, moving on. Simple templates were
often used to guide the work (e.g. Lake, 2008; Clarke, 2008; Whomsley,
2009; Davies, 2010) and were reported to help embed a shared
understanding about formulation within a diverse staff group.
Integrating formulation into the work of the team and the service at
every level

Although this might be seen as the ultimate aim from a formulation
perspective, to date only one example exists: an ambitious project in an
older people's service in Tees Esk and Wear Valleys NHS Foundation Trust
(Dexter-Smith, 2010). Two hundred and sixty-five members of staff across

Using formulation in teams

219

five CMHTs, plus a young onset dementia team, care home liaison team,
and four inpatient units (functional and organic) serving a population
in the region of 107,600 people over 65 years of age, have been trained
to implement formulation at all stages of the care pathway. Formulations
are constructed with the help of a CBT-based diagram, supported by a
range of materials such as crib sheets for staff, accessible documents
for staff to complete with clients and families, a template to transfer
the formulation to the electronic record system, and so on. Family and
carers are sometimes invited to attend the formulation meetings -- a
decision that needs careful consideration of the pros and cons (Shirley,
2010). Psychology staff provide ongoing supervision to the teams.
Craven-Staines et al.'s evaluation (2010) makes it clear that although
the formulation training was received very positively, it has not been
easy to implement such a large-scale culture change. What do we know
about the benefits of team formulation? As is the case with individual
formulation, this is an under-researched area. However, a small number
of clinical reports, audits and qualitative studies suggest that the
team approach can have benefits in addition to those attributed to the
more traditional use of formulation with individuals such as clarifying
hypotheses, informing the intervention, predicting difficulties and so
on (see chapter 1). These benefits are (DCP, 2011): • • • • • • • • • •
• • • • • • •

achieving a consistent team approach to intervention; helping team,
service user and carers to work together; gathering key information in
one place; generating new ways of thinking; dealing with core issues
(not just crisis management); understanding attachment styles in
relation to the service as a whole; supporting each other with service
users who are perceived as complex and challenging; drawing on and
valuing the expertise of all team members; challenging unfounded 'myths'
or beliefs about service users; reducing negative staff perceptions of
service users; processing staff counter-transference reactions; helping
staff to manage risk; minimising disagreement and blame within the team;
increasing team understanding, empathy and reflectiveness; raising staff
morale; conveying meta-messages to staff about hope for positive change;
facilitating culture change in teams and organisations.

220

Lucy Johnstone

(This list is based on Summers, 2006; Clarke, 2008; Lake, 2008; Kennedy
et al., 2003; Onyett, 2007; Hewitt, 2008; Kennedy, 2009; Whomsley, 2009;
Berry et al., 2009; Craven-Staines et al., 2010; Wainwright and Bergin,
2010; Walton, 2011; Christofides et al., 2011.) Similar benefits in
terms of clarifying team communications and assumptions and revealing
personal positions and prejudices have been noted by systemic family
therapists (Palazzoli et al., 1980). The clinical psychologists who were
interviewed in Christofides et al. (2011) qualitative study were very
enthusiastic about their use of team formulation, describing it as 'One
of the most powerful tools we have.' They felt that without it, teams
were 'fumbling in the dark ... because if there's no theory or structure
to hang an understanding on then they're floundering with an
intervention, not really knowing why it's not working' (2011: 7). Hood
et al. (2013) carried out a follow-up study in which the
non-psychologist staff members in these teams were interviewed, and
found that they fully shared such views: '\[Formulation\] really, really
was useful and I think just to have the head space to really think about
what was happening'; 'It really should be a bit more about formulation,
formulation, formulation' (2009: 9--10). Similarly appreciative
responses were made in audits and service evaluations: 'One of the most
productive things on the ward'; 'Makes me more tolerant, more patient,
increases empathy'; 'Afterwards the problems seemed understandable,
something we could start to address' (Summers 2006: 342). Wainwright and
Bergin's (2010) evaluation also suggested that staff empathy,
understanding and tolerance were increased. Kennedy, Smalley and
Harris's audit found 'entirely positive outcomes on all questions asked
of all stakeholder groups' (2003: 23), including clients.
Formulation-based consultations in a residential home for adolescents
were associated with a reduction in staff sickness and overall number of
significant incidents, including fewer calls to the police and charges
of criminal damage. Staff comments included: 'Has enabled a greater
understanding of the past experiences of the children's lives and how
these experiences affect their behaviour and emotional well being'
(Down, 2010: 3). Promising qualitative results are also emerging from
the project in Tees Esk and Wear (above). Staff describe a sense of
emotional containment from having a framework that helps them make sense
of the most distressing and challenging client presentations. A close
look at individual outcomes has identified a number of complex
situations where staff and managers were caught up in very emotive,
resource-draining situations which changed once the formulation helped
to introduce understanding and a potential way forward (Dexter-Smith,
2012, personal communication). The list of proposed benefits in the DCP
Guidelines receives some additional validation from an audit of the team
formulation work of 3 psychologists based in adult mental health
inpatient and CMHT settings (Hollingworth and Johnstone, 2013). The
researcher re-phrased the suggested benefits into

Using formulation in teams

221

questions and asked MDT members to rate their experience of team
formulation meetings in relation to each item. Using a scale of 1 (very
unhelpful) to 7 (very helpful), staff rated team formulation as helpful
or very helpful across all areas assessed. All of the 22 participants
felt that the meetings had helped to develop a shared team understanding
of a client's problems, strengths and difficulties; draw on the
knowledge and skills from different professional backgrounds; generate
new ideas about working with the client; develop an intervention plan;
and improve risk management. They made comments such as 'Useful in
planning a way forward which has given the client and professionals a
sense of hope for future recovery'. Since the DCP list of benefits
overlaps with the general characteristics of good teamwork, which
include having clear objectives, involving all members in team
activities, reviewing performance regularly, and supporting creativity
and innovation (Borrill and West, 2002), it might reasonably be assumed
that formulation meetings contribute to more effective teamwork across
the board. The existing studies have also identified challenges to the
team formulation approach. Psychologists described the informal team
formulation role as one which was hard to define or document
(Christofides et al., 2011). Non-psychologist staff often lacked the
confidence to develop their own formulation work, even after training
(Craven-Staines et al., 2010) implying the need for ongoing facilitation
and supervision. Charlesworth (2010) reported that facing the full and
often very distressing reality of clients' circumstances can leave staff
feeling helpless and overwhelmed. There is a risk that the implications
of the formulation meeting will not be followed through in the
intervention (Wainwright and Bergin, 2010); a considerable amount of
further input may be necessary to ensure that plans for complex clients
remain consistent in the face of ongoing daily pressures. There is also
the ever-present danger that formulation time will be eroded by other
apparently more urgent crises and demands. Achieving high enough
attendance to make the discussions representative and meaningful is
particularly hard with shiftwork patterns in residential or inpatient
settings (Down, 2010). Facilitating a formulation meeting can be
challenging; the facilitator will need to draw on a wide range of
skills, deal with complex group dynamics, and do a lot of 'thinking on
your feet' (Shirley, 2010). The approach may be resisted by staff unless
introduced with sensitivity (Christofides et al., 2011; Craven-Staines
et al., 2010), and to be effective 'it must be supported by influential
members of the team' (Lake, 2008: 23). In summary, 'Formulation may have
most to offer if embedded as the core business of the unit, with robust
links to patient care planning and to staff training' (Summers, 2006:
343). Conflict with the predominant medical model is another potential
area of difficulty. This issue will be discussed in more detail below.
Clearly, this is a promising approach which deserves further
investigation. For clinicians such as clinical psychologists with a
limited amount of input into teams, it seems to be an effective way of
using a scarce resource to contribute to

222

Lucy Johnstone

the care of service users with complex needs and to enhance the
psychological thinking of the whole team (Christofides et al., 2011;
Berry, 2007). If the team formulation approach is to be adopted more
widely, it is obviously important to document specific outcomes in terms
such as reduction in medication use, shorter admissions, lower staff
sickness rates, increased service user recovery rates, better
identification and management of risks and so on. This is a gap that
urgently needs filling. A tentative team formulation for Jack can serve
as a practical illustration of the implementation of this approach.
Jack: a tentative team formulation The same caveats apply here as in the
other chapters; we do not know much about how mental health
professionals experienced their work with Jack. For this reason, the
example of a team formulation below is very hypothetical. I have assumed
that the formulation meeting on the ward included two members of the
community mental health team in order to achieve consistency of approach
across both settings. These are Jack's care co-ordinator, a psychiatric
nurse, plus a support worker who knows Jack well. I have also assumed
that all the staff are familiar with Jack's history, and that with
facilitation from his psychologist, they have jointly drawn up this
understanding of his difficulties: Jack's difficulties can be understood
in the light of the fragmentation and decline of his family following
his parents' divorce, coupled with his experience of violence and abuse.
He witnessed and was a victim of his father's violence to the whole
family, and was sexually abused as a teenager. All of these experiences
will have been extremely traumatic, and are made worse by the fact that
such high expectations were placed on Jack as a gifted and popular child
and the inheritor of the family business. It seems that he has not been
able to work through his mixed feelings about his father -- someone he
both misses and hates -- and what this means for his own development as
a man. Nor has he yet been able to disclose any details about the sexual
abuse. He seems to be caught in a cycle where he is either abused or
abusive, as demonstrated in the family arguments. He may use drink as
both an escape and a means of self-punishment, and in this way is in
danger of repeating the more damaging aspects of his father's life.
Jack's current presentation is perhaps a consequence of the overwhelming
nature of these life events and the feelings of fear, betrayal, anger,
guilt, shame and humiliation that they are likely to have evoked. His
'high' moods perhaps represent an escape from his difficulties, although
at times he lapses back into despair. His unusual beliefs about Robbie
Williams and the royalties owing to him may represent his longing for
success and the regaining of everything that life has unjustly taken
from him.

Using formulation in teams

223

Jack appears to have mixed feelings about his status as a 'mental
patient'. On the one hand, this devalued role is an even bigger decline
from the bright future that was predicted for him, and perhaps for this
reason he angrily rejects his various diagnoses. Instead of providing
for his family in his father's absence, Jack is now in the position of
needing care himself, something he finds hard to accept -- which may
explain the difficulty in engaging with him. Admission to hospital is a
further step in a process that is likely to reinforce his feelings of
being a flawed and hopeless failure. On the other hand, he is compliant
with medication and has settled on the ward. There is a risk that the
alternative 'career' and escape from the challenges of the outside world
offered by the psychiatric services may come to seem like a solution to
his difficulties. We should not underestimate the very real financial
and employment challenges that face him and the impact these may have on
his self-esteem and sense of identity. Staff find Jack likeable but also
frustrating. It is hard to get past his constant talk about music and
royalties, and he has not really been able to make use of sessions with
the clinical psychologist. It is easy to be sympathetic to his problems,
but there is a feeling that we are not really helping him to move on,
which has led to some differences of opinion about whether and when he
should be discharged. In addition, staff have found it difficult to deal
with the constant anxious phone calls from his sisters and mother. It is
possible that some of the staff feelings reflect Jack's own dilemmas --
stuck between the community and the hospital, unable either to work on
the underlying traumas or to put them behind him, and torn between his
own struggles and the needs of the family for whom he feels so
responsible. It is important that we plan his discharge in a way that
does not feel to him like a repeat of the rejection by his family, when
his mother kicked him out. On the positive side, Jack is a young man
with many strengths and abilities. He enjoys the weekly music group on
the ward, where he has been able to contribute constructively and make
some friends. He relates well to Shabnam, his CPN, and Tony, his support
worker, who has been investigating activities and accommodation options.
He may feel that Tony's role makes him less of a threat, in contrast to
staff who, like other powerful adults in his life, may have the means to
hurt or control him. At times it is possible to distract him from his
pre-occupation with Robbie Williams and encourage him to make short
outings to local parks and cafes. He is lively, intelligent and full of
ideas, even if they are not always realistic, and he can be very good
company. Comment on the team formulation

It can be seen that the team formulation draws from a number of models
that have been presented in this book. These include core beliefs (CBT);
family relationships and repeated cycles of rejection (systemic);
symbolic meanings

224

Lucy Johnstone

and transference/counter-transference (psychodynamic); and the social
position and messages of the 'mental patient' role (narrative and social
inequalities.) It also draws heavily on two bodies of knowledge that
inform much current practice: attachment theory and trauma models. The
formulation attempts to integrate these various models and theories
through their personal meaning to Jack (see chapters 8 and 9.)
Intervention plan based on the team formulation Sufficient time needs to
be reserved during the meeting and/or in subsequent meetings to draw out
the implications for intervention. This is a possible plan that the team
might draw up based on the above team formulation: • •

•

•

•

•

Write a letter to Jack summarising our thoughts and get his feedback.
Reinforce the message that he needs to work actively alongside us in
order to recover. The service needs to try to provide the consistent
secure attachments that are currently missing in Jack's life. At present
the ward is his main base and it is important that he withdraws in
planned stages. Dr Aziz will meet Jack to negotiate a discharge date in
2--3 weeks with increasing periods of leave leading up to it. Shabnam
will visit him on the ward weekly during this period. Jack will need a
consistent core group to work with him and create a sense of trust and
safety in his chaotic life. This will consist of Dr Robinson (community
team consultant) in liaison with Dr Aziz (inpatient consultant), Shabnam
(CPN), and Tony (support worker). Caroline (clinical psychologist) has
ended her sessions with Jack by mutual agreement, but will arrange and
facilitate regular formulation meetings with the core staff group. Tony
has an important part to play as an older man who can provide a caring
role model, in contrast to Jack's father and boss. Jack seems able to
use this kind of low-key supportive relationship very well. Tony is
helping Jack to find ways in which he can build on his interest in
music, structure his days and so on. Jack may be interested in joining a
self-help support group of service users who have had similar
experiences. In preparation for discharge, Dr Robinson and Shabnam will
invite Jack's family to a meeting to hear their views, try and contain
their anxieties, and if possible re-build their relationship with Jack.
This will need to be done very slowly and carefully, given the high
degree of tension in the family. Rosie (social worker) will advise as to
whether they are receiving the full range of benefits. Any help that can
be offered with their finances is likely to relieve the stress on Jack.
Shabnam will support Jack by focusing on his goals and strengths and
building his self-confidence.

Using formulation in teams

• •

•

•

225

Medication does not appear to be reducing Jack's unusual beliefs, but he
says it calms him down and so he will continue on the same low dose.
Jack is adamant that he does not suffer from 'paranoia' or 'delusional
disorder', and his strong feelings about this are creating a barrier to
working with the team. The formulation suggests that we can understand
his difficulties and beliefs as a response to trauma, which may be more
acceptable to him. Dr Aziz will discuss this with him. The general
approach to Jack's unusual beliefs will be to avoid challenging them
directly, although we will be open about the fact that we do not share
them. Instead, we will discuss the possible meanings behind the beliefs
-- for example, does he feel that the world is an unsafe place? How can
we make it feel safer for him? What would the royalties enable him to
do, and how can he take small steps towards those goals rather than just
waiting for a cheque to arrive? And so on. We recognise that Jack is not
yet ready to work on his trauma and abuse memories, but we hope that
this may change once he feels more stable and secure and has built up
some self-confidence and structure in his life. At that time we will ask
him whether he wishes to be referred back to Caroline. NB Shabnam will
check that Jack is aware that if he discloses identifying information
about his abuser, we will need to inform the child protection team.

Team formulation letter to Jack In team formulations the main client is
often, in effect, the team, who are asking for support with their own
feelings and 'stuckness'. As in supervision, staff need to be able to be
honest and open about their feelings but it will not necessarily be
helpful or professional to share the entirety of the resulting
formulation directly with the service user. In the above example, it
would be upsetting for Jack to realise that some of the staff feel
frustrated to the point of wanting to discharge him straight away,
although from the team perspective these reactions need to be included
so that they can be worked with and not simply acted out. At the same
time, it is not comfortable to 'feel as if the team are talking behind
the client's back' (Whomsley, 2009; 117). For these reasons, careful
consideration needs to be given to which aspects of the formulation will
be shared with the client and how this is to be done. One possibility is
to inform the service user that when their care plan has been reviewed,
the team will be sharing their thoughts and ideas with him/her in a
letter and asking for feedback. The content and tone of the letter also
needs to be guided by the formulation; for example, in Jack's case,
direct reference to sexual abuse may feel too exposing or intrusive at
this point. The letter might look something like this:

226

Lucy Johnstone

Dear Jack, As you know, now that you have been in hospital for a while,
the team has met to discuss how we understand your difficulties and how
we can best help you. We would like to share our thoughts so far, and we
would very much appreciate your feedback. We know that at school you
were seen as talented and popular. Life seemed to be full of promise,
and you probably assumed that one day you would take over your father's
business. Unfortunately, things started going badly wrong when the
business ran into trouble. This led to a chain of events including your
father's drinking and violence, your parents' divorce and the family's
forced move to Swindon. You still miss your father, despite his
behaviour, and you are deeply concerned about your family's well-being
and the struggle to survive ﬁnancially. It is not surprising that you
found it hard to do your best at school, and that you took refuge in
drug use and alcohol. However, this seems to have led to so many
arguments that your mother threw you out. At this point you must have
felt that you had lost everything. You were given a diagnosis of
depression, but perhaps this also stands for despair, anger, guilt and a
sense of failure as well. Just as life started to improve a bit, your
mother developed serious health problems. We wonder if this seemed like
the ﬁnal straw. It was around this time that you became very worried
about Robbie Williams and the money that you believe he owes you. As you
know, our view is that this is very unlikely to be true. At the same
time we appreciate that given everything you have been through, it is
understandable that you have been left with a feeling that the world is
unsafe, and that you have been unjustly deprived of what is owing to
you. Many people who have been through traumatic events develop similar
kinds of fears and beliefs. Perhaps this kind of explanation might make
more sense to you than a diagnosis. We have the impression that it is
very hard for you to face all the painful feelings and memories of the
last 15 years. In particular, we are aware that you had some very
distressing experiences as a teenager which you have not yet been able
to talk about. Most people ﬁnd that they need to be living reasonably
stable lives and to have trusting relationships with the professionals
and the team before they are able to re-visit such events and eventually
come to terms with them. You and Caroline have agreed that you are not
yet ready to do this work, and we respect this decision. In the
meantime, we think it is very important that you try to achieve some
structure and stability in your life. We would like to help you plan for
life after you leave hospital. This might include social activities and
taking up some of your musical activities again. We also wonder if it
would be a good idea to arrange some meetings with your family and try
to overcome some of the tensions in your relationships with them.

Using formulation in teams

227

Because of all the ups and downs in your life, we think it is very
important that we can provide some consistency and continuity. You know
your core team, Dr Robinson, Shabnam and Tony, quite well now and you
also know the staff on Juniper Ward. We all want to support you as best
we can while you re-build your life. This will take determination and
persistence on your part as well as on ours, but you have many gifts and
strengths and we are conﬁdent you can do it.

Best wishes, Shabnam and the team Reflection on the team formulation and
intervention plan It may be objected that this process simply describes
good practice, and that much of it happens anyway through the CPA (Care
Plan Approach) process, whereby the care co-ordinator takes
responsibility for summarising and overseeing the delivery of the
treatment package. To some extent this is true. However, there are many
traps for a team that does not base their work on the crucial first step
of an explicitly shared understanding of a service user's difficulties,
based in psychological theory. In Jack's case these traps might be:
'Splitting' in the team, as half of the staff become fed up with him
while the other half is tempted to try and 'rescue' him (Dunn and Parry,
1997; Meaden and Van Marle, 2008; Walton, 2011). If the former dynamic
wins, Jack may be abruptly discharged -- effectively thrown off the ward
in the same way as he was thrown out of home. He will thus have chalked
up another devastating rejection. If the latter wins, then it may become
too easy for him to slide into a 'mental patient' role and abdicate
responsibility for himself. Medicalising of Jack's difficulties -- an
ongoing risk in any mental health setting (see below for further
discussion of this issue). If there is no coherent psychological
understanding of Jack's core difficulties and he does not seem to
'improve' sufficiently quickly, additional diagnoses may be suggested,
along with more powerful medications. He will then be well on the way to
becoming a long-term psychiatric patient, and probably one at war with
the team because he disputes his diagnosis -- which in turn may lead to
a more coercive approach that increases his distrust and may be
experienced as re-abuse. Less dramatically, Jack may simply be offered a
series of interventions which, while well-intentioned, are not part of a
coherent formulation-based package and therefore do not address his
central difficulties in a way that will help him to make progress. We
might then see this kind of pattern: •

Problem: the medication has not reduced Jack's delusional beliefs.
Solution: Increase the dose and/or try different medications. This
pattern can continue for years.

228

Lucy Johnstone

•

Problem: Jack has started drinking again. Solution: refer him to the
drug and alcohol service. However, if this new team does not have a
shared understanding of why Jack is drinking, he is unlikely to be able
to stop, and the only effect will be to reduce the consistency of the
approach by introducing yet more professionals into his life. Problem:
Jack says he is too afraid of Robbie's minders to leave the house.
Solution: ask the occupational therapist to do a graded exposure
programme, i.e. taking gradual steps towards going to the shops.
Unfortunately, if the nature and meaning of his core fears is not
understood, Jack will not feel able to put these skills into practice.

•

Typically, the lack of an explicit and shared psychological formulation
leads to an accumulation of diagnoses, medications and unsuccessful
interventions delivered by a growing army of professionals, while Jack
becomes more and more entrenched in the psychiatric system and both he
and staff gradually lose hope for his recovery. The way out of this trap
is not complicated -- none of the interventions suggested by the team
formulation is beyond the professionals' skills -- but it is unlikely to
happen without the crucial first step in place. The moral is that
instead of the routine psychiatric procedure of: Problem

Solution

We need: Problem

Formulation

Solution

The team formulation approach is likely to be less controversial in the
child primary care service attended by Janet. Typically the culture is
more therapeutically-based in such settings, with the psychiatrists and
other staff often having further training in family therapy. Joint
working is routine, and clinicians tend to think in terms of
developmental stages and systemic perspectives, although labels like
'conduct disorder' may be used. The debate about the validity of
diagnoses such as 'ADHD' has been discussed at length (Timimi, 2005).
Chapter 4 describes the kind of systemic formulation that might be
developed for Janet within the team working with her. Essential
characteristics of a team formulation As with individual formulation,
there is no prescribed method for developing a team formulation; some of
the different models have been described and referenced above. As
discussed in chapter 8, the DCP (2011) checklist of good practice argues
for an integrative approach based on personal meaning as the starting
point for all formulations, even if simple or single-model versions are

Using formulation in teams

229

the most appropriate for particular circumstances. The kinds of
difficulties that are presented to mental health teams are by definition
extremely complex, and formulations are unlikely to be sufficiently
sophisticated if based on one model only. My personal checklist of
aspects that should also be included in every team formulation is as
follows. Transference and counter-transference between service user and
team

'Transference' refers to feelings derived from early relationships which
may be re-played in the present in relation to carers and others, and
'countertransference' reactions refer to carers' responses (see chapter
3). Transference and counter-transference reactions run riot in all
mental health settings, as a number of team formulation studies have
noted. If, as is usually the case, there is no opportunity to understand
and process these feelings, they may lead to 'staff re-enacting
punitive, withholding or abusive roles in relation to enraged,
overwhelmed or helpless clients ... The team can be split, with mistrust
and misunderstanding between colleagues' (Dunn and Parry, 1997: 20).
'Staff may inadvertently re-enact early patterns of abuse and become
enmeshed in unhealthy, destructive interactions' (Meaden and van Marle,
2008: 44). (A similar focus on counter-transference is encouraged by
Davenport, 2002; Martindale, 2007 and Lake, 2008). In Jack's case, we
hypothesised that he feared and distrusted professionals in the same way
that he feared his father (and perhaps the man who abused him). We also
guessed that staff reactions to Jack reflected his own feelings and
dilemmas. We tried to anticipate and avoid the 'transference trap'
whereby staff might end up re-creating the kind of relationships that
brought Jack into services in the first place. An attachment perspective
on the way the client uses/ interacts with the psychiatric service as a
whole

Although attachment theory has been extremely influential ever since its
development in the 1960s, surprisingly little has been written about the
kinds of attachments that service users develop towards teams and
services (Adshead, 1998; Ma, 2007). Nevertheless, it is clear that such
patterns often echo the relationships with early caregivers (e.g. Dunn
and Parry, 1997; Whomsley, 2009). We hypothesised that Jack was, at some
level, seeking from the service the kind of consistent attachments that
his family were unable to provide, but that his fear and distrust
created an anxious-ambivalent style of relating which made it hard for
him to engage, and which risked splitting the team. In order to be able
to offer Jack a different kind of attachment experience within services,
staff themselves need to feel secure and contained -- something which is
difficult to achieve in a typical clinical

230

Lucy Johnstone

environment of constant re-organisation and upheaval. Team formulation
can promote a sense of containment and mutual support. Psychological
framing of medical interventions

Psychologists in particular are inclined to believe that decisions about
medication, admission and so on are beyond their remit. Whether or not
this is true, it is certainly the case that such interventions have
psychological meanings and effects which need formulating along with
other aspects of the care package. For Jack, medication may represent a
hope that an outside agent will 'make me better' and/or it may be seen
as a passport to the safety of the psychiatric system. (See Martindale,
2007 for further discussion of the subjective meanings of medication.)
If he reaches the point of wishing to work on the trauma, it may impede
access to his feelings. Other medical decisions -- giving a diagnosis,
admitting someone to hospital, and so on -- also have psychological
impacts and meanings that need to be included in the formulation.
Similar considerations apply in relation to the growing tendency to
prescribe medication to children, especially those who are said to
display symptoms of 'ADHD'. In addition to the physical effects, this
can convey unhelpful messages about failure, inadequacy, abnormality and
the location of the problem within the child, diverting attention from
more systemic interventions. Psychological framing of 'symptoms'
including 'psychosis'

The biomedical model of psychiatry assumes that certain categories of
experience, including 'delusions' and hallucinations, should be seen as
'symptoms' of an underlying illness. A psychiatric formulation of Jack
might therefore take the form of 'schizophrenia triggered by the stress
of family ill-health'. In contrast, as described in the DCP Guidelines,
psychologists see such experiences as meaningful, although not
necessarily immediately understandable, in the context of the person's
life (DCP, 2011: 16--17). Jack's formulation therefore describes his
experiences in non-medical terms (e.g. 'unusual beliefs') and
hypothesises about their personal significance to him. Although
controversial in AMH settings, this kind of understanding would be
common in child and adolescent services when encountering problems such
as those presented by Janet. Awareness of social factors, such as class,
gender, housing, employment etc

It is too often taken for granted that service users and their families
will be poor, unemployed, living in inadequate housing and so on, all of
which are

Using formulation in teams

231

very significant stressors in their own right. Moreover, poverty and its
consequences may be experienced as a powerful sense of unworthiness,
exclusion and stigma (see chapter 6). Jack's formulation attempts to
remind the team of these very real difficulties and their likely impact
on Jack. Influence of the 'mental patient' role

In my view, this is a central but usually overlooked aspect of the
formulation for any service user. Giving someone a psychiatric diagnosis
is a very powerful act that may shape their entire life. Entry into the
'sick role' also conveys strong messages about lack of responsibility
and agency (Johnstone, 2000, chapter 3). These messages nearly always
interact unhelpfully with the service user's existing difficulties. In
Jack's case we can see that he risks falling into the very common trap
in which the mixed benefits of a psychiatric career (provision of
accommodation, structure, social contact and support coupled with escape
from expectations and responsibility) may be chosen, consciously or
unconsciously, as a false solution to the overwhelming challenges (both
internal and external) that he faces. The letter to Jack attempts to
balance these medical messages with a clear statement that recovery
depends on all parties working together. Children of Janet's age are
unlikely to be referred for residential treatment, although such
facilities do exist. However, it is still important to be aware of the
effect of identifying one person in the family as 'the problem'. Family
therapists are very sensitive to this kind of dilemma (see chapter 4).
Last but certainly not least is an aspect that is receiving an
increasing amount of attention in theory and practice, and which applies
to individual and team formulations across the specialties; the possible
role of trauma and abuse. Possible role of trauma and abuse

A growing body of research suggests that a history of trauma and abuse
is associated with all types of mental health problems, not forgetting
psychosis, which would include the kind of experiences that Jack
reported. Up to 85 per cent of people with a diagnosis of psychosis
report a history of trauma, broadly defined to include sexual and
physical abuse, witnessing or being subjected to domestic violence,
emotional neglect, and bullying (Read et al., 2005; Larkin and Morrison,
2006; Read and Bentall, 2012). This appears to be a causal link: there
is evidence of a dose-dependent relationship between the severity,
number, and number of types of traumatic episodes, and the likelihood of
psychosis. People abused as children are 9.3 times more likely to
develop psychosis; the risk rises to 48 times for the severest abuse
(Janssen et al., 2004); people who have experienced 3 kinds of abuse are
18 times more likely to be psychotic; with 5 types of abuse, the risk
rises

232

Lucy Johnstone

to 193 times (Shevlin et al., 2007). The relationship holds in
prospective studies and after controlling for gender, ethnicity,
education, substance abuse, etc. In addition, there is some evidence
linking particular kinds of abuse with particular 'symptoms' (for
example, child sexual abuse seems to be a stronger risk factor for
hearing voices than child physical abuse). It has been noted that the
content of unusual beliefs is often closely related to actual
experiences of abuse (Read et al., 2005). These are shocking figures,
and raise profound questions about how professionals have managed to be
unaware of the epidemic of trauma in our midst. They also raise very
fundamental questions about the role of psychiatry and the biomedical
model on which it is based (Read and Bentall, 2012). How much sense does
it make to treat people as though they were suffering primarily from
illnesses with biological causes, rather than traumas with psychological
effects? There is growing evidence that the experiences that service
users report (unusual beliefs, distressing voices etc) are, in many
cases, a reaction to the abuses they have been subjected to. There is
the abuse, and there are the responses to the abuse. There is no
additional 'psychosis' that needs explaining. (Johnstone, 2011: 106) The
implication is that we need a paradigm shift in our model of mental
health problems, one that is based on the accumulating evidence about
the effects of trauma on the mind and body (see Dillon et al., 2012 for
a summary). For reasons of space, I will simply note here that
formulation in any mental health presentation, child or adult,
individual or team, should be traumainformed. If there is a known
history of trauma, the presenting difficulties should be considered as
possible trauma effects. If the formulation does not seem to account for
the difficulties, trauma (perhaps undisclosed) should be the first
consideration as a candidate to fill the gap. Clinicians in child and
adolescent services will be aware of the possibility of developmental
trauma, as we saw in Janet's case, and are on the whole less likely to
reach for a medical explanation of distress. This awareness tends to be
lost by the time someone reaches adult services. Even where there is a
known history of trauma, it may be months or years before a service user
is ready to work on these issues. In such cases, one of the central
purposes of the formulation is to provide a framework for staff that
explains the need for supportive waiting, and thus reduces the risk of
increasingly controlling medical interventions in the meantime. This is
certainly a risk in Jack's case. We can easily see how compulsory
medication injected into his buttocks would be experienced as a repeat
of earlier abuse. Such re-enactments are very common in psychiatry.
Another essential consideration in team formulations is therefore
acknowledgement of the possible re-traumatising role of services.

Using formulation in teams

233

Possible re-traumatising role of services

In training, I illustrate this process through a 'One-size-fits-all
formulation for long-term service users' which looks like this: Service
user X has unmet attachment needs and unresolved trauma from their early
life. X tries to meet these through the psychiatric services, but fails,
since services are not set up to do this. Still needy, but unable to
achieve enough emotional security to move on, X ends up trading
'symptoms' for whatever psychiatric care is on offer. Staff are
initially sympathetic but become increasingly frustrated at X's lack of
progress. The resulting dynamic may end up repeating X's early
experiences of neglect, rejection or abuse. Both parties become stuck,
frustrated and demoralised in this vicious circle. Interestingly, no
group of staff has ever disputed the accuracy of this all-purpose
formulation. On the contrary, it is always greeted with rueful
recognition. In fact research shows that psychiatric interventions are
frequently traumatising, although the response is to suggest therapy for
this iatrogenic PTSD rather than abandon the 'treatments' that have
caused it (Lu et al., 2011). As already noted, we can see how such a
process might be played out in relation to Jack in the form of
rejections and coercive interventions from the service. He is likely to
experience this as repeated abuses by powerful people who are not able
to see his real needs. Perhaps his suspicion of professionals is
justified, despite the fact that each individual staff member is
genuinely trying to help. This cycle of re-traumatisation is not an
individual problem but a systemic one, the inevitable result of basing a
service on fundamentally false principles, in which service users are
seen as 'patients with illnesses' rather than 'people with problems'. I
have discussed the damaging consequences in more depth elsewhere
(Johnstone, 2000). For the purposes of team formulation, we can note
that this is a sensitive area, best approached from the assumption that
all staff are doing their best within a system that is not suited to
their or the service users' needs. The staff in the formulation meeting
are likely to be those who are most open to a change in practice and in
the strongest position to minimise or undo the damage. Like service
users, they need support and new ways of looking at things, not blame.
The team formulation for Jack tries to anticipate and avoid the common
trap of re-traumatisation. Team formulation in practice As already
discussed, evaluations suggest that team members value formulation
highly. The approach has the advantage of being both simple and complex.
At

234

Lucy Johnstone

one level, formulating is something that we all do as human beings; we
try to make sense of people's relationships, feelings, behaviours and
motives. This makes it very easy for staff of all levels of training and
experience to contribute to a team formulation meeting. There is no such
thing as a 'wrong guess', and the hunches of a newly arrived student or
support worker are likely to be at least as valuable as the opinions of
the highest-status staff. All professionals are implicitly formulating
in their work, and the process is perhaps most acceptable to them if
described as a more explicit, structured and shared version of what they
are doing already. At another level, pulling together the complex
mixture of information, feelings and intuitions into a coherent,
integrated, theory-based narrative that is acceptable to staff and
service user is a sophisticated and demanding task that may well end up
falling to the psychologist, although it is desirable to share this
round the team as people gain in confidence. Useful concepts in team
formulation

I have found it helpful to introduce the concept of formulation to teams
in low-key training sessions, using practice examples. I have also found
it useful to introduce certain key concepts and ideas to the team so
that they become part of the common language which can be drawn upon
during formulation meetings. My own favourites are: • • • • • • • • • •

Parallel process (how staff reactions reflect the service user's
problems). Transference/counter-transference. Symbolic meanings
(especially in psychosis). Cycles of re-victimisation. Splitting
(polarisation of staff attitudes). Attachment styles.
Rescuer/Persecutor/Victim triangle (a concept from Transactional
Analysis; e.g. Lapworth and Sills, 2011.) Core beliefs/schemas (see
chapter 2). 'Reciprocal roles (from cognitive analytic therapy:
e.g. Ryle and Kerr, 2002). 'Sick role' messages.

The first five concepts derive from psychodynamic theory, and are
discussed further in chapter 3 as well as in introductory textbooks
(e.g. Malan, 1995; Bateman et al., 2010). Facilitating a formulation
meeting

Facilitating a team formulation meeting is, like formulation itself,
both simple and complex, exciting and demanding. It is much easier to
construct

Using formulation in teams

235

a formulation as a group than as an individual. Drawing on the ideas of
the whole team, a broad outline can usually be generated in 15--20
minutes. It is the process aspects of the meeting that may need most
attention. The team will bring to the meeting not only their thoughts
and information, but their feelings as well. Since these emotions
reflect those of the service user, compounded by the inevitable
challenges of working in the psychiatric system, they can be very
powerful. It means that a team formulation meeting can have a very
different flavour to that of a routine care planning meeting or ward
round -- it may be dominated by feelings of anger, stuckness,
hopelessness, sadness and so on, and conflicts that reflect the service
user's dilemmas may emerge in the form of disagreements and 'splitting'
between team members. All this is useful material to work with, but it
means that facilitation may sometimes feel more like group therapy, and
may need to draw on the same skills. It is helpful to have a
co-facilitator who can keep an eye on the process if this is likely to
be challenging. It is also helpful to allow time at the start of the
meeting for staff to express their feelings about working with the
service user. The message is that no feelings are taboo -- we are all
human beings, and feelings are information. However, as professionals we
are expected to reflect on and use our feelings to help the service
user, not simply act them out. In Jack's case, we might anticipate any
of the following scenarios in the team formulation meeting: • • • • • •
•

Staff adopting opposite positions about Jack's discharge date.
Expressions of anger and frustration with Jack. A strong desire to
'rescue' and take care of Jack. Insistence that Jack is 'ill' and needs
more medication. A dispute about the relevance of diagnosis. Avoidance
of the subject of trauma. A general feeling of hopelessness and
'stuckness' about Jack's progress.

Any combination of the following strategies might be useful in such
situations: •

•

If diagnoses or 'symptoms' are described, encourage translation into
formulation terms; for example, 'When you say he is paranoid/
schizophrenic, what leads you to that conclusion? Is it because he has
some unusual beliefs? How else could we understand the beliefs he
holds?' For obvious reasons do not challenge the whole concept of
'schizophrenia' or other diagnoses, but suggest that there may be
alternative ways of understanding this particular case. Similarly if
medical solutions are dominating, ask: 'What are we hoping we might
achieve by increasing medication/putting him on a depot/ prescribing
ECT? And what are the possible disadvantages? Are there other ways of
achieving the same aims?'

236

Lucy Johnstone

•

Notice, allow space for and validate staff feelings of frustration,
anger, despair and so on ... ... but encourage 'I' language ('When she
does X, I feel Y') not 'He makes me furious/she is manipulative' ... ...
and then relate it to the service user: 'What does that tell us about
Jack?' (but do not be tempted to 'psychologise' the team member). Watch
out for parallel process -- for example, Jack's argument with the
consultant about his diagnosis may be reflected in a team disagreement
about diagnosis. Relate this back to Jack's situation. For example,
'Perhaps this difference of opinion is re-playing Jack's battle with the
team -- how could we resolve it?' In the case of splitting -- validate
both perspectives as containing part of the truth, and invite the team
to find a middle ground. Try to find something useful in every
contribution; for example, 'He's just using the ward as a hotel -- we
should discharge him tomorrow': 'I can understand your feelings of
frustration, and I suspect they are shared by others. Maybe we need to
discuss the reasons for these feelings. And of course you are right that
we need to be planning for discharge at some point'. Encourage staff to
hypothesise -- there are no 'correct' answers. Notice what the team is
not discussing. If we cannot acknowledge the horrific nature of the
events in most service users' lives, we will not be able to help them,
and our avoidance may reinforce theirs. Comment on the atmosphere in the
room. A feeling of heaviness and despair needs to be acknowledged,
because it may inform us about how Jack feels inside. Identifying this
will help the team to retain a sense of hope, rather than being drawn
into Jack's hopelessness. Notice quieter members of the team, make a
point of trying to draw them in. Offer, not impose, your own views.
Perhaps hardest of all -- accept that your own view (whatever that is)
may not prevail. It is not always possible to divert teams from
interventions that you may see as grossly inappropriate and damaging. It
may be a case of losing a battle or two, but trying your best to
maintain a good relationship with the team in order to win the war -- in
other words, to shift a whole team in a more psychologically-aware
direction, as discussed below.

• • •

• •

• • •

• • •

Team formulation for culture change One of the claimed benefits of team
formulation as listed in the DCP Guidelines is 'facilitating culture
change in teams and organisations' (DCP, 2011: 9). Clinicians have
reported that 'Using formulations may help in shifting staff culture'
(Summers 2006: 343). A key clinical psychology

Using formulation in teams

237

document, New Ways of Working in Teams, recommends team formulation as
'a powerful way of shifting cultures towards more psychosocial
perspectives' (Onyett 2007: 23). The culture that is in need of this
shift is, as already discussed, the dominant biomedical one which
assumes that patients are suffering from 'illnesses' with primarily
biological causes. The team power struggles and mixed messages that
arise out of unresolved tensions and contradictions between competing
models have been extensively documented (e.g. Johnstone, 1993, 2000;
Colombo et al., 2003), and are bound to be played out in the formulation
meeting as well. Part of the appeal of formulation to staff may lie in
their frustration with the current model and the hope for an
alternative. This emerged as a strong theme in the study by Hood et
al. (2013) in which staff members made a number of comments along the
lines of: I think services now are full of people who wouldn't be here
if people had taken a little bit longer to think about what brought them
to the service and how we can help them and be more proactive and help
them to recover, I think we're just stuffed full of people who've been
given various diagnoses and medication and that hasn't actually achieved
that much. (Hood et al., 2013) Within this culture they saw formulation
as 'still fighting for recognition as the useful way of understanding
the person's issues' (Hood et al., 2013). The issue of whether a
formulation should be an addition to, or an alternative to, a
psychiatric diagnosis is discussed further in chapter 12. The former
position is apparently unproblematic for some of those using a team
formulation approach (e.g. Davenport, 2002; Meaden and van Marle, 2008;
Berry et al., 2009; Martindale, 2007) although others (e.g. Kennedy,
2008) believe that the biomedical model and diagnosis play a major role
in creating and perpetuating the difficulties that need formulating.
This is also my experience -- and it accords with the testimony of many
service users (e.g. Rogers et al., 1993). The DCP Guidelines state that
psychological (as opposed to psychiatric) formulation should not be
premised on psychiatric diagnosis (DCP, 2011: 16--17), a view that was
shared by some of Hood's participants: I don't think you can complement
a diagnosis \[with formulation\]. I don't think it works. I think it's
useless. I think it's really damaging. I think it's really awful. I mean
you know you put that diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia, of borderline
personality disorder, of manic depression on someone, they've got it for
life, end of story. (Hood et al., 2013)

238

Lucy Johnstone

The combination of diagnosis with formulation conveys a mixed message
about personal responsibility and the service user's capacity to take
control of their lives. As Kennedy puts it: 'simultaneously, the
messages received by the patient include that they are helpless, out of
control, unable to manage without being (forcibly if necessary) detained
and drugged, while being asked to explain their own behaviour, take
responsibility for their actions and "get better"' (Kennedy, 2008: 42).
In other words, service users are effectively told, 'You have an illness
which is not your fault BUT you retain responsibility for it and must
make an effort to get better BUT you must do it our way because we are
the experts in your illness'. Muddled thinking leads to muddled
practice. Should Jack take more medication to get rid of his 'delusions'
or should we encourage him to talk about his beliefs and relate them to
the traumas in his life? Is his distress when he talks about his family
a sign that he is more 'depressed' or more in touch with his feelings?
-- 'worse' or 'better'? Should he accept his diagnosis of 'mental
illness' and take more medication, possibly for life, or should he stop
hanging around in hospital and make more effort to get on with his
family and find a job? Both staff and service users find themselves
stuck in this trap, which generally originates from the first contact
with the psychiatric services when psychosocial difficulties are
re-defined and diagnosed as 'illnesses'. At a pragmatic and strategic
level it is important for the facilitator to be pro-formulation rather
than anti-diagnosis. This is in the spirit of formulation itself, which
is about offering, not imposing, ideas and viewpoints. In the example of
Jack, I have assumed that after the formulation discussions, the
consultant was willing to entertain the possibility that in Jack's
particular case the difficulties could be understood as a response to
trauma. The phrasing of this section of the hypothetical intervention
plan is deliberate ('Jack is adamant that he does not suffer from
"paranoia" or "delusional disorder", and his strong feelings about this
are creating a barrier to working with the team'). While this tends to
imply that it is Jack's attitude rather than the team's failure to
understand him that is the impediment to progress, it may make a reduced
focus on diagnosis more acceptable to the team. The trauma perspective
has led to suggestions for new subcategories of diagnosis such as
'traumatic psychosis' (Callcott and Turkington, 2006) which can perhaps
be seen as a kind of halfway house between formulation and diagnosis,
and for this reason do not present a direct challenge to the biomedical
model. It may also be possible to persuade teams to re-designate someone
as suffering from 'dissociative disorder' rather than 'schizophrenia',
'bipolar disorder' or 'paranoia'. This diagnosis describes a pattern of
response to extreme trauma and thus implies a psychological origin of
the person's difficulties.

Using formulation in teams

239

Summary The alternative to the one-size-fits-all formulation would look
like this: Service user X has unmet attachment needs and unresolved
trauma from their early life. X tries to meet these through the
psychiatric services......... Formulate here! A formulation-based
approach, embedded with the service and implemented from first contact
in order to guide the whole care pathway, can provide an exit from this
trap. Within a non-medical model, the central task of every mental
health professional would be to create meaning out of chaos and despair.
Team formulation is one way of doing this. Much remains to be done in
developing, promoting, implementing and researching the team formulation
approach. However, at minimum it provides a space in the team for both
thinking and processing feelings. In busy teams these opportunities are
rare, squeezed out by the constant crises and demands and not valued by
the dominant model of treatment. The 'thinking' consists of the
information, experience, theory and evidence that staff bring to the
meetings, while the 'feelings' derive from the service users' distress
and the professionals' emotional reactions to it. These two aspects of
the therapeutic work, thinking and feeling, can be integrated via the
team formulation process, and framed in terms of personal meaning. In
this way, team formulation can provide an alternative, indeed an
antidote, to the limitations and damage of the traditional psychiatric
approach. It is a powerful instrument for culture change. It puts back
what psychiatry takes out, and restores meaning, agency and hope, for
staff and service users. Acknowledgements Thanks to Rudi Dallos, Richard
Down and Neil Harris for their helpful comments on the applicability of
this model to child and adolescent work. References Adshead, G. (1998)
Psychiatric staff as attachment figures: understanding management
problems in psychiatric services in the light of attachment theory.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 172: 64--69. Bateman, A., Brown, D. and
Pedder, J. (2010) Introduction to Psychotherapy: an Outline of
Psychodynamic Principles and Practice, 4th edn, Hove: Routledge. Berry,
K. (2007) Psychology services in psychiatric rehabilitation: service
user needs and staff perceptions, Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy,
14, 244--248.

240

Lucy Johnstone

Berry, K., Barrowclough, C. and Wearden, A.J. (2009) A pilot study
investigating the use of psychological formulations to modify
psychiatric staff perceptions of service users with psychosis,
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 37, 39--48. Borrill, C. and
West, M. (2002) Team Working and Effectiveness in Health Care: Findings
from the Health Care Team Effectiveness Project, Birmingham: Aston
Centre for Health Service Organisation Research. British Psychological
Society (2010) Accreditation through partnership handbook: Guidance for
clinical psychology programmes, Leicester: British Psychological
Society. Callcott, P. and Turkington, D. (2006) CBT for traumatic
psychosis. In W. Larkin and A.P. Morrison (eds) Trauma And Psychosis:
New Directions For Theory And Therapy, Hove, New York: Routledge,
pp. 222--238. Charlesworth, G. (2010) Commentary, PSIGE newsletter, 112,
4--6. Christofides, S., Johnstone, L. and Musa, M. (2011) Chipping in:
clinical psychologists' descriptions of their use of formulation in
multi-disciplinary team working, Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research and Practice. DOI: 10.1111/ j.2044-8341.2011.02041.x Clarke I.
(2008) Pioneering a cross-diagnostic approach founded in cognitive
science. In I. Clarke and H. Wilson (eds) Cognitive Behavior Therapy for
Acute Inpatient Mental Health Units: Working with Clients, Staff and the
Milieu, Hove UK: Routledge, pp. 65--77. Colombo, A., Bendelow, G.,
Fulford, B. and Williams, S. (2003) Evaluating the influence of implicit
models of mental disorder on community-based multidisciplinary teams,
Social Science and Medicine 56, 1557--1570. Craven-Staines, S.,
Dexter-Smith, S. and Li, K. (2010) Integrating psychological
formulations into older people's services -- three years on (Part 3):
staff perceptions of formulation meetings, PSIGE newsletter, 112,
16--22. Davenport, S. (2002) Acute wards: problems and solutions,
Psychiatric Bulletin, 26, 385--388. Davies, L. (2010) Consultation to a
local residential children's home: the process of service development,
implementation and evaluation, illustrated with a case study.
Unpublished report of clinical activity, Cardiff Doctorate in Clinical
Psychology. Dexter-Smith, S. (2010) Integrating psychological
formulations into older people's services -- three years on, PSIGE
Newsletter, 112, 8--22. Dillon, J., Johnstone, L. and Longden, E. (2012)
Trauma, dissociation, attachment and neuroscience: a new paradigm for
understanding severe mental distress, Journal of Critical Psychology,
Counselling and Psychotherapy, 12(3), 145--155. Division of Clinical
Psychology (2011) Good Practice Guidelines on the Use of Psychological
Formulation, Leicester: The British Psychological Society. Down, R.
(2010) CAMHS Residential Care Consultation Service: 4 month review to
April 2010, Internal Trust report, Hywel Dda Health Board. Dunn, M. and
Parry, G. (1997) A formulated care plan approach to caring for people
with borderline personality disorder in a community mental health
service setting, Clinical Psychology Forum 104, 19 --22.

Using formulation in teams

241

Health Professions Council (2009) Standards of Proficiency: Practitioner
Psychologists, London: Health Professions Council. Hewitt, O. (2008)
Using psychological formulation as a means of intervention in a
psychiatric rehabilitation setting, The International Journal of
Psychosocial Rehabilitation, 12, 1, 8--17. Hollingworth, P. and
Johnstone, L. (2013) Team formulations: what are the staff views?
Clinical Psychology Forum (in press). Hood, N., Johnstone, L. and
Christofides, S. (2013) The hidden solution? Staff experiences, views
and understanding of the role of psychological formulation in
multi-disciplinary teams, Journal of Critical Psychology, Counselling
and Psychotherapy, in press. Ingham, B. (2011) Collaborative
psychological case formulation development workshops: a case study with
direct care staff, Advances in Mental Health and Intellectual
Disabilities, 5 (2), 9--15. Janssen, I., Krabbendam, L., Bak, M.,
Hanssen, M., Vollebergh, W., de Graaf, R. and van Os, J. (2004)
Childhood abuse as a risk factor for psychotic experiences, Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 109, 38--45. Johnstone, L. (1993) Psychiatry:
are we allowed to disagree? Clinical Psychology Forum, 56, 30--32.
------(2000) Users and Abusers of Psychiatry: A Critical Look at
Psychiatric Practice, 2nd edn, London, Philadelphia: Routledge.
------(2011) Can traumatic events traumatise people? Trauma, madness and
'psychosis'. In M. Rapley, J. Moncrieff and J. Dillon (eds)
De-medicalising Misery: Psychiatry, Psychology and the Human Condition,
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 99--109. Kennedy, F. (2008) The use
of formulation in inpatient settings. In I. Clarke and H. Wilson (eds)
Cognitive Behavior Therapy for Acute Inpatient Mental Health Units;
Working with Clients, Staff and the Milieu, Hove UK: Routledge,
pp. 39--63. Kennedy, F., Smalley, M. and Harris, T. (2003) Clinical
psychology for in-patient settings: principles for development and
practice, Clinical Psychology Forum, 30, 21--24. Lake, N. (2008)
Developing skills in consultation 2: a team formulation approach,
Clinical Psychology Forum, 186, 18--24. Lapworth, P. and Sills, C.
(2011) An Introduction to Transactional Analysis: Helping People Change,
London: Sage. Larkin, W. and Morrison, A.P. (eds) (2006) Trauma And
Psychosis: New Directions For Theory And Therapy, Hove, New York:
Routledge. Lu, W., Mueser, K.T., Shami, A., Siglag, M., Petrides, G.,
Schoepp, E., Putts, M. and Saltz, J. (2011) Post-traumatic reactions to
psychosis in people with multiple psychotic episodes, Schizophrenia
Research, 127, 1, 66--75. Ma, K. (2007) Attachment theory in adult
psychiatry. Part 2: Importance to the therapeutic relationship, Advances
in Psychiatric Treatment, 13, 10--16. Malan, D. (1995) Individual
Psychotherapy and the Science of Psychodynamics, 2nd edn, London: Hodder
Arnold Publications.

242

Lucy Johnstone

Martindale, B.V. (2007) Psychodynamic contributions to early
intervention in psychosis, Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 13,
34--42. Meaden, A. and van Marle, S. (2008) When the going gets tougher:
the importance of long-term supportive psychotherapy in psychosis,
Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 14, 42--49. Onyett, S. (2007) Working
Psychologically in Teams, Leicester: The British Psychological Society.
Palazzoli, M.S., Boscolo, L., Cecchin, G. and Prata, G. (1980)
Hypothesising-- circularity--neutrality: three guidelines for the
conductor of the session, Family Process, 19, 3--12. Read, J. and
Bentall, R.B. (2012) Negative childhood experiences and mental health:
theoretical, clinical and primary prevention implications, British
Journal of Psychiatry, 200, 89--91. Read, J., van Os, J., Morrison, T.
and Ross, C.A. (2005) Childhood trauma, psychosis and schizophrenia: a
literature review with theoretical and practical implications, Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 112, 5, 330--350. Rogers, A., Pilgrim, D. and
Lacey, R. (1993) Experiencing Psychiatry, London: Macmillan/MIND. Ryle,
A. and Kerr, I.B. (2002) Introducing Cognitive Analytic Therapy:
Principles and Practice, Chichester: John Wiley and Sons. Shevlin, M.,
Dorahy, M.J. and Adamson, G. (2007) Trauma and psychosis: an analysis of
the National Comorbidity Survey, American Journal of Psychiatry, 164(1),
166--169. Shirley, L. (2010) Sharing formulation with care staff using
the Newcastle Model -- group problem-solving, PSIGE newsletter, 112,
55--61. Skinner, P. and Toogood, R. (eds) (2010) Clinical Psychology
Leadership Development Framework, Leicester: British Psychological
Society. Summers, A. (2006) Psychological formulations in psychiatric
care: staff views on their impact, Psychiatric Bulletin, 30, 341--343.
Timimi, S. (2005) Naughty Boys: Anti-social Behaviour, ADHD and the Role
of Culture, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. Wainwright, N. and Bergin,
L. (2010) Introducing psychological formulations in an acute older
people's inpatient mental health ward: a service evaluation of staff
views, PSIGE newsletter, 112, 38--45. Walton, M. (2011) Complex case
consultation forums: a thematic analysis, Clinical Psychology Forum,
223, 10--14. Whomsley, S. (2009) Team case formulation. In C. Cupitt
(ed.) Reaching Out: The Psychology of Assertive Outreach, London:
Routledge.

Chapter 11

Using integrative formulation in health settings Samantha Cole

This chapter aims to give a flavour of the kind of integrative
formulation that psychologists might use with individuals and teams in
physical health care settings. The application of formulation to the
medical context entails the same principles and strategies outlined in
the earlier chapters but with the obvious difference that a central
aspect of the service user's difficulties will always be related to an
actual or potential experience of physical threat (whether an illness,
condition, injury, disability or symptom, such as pain). Some
differences of emphasis and process follow from this central shift of
focus, as will be discussed below, before Janet's case is presented from
the health perspective. Challenges and considerations in formulation in
health settings It is now generally accepted that the biomedical model
cannot operate efficiently without attending to psychological processes
and holistic care, as distinct from physical treatment. However, the
history of mind--body dualism has shaped research into psychological
aspects of physical health and the model of delivery of services to meet
these identified 'additional' needs (Salmon, 2000). Psychological care
can still be seen as a parallel but relatively unconnected activity
attended to by specialists who often work as an adjunct to the physical
health care team with few effective channels of communication, rather
than as an integral aspect of the entire care pathway. For obvious
reasons, priorities will almost always be framed in terms of the
physical wellbeing of the service user, and the medical intervention
aimed at improving it will invariably continue regardless of any ongoing
psychological assessment, formulation and intervention cycle. A cancer
patient for whom chemotherapy is indicated is likely to receive it
irrespective of a psychological formulation, although this may help
guide the way the patient is prepared for the treatment and the specific
arrangements for administering it. This context has potential advantages
and disadvantages for psychologists in healthcare settings. On the one
hand, colleagues are less likely to be able

244

Samantha Cole

to draw readily upon concepts such as 'attachment', 'transference' and
'negative schemas', which to some extent can be assumed when
communicating with allied professionals in mental health services. On
the other, this means that even relatively simple formulations can offer
valuable insights to multi-disciplinary team discussions about the
management of a patient (e.g. why they might not be 'complying' with
medical advice). Indeed, a preliminary research study that colleagues
and I conducted with an acute inpatient staff group suggests that simply
having the offer of a psychologist's support to develop a team
formulation for a 'difficult' patient during integrated care meetings
may be enough to reduce staff's self-reported feelings of frustration
and increase their felt competence to deal with the challenges. It seems
that merely giving the implicit message that, at some level, it all
makes sense may be valuable support for stressed nurses working with
confusing presentations. A related consequence of working with
professionals who do not necessarily have any training in mental health
or health psychology, is that most formulations are in effect team
formulations with more than one 'client' (the patient and the medical
team). Each is seeking to negotiate a shared understanding of the
difficulties which may indicate the necessity for change in either or
both sides in relation to each other. The psychologist is, therefore,
often in the position of mediating between the understandings of
stakeholders at all levels of the health service and the service user --
understandings that do not always coincide. For example, the medical
team may refer a patient with 'mental health issues' who attributes
their distress to the (mis)management of their medical care or their
consultant's style of relating and who, therefore, situates the needed
change in the process of healthcare delivery. This means that parallel
formulations may be developed with the team and service user, with
neither being shared with the other in its entirety if that is not
likely to be helpful (e.g. staff and patient's judgements of and
emotional responses to each other). However, in general the process is
likely to involve the wider system as opposed to being primarily
developed and used within a dyadic therapy relationship, as is more
common in mental health settings. Formulations need to be co-constructed
with healthcare colleagues as tentatively and respectfully as with the
individual service user, as discussed in the chapters on systemic
working and team formulation in chapters 4 and 10. As noted in the DCP
'Good practice guidelines on the use of psychological formulation'
(2011: 16), a medical diagnosis will often, though not always, play an
important role in a formulation in a physical health setting where the
medical model is not 'metaphorical' (Boyle, 2002: 233), as in mental
health services, and the legitimacy of a truly biopsychosocial
formulation, taking account of the psychological effects of biological
factors (e.g. depression in stroke), is far less controversial. However,
the use of psychiatric diagnoses in this context remains contentious and
it is no more conceptually coherent to

Using integrative formulation in health settings

245

premise a health formulation on them. For example, viewing cancer as a
'trigger' of underlying vulnerability to depression tends to further
reduce the agency of a patient who may think that it is in the hands of
the doctors to 'treat' the secondary diagnosis of a 'mood disorder' as
well. This may in turn increase their sense of hopelessness since they
are now unfortunate enough to be suffering from two illnesses
concurrently. This can be avoided if the experiences themselves, for
example, tearfulness and lack of interest in or enjoyment of activities,
are understood as obviously meaningful and valid psychological reactions
to an overwhelming set of circumstances. In general, my impression is
that patients' distress is often understood by healthcare professionals
as a response to the personal impact of medical/ organic factors, rather
than from within an illness model that assumes that it too is primarily
caused by biological dysfunction. Indeed, it may be that the potential
role of a psychologist in supporting the adjustment of a physically ill
patient whose distress is easy to empathise with is often overlooked.
However, medical professionals tend to hold (often unstated) norms about
how distressed someone 'should' be about having a particular illness,
injury or symptom. When a patient's reaction seems to be out of
proportion to the expected impact, a formulation is likely to be more
helpful in explaining the gap, and less stigmatising than a psychiatric
diagnosis with its implicit normative judgements about the appropriate
degree of sadness or fear in the situation. Health formulations also
have the advantage over psychiatric diagnoses of being able to address
and thus pre-empt difficulties before a potentially distressing event
has occurred (for example, when developed as part of a pre-transplant
assessment), enabling psychological care in medical settings to be
pro-active and preventative in a way that is often not possible in
mental health services. Knowing that a user of healthcare services
already has a psychiatric diagnosis of, say, schizophrenia does not tell
us much about how they and their family members will respond to a
diagnosis of, and treatment for, a life-limiting or life-threatening
illness or how they will cope with chronic pain or disability. However,
if Jack, for example, were to become physically ill it would be relevant
to consider the personal meaning he has constructed about his
psychiatric diagnosis, his experiences of being 'ill' and a 'patient'
within this context, and how, if at all, he relates these experiences to
his physical health status. The distinction is still sometimes
(implicitly) made between illnesses that are physical (and therefore
'real') and those that are psychosomatic or 'in the mind' (and therefore
'unreal'). Even when there is an understanding on the part of healthcare
professionals that the interaction between the physical and
psychological aspects of a presentation is more complex than that,
service users may assume that this distinction has been made if the
involvement of a psychologist is suggested. The potential for service
users to feel dismissed or judged is even greater if referral to
psychological health services is the only

246

Samantha Cole

intervention offered, as is often the case with diagnoses of exclusion
such as chronic fatigue syndrome or chronic regional pain syndrome. The
psychologist then needs to carefully negotiate a shared view about where
the 'problem' resides so that barriers to engagement are overcome and
constructive change can occur. However, the pressure to 'prescribe'
immediate solutions that often pervades medical settings can persist,
especially if the available time for first developing a meaningful
understanding is limited due to, for example, shortened life expectancy,
urgency of the medical treatment schedule, the burden of existing
hospital appointments which take priority, or patient fatigue. The
process of assessment--formulation--intervention in health may,
therefore, tend to be even more recursive than in mental health
settings, often constituting a series of evolving 'on-the-spot'
solution-focused reformulations as new assessment information emerges
and medical interventions proceed. For example, a brief, extemporary
formulation of a child's fears in relation to an imminent invasive
procedure may be offered to the parent and nurse in the treatment room
to ensure that an essential medical test can proceed with minimal
distress to the family. The family may then have a longer follow-up
appointment with the psychologist at a less pressured moment to 'flesh
out' the assessment and formulation so that further medical
investigations or treatments can be planned in a way that avoids
escalation of the child's anxiety. At any particular moment during this
process, the 'working' formulation may be a transitory, contingent one
allowing certain aspects of the service user's experience to be
fore-grounded for the purposes of, sometimes urgent, targeted
interventions. This means that a 'full' written formulation is probably
less likely to be routinely offered to service users or colleagues than
might be the case in mental health services. Medicine and nursing are
very solution-focused professions for obvious reasons, and this tends to
go hand-in-hand with implicit understandings about expertise: patients
and health professionals tend to share assumptions that the 'expert'
will generally lead interactions, decide what information is relevant,
assess it independently of the patient in order to arrive at a
diagnosis, and then advise on a plan of action, which they are also
likely to assume responsibility for implementing. Many service users
value clinical paternalism or authoritarianism since it can reduce
uncertainty and unpredictability, and relieve them of responsibility for
understanding and responding to a possibly frightening situation. If
this has been an individual's experience of the help they have already
encountered in the hospital or primary care clinic, they may reasonably
also approach psychological support with hopes or expectations that the
psychologist will offer immediate 'expert' solutions to their problems.
There will often be contextual cues to reinforce expectations that the
same passive 'patient' role is appropriate in the therapeutic
relationship, such as some clinical psychologists' use of the 'doctor'
title. Similarly, if the setting in which the psychologist works is a
medical consulting room, for example, it

Using integrative formulation in health settings

247

may suggest the same 'script' as for a doctor's appointment. These
expectations can be initial barriers to fostering a genuinely
collaborative approach to formulating, although once overcome the
process can ameliorate the subtle negative implications of the wider
expert model. For similar reasons, 'decentred' therapies such as
narrative therapy, which seek to avoid pathologising stories that
further decrease service users' sense of control, can be attractive for
psychologists working in health settings. However, they can be difficult
to communicate to medical colleagues (and sometimes resisted by
patients) who expect an 'expert' view. Furthermore, more collaborative
practices are not always facilitated by physical healthcare systems and
processes that are predicated on a hierarchy. For example, clinical
letters often have a standard format, starting with a diagnosis, and
addressing the referring GP rather than the patient. There is also the
potential for formulations to be unhelpful, or even harmful, if the
patient's control in health matters is emphasised too much, giving the
impression that illness is preventable and that if it occurs, it
represents a personal failure to keep healthy. Longitudinal formulations
linking people's psychological history to their current health and
emotional state, or which describe the power of emotional events to
influence physiological ones, may leave the patient feeling to blame for
the onset or maintenance of their health problems (e.g. for not leaving
a 'stressful' job earlier). This can perhaps be mitigated by theories
that consider stress and illness as, at least partly, a function of
environmental demands and resources (such as those discussed in more
detail in chapter 6). Attention to socio-cultural health inequalities is
another aspect that will generally inform a health formulation. These
and other relevant issues in formulation in healthcare settings are
discussed in more detail below. Additional theoretical influences on
health formulation In principle, formulating in health settings could
draw upon any of the theoretical models described in the preceding
chapters. As with work in other settings, a fully integrated formulation
is not always necessary and it may be more useful to draw primarily from
one conceptual framework at a given point in the process to illustrate a
particular aspect of the problem to a service user. For example, a
cognitive behavioural model of a panic cycle may be drawn out with a
service user with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease to explain how
misinterpretation of the symptom of breathlessness (e.g. as a sign of
imminent collapse) leads to anxiety and an escalation of physical
discomfort due to the body's stress response. In some areas of health,
particular models may be favoured for their utility in conceptualising
the psychological issues most commonly associated with the condition.
For example, 'third wave' cognitive behavioural therapies, such as
acceptance and commitment therapy and mindfulness-based cognitive
therapy, are

248

Samantha Cole

often used in pain services. In many health settings, systemic
perspectives are likely to be a focus since, as discussed above,
formulations are not only likely to need to include the impact of
illness and/or disability upon relational processes within the service
user's social network, but will also need to account for the context of
the healthcare system itself in relation to the family's experience.
However, the process of formulating within medical settings is almost
always integrative in the sense that it will combine psychotherapeutic
models with an understanding of the causal role of the physical health
condition and theoretical concepts from the health psychology
literature, some of which are outlined below. Health beliefs and illness
representations

Our attitudes and beliefs about physical health are shaped in part by
our previous experiences of, or exposure to, illness and/or injury. This
learning influences our long-term health-related behaviour and will
affect the reception, retention of and reaction to new information
relating to our physical wellbeing. In order to make sense of health
experiences and guide responses, individuals actively construct
cognitive and emotional representations of health threats organised
around several dimensions: beliefs about what actually constitutes the
threat (the illness identity); perceived causes (e.g. hereditary,
external, internal); perceived trajectory or time-line (e.g. acute,
chronic, cyclical); assumed consequences (Leventhal et al., 1997);
anticipated severity (a combination of the magnitude of perceived
consequences and expected time course); ideas about susceptibility (how
vulnerable a person thinks they are to a particular health threat;
Becker, 1974); illness coherence (i.e. meta-cognitions evaluating the
meaningfulness or usefulness of the representation: Weinman et al.,
1996); and emotional representations (Moss-Morris et al., 2002).
Individuals' engagement in preventative health behaviours, and their
behavioural response to health advice once a health threat has been
realised, are likely to be influenced by the following set of
appraisals: their judgements about curability and controllability,
including the extent to which the individual plays a part in this
(i.e. their personal control and self-efficacy beliefs) and their belief
in the treatment or recommended advice (i.e. outcome expectancies: Lau
and Hartmann, 1983); determinations of the necessity of the proposed
treatment (whether its medication, surgery or behaviour change: Horne et
al., 1999); a costs-benefits analysis of different ways of responding
(e.g. whether it is expected to be painful, to worsen quality of life or
to be degrading); the individual's health motivation (i.e. their
readiness to be concerned about health matters); cues to action (either
internal or external: Becker, 1974); and subjective norms (i.e. their
perception of the norms of their social environment in relation to a
health behaviour and their evaluation of whether they are motivated to
comply, weighted by the importance they attribute to social opinion:
Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980). All of these factors would need to be
explored with users

Using integrative formulation in health settings

249

of psychological services in a health setting and are likely to need
reformulating over time as their beliefs are modified by their
experiences. Coping theory

When someone has an acute or chronic illness or condition, their whole
family may need to adjust their expectations, roles and daily lives. For
most people, it takes time to make sense of what has happened and get
used to new, and therefore sometimes worrying, experiences, including
treatments. This process of change is almost always stressful and
illness and treatments present formidable challenges. According to Moos
and Schaefer (1984), the situation engendered by illness and injury can
be conceptualised as a crisis because it is often unpredicted, and
entails considerable ambiguity and uncertainty, and yet often demands a
quick response to be formulated, probably drawing on limited prior
experience (since most people are healthy most of the time).
Furthermore, illness and injury may pose threats to an individual's
identity and future as well as necessitating often abrupt changes in
their roles, social support and environment (for example, becoming
confined to a bedroom and being cared for by family members who are
normally dependent on you for care). For these reasons, understanding
how people tend to respond to unexpected challenges, change and stress
in general may help us to understand or predict their responses to
illness and treatment. Coping theory has provided a taxonomical
framework for exploring the various actions taken by people facing
threats to their health in order to reduce the stressfulness of the
challenge when the internal and/or external demands of the situation are
appraised as overwhelming their resources (Lazarus and Folkman, 1984).
Broadly speaking, people can respond by tackling the issue 'head on'
(known as problem-focused coping) or by addressing its emotional effects
(known as emotion-focused coping). Behaviourally, problem-focused coping
strategies may be limited in the context of serious health concerns but
people may still be able to confront the issue cognitively (e.g. by
engaging in self-talk or mentally rehearsing a coping or
health-maintaining skill). Emotion-focused coping strategies such as
relaxation or distraction may be more accessible to acutely unwell
people. However, they often entail reactions (e.g. denial, repression or
rationalisation) that can disconcert or challenge the clinicians who are
engaged primarily in managing the problem. 'Coping' is, therefore, an
interactional and dynamic process in which the individual and the
environment each affect the other and one which a clinician would want
to reformulate as it evolves when working with family members such as
Mary and Janet. Cultural/societal context

Illness and disability are social constructs that relate to the person
as a whole in the context of their social environment, as opposed to
disease process or

250

Samantha Cole

pathology, and so it is important to bring a critical awareness of the
wider cultural and political context to the process of health
formulation. There is substantial evidence that factors such as
socioeconomic status, social support and networks, occupational status
(particularly unemployment and retirement), social cohesion and
religious belief have significant effects on health outcomes (Wilkinson
and Marmot, 2003). Furthermore, illness and disability are not generally
socially neutral, with some conditions attracting a great deal of stigma
and moral opprobrium (e.g. HIV/AIDS), or diagnoses of exclusion (such as
chronic fatigue syndrome being characterised as 'yuppie flu'), and
obesity or smoking-related conditions. Even when the diagnosis tends to
be viewed more sympathetically, those who are given the diagnosis with
it can feel that their responses to their own health predicament are
constrained by prevailing discourses about 'thinking positively' and
'bravely battling'. For example, Susan Sontag's observation from over
thirty years ago that the combative metaphor of 'fighting' cancer
contains the implicit accusation that some patients' will to resist the
disease is not strong enough, is still keenly felt by some people
(Sontag, 1978). Although unlikely to be explicitly included in every
health formulation, the process should include an attempt to understand
the health beliefs of the service user in the context of the
historically, socially and culturally specific constructs of illness and
health that the service user lives within -- including any apparent
health norms related to ascribed characteristics such as gender, race,
ethnicity, and class -- and how these sit with wider discourses about
health and illness within any minority or socially marginalised groups
that the service user may identify, or be identified, with. Cognitive
development and health-related understanding

An awareness of how understanding of the concepts of health and illness
develop should inform formulations of health-related difficulties for
children and young people, and perhaps also for adults with significant
learning difficulties. Research suggests that children's concepts of
illness and health change in fairly predictable directions with age
and/or cognitive development and in ways that broadly correspond to
Piagetian theory (Bibace and Walsh, 1980). During the earliest
developmental stage, generally between two and six years of age,
children make links, often expressed in terms of proximity or magic,
between an illness and external cues in the environment that may
coincide spatially or temporally with it (e.g. cold air). This has been
termed 'associational contagion' (Rozin et al., 1985). Younger
children's spontaneous accounts of illness often have a moral dimension:
they tend to believe that 'boys and girls who misbehave get sick more
often than those who are good' (Brodie, 1974); and the idea of illness
(and treatment) as punishment for wrongdoing is common, particularly
amongst hospitalised children (Brewster, 1982).

Using integrative formulation in health settings

251

Children who are functioning at the concrete operational stage, usually
between seven and ten years of age, begin to revise their ideas about
the aetiology of illness. They initially believe that one becomes ill by
being in physical contact with an external 'contaminant': a person,
object or activity that is thought to be harmful in some way. More
sophisticated conceptualisations of the method of transmission from the
contaminant through internalisation (e.g. swallowing or inhaling) begin
to develop later, although illness is usually still only vaguely located
within the body (Bibace and Walsh, 1980). With the transition to formal
operational thinking from around 11 years of age, young people become
more aware of the body as a system of organs and of basic internal
mechanisms and transformations (e.g. food is for energy, waste is
excreted; Carey, 1985). Consequently, illness is construed increasingly
in terms of failures of these internal physiological structures or
processes, which may be the result of a sequence of events triggered
externally or internally. More mature interpretations may also
acknowledge psychological factors, that is, that one's thoughts or
feelings can affect functioning of the body (Bibace and Walsh, 1980). A
clinician formulating with a child or young person would need to have an
understanding of their phase of cognitive development so that they can
help to make sense of the particular health beliefs and illness
representations they have constructed, and to be able to communicate
this in a way that does not extend too far beyond their current mental
model. For example, when formulating with Janet, who would normally be
expected to be at the concrete operational stage, one could not assume
that she would share the psychologist's assumption that psychological
factors such as her thoughts or feelings would be relevant to her
physical health, and guidance is likely to be needed to help Janet make
these links. Janet: a perspective from the health context As in the
previous chapters, a formulation based on written information without
access to Janet and Mary's accounts of their concerns will always be
limited and somewhat speculative. However, their story as it has been
presented provides a good opportunity to illustrate how physical,
psychological and social factors can interrelate to create and maintain
problems and how this might look as a tentative integrative formulation.
As discussed above, a formulation for Janet from a health psychology
perspective would include an understanding of the personal meanings of,
and beliefs about, health, illness and the healthcare system of Janet
and those in her social network. This would certainly include Janet and
Mary but may also need to reflect upon relevant health-related
assumptions, judgements and beliefs of the other people involved in
attempting to understand the situation: the school nurse, social
services, accident and emergency staff, the paediatric consultant, and
Janet's wider family. Although organic causes have been ruled

252

Samantha Cole

out as an explanation for the persistence of Janet's poor food intake
and weight loss, and so doctors do not consider her 'ill', chronic food
refusal has potentially serious physical consequences for Janet's
apparently already delayed development and growth, and so she may not be
considered 'healthy' either. It is sometimes difficult for families who
present to healthcare services with ostensibly physical symptoms (in
this case weight loss and limited mobility) to understand or accept that
'no physical problems were evident' to the clinicians; they may feel
disbelieved or disregarded or they may think that the doctors have not
yet successfully identified the cause. This can be reinforced if
healthcare professionals remain concerned and involved, offering
follow-up appointments and continuing to regularly assess the symptoms,
as in Janet's case. Mary is likely to be picking up mixed messages about
the basis for Janet's problems, whether she is 'ill' or not, and who,
therefore, is responsible for initiating change or intervening. If Mary
does not have a coherent framework for understanding Janet's low weight
and mobility problems, it is unlikely that Janet has had a clear
understanding conveyed to her. Similarly, it would be useful to gain an
insight into Mary's understanding of her own health conditions (angina
and arrhythmia), which are cursorily mentioned in the referral, and how
much, if any, of this has been shared with Janet and in what way. For
example, is the brevity with which her imminent heart surgery, an event
which would reasonably be expected to be a considerable stressor in any
family, is introduced into the referral merely an artefact of the focus
on Janet as the 'index patient'? Or does it reflect a wider (avoidant)
coping strategy for Mary of distracting herself from the considerable
health challenges she faces by focusing her attention on Janet's
physical wellbeing? The main symptom of angina is pain, primarily in the
chest, that can be triggered by physical activity or stress and can also
develop after eating a meal. Obesity and a high-fat diet are risk
indicators and people with this diagnosis are often given advice about
dietary changes and paced activity. However, patients, particularly
women, are more likely to cite uncontrollable causes such as stress or
family history for their angina (as opposed to personal behaviour, such
as diet, exercise levels and smoking; Furze and Lewin, 2000). If Mary
experiences pain and exhaustion upon exertion she may have come to see
herself as vulnerable to physical threat (perhaps even death) if she
engages in more than minimal physical activity. If she has then
generalised this association, it could explain why she requested a
wheelchair for Janet, perhaps assuming that over-exertion could
similarly further damage Janet's health. It is also possible that Janet
may have formed some understanding of a link between her mother's eating
and her poor health (perhaps if she observed an episode of pain after
her mother ate or if she has heard conversations at home or at school
indicating the importance of a balanced diet to reducing the risk of
coronary disease) and this may be contributing to her refusal to eat the
food that Mary prepares for her.

Using integrative formulation in health settings

253

The family's strong Romany identity may also provide some insights into
the kind of issues that might be explored during the process of
formulation. For example, discourses about illness within Romany culture
sometimes make a distinction between those that originate from within
their own ethnic group, which can only be helped by their own healers,
and those which are attributed to non-Roma society, and which are
amenable to conventional western medicine (Jesper et al., 2008).
Self-reliance, stoicism and a sense of urgency in relation to
problem-solving all tend to be highly valued qualities for a travelling
lifestyle but may also contribute to avoidance of, or late presentation
to, healthcare services (Department of Health, 2004). The limited
available evidence suggests that Roma in the UK are less likely to be
registered with a GP than the majority of the population and are more
likely to encounter, or perceive, barriers to service access or use
(e.g. geographical distance from healthcare providers and communication
difficulties). Moreover, when they do access services, whether due to
mutual lack of understanding or familiarity with areas of potential
conflict in health beliefs, attitudes and practices, or to experiences
of discrimination, Roma often report negative or unhelpful interactions
with healthcare providers (DoH, 2004; Mladovsky, 2007). Perhaps for a
combination of these reasons, it is common for Roma to seek medical care
only when it is deemed to be immediately necessary, often resulting in
acute presentations at accident and emergency departments, rather than
in what might be perceived by healthcare professionals as more
'appropriate' use of primary, secondary and preventative healthcare
services (Jesper et al., 2008; Mladovsky, 2007). All of this may be
relevant to understanding Mary's pattern of engagement with healthcare
services on Janet's behalf. If so, this might provide an alternative
construction to one which might pathologise her repeated 'unnecessary'
presentations as indicative of parental abuse (either by construing her
as consciously or unconsciously wanting medical staff to identify the
signs of physical or sexual abuse by Janet's father or by viewing her as
inducing or fabricating symptoms in her daughter to meet her own
psychological needs, as in the diagnosis of factitious disorder by proxy
mentioned in chapter 6). These are not necessarily mutually exclusive
hypotheses, of course, but an awareness that there may be contributing
factors that would not be given due weight in a normative assessment of
parental behaviour in relation to their child's health in the UK must
surely provide a sounder basis for assessing any current risk. Within
Romany culture, marime, a concept of physical and moral impurity which
is usually related to a feeling of shame, must be avoided by cleaning,
food preparation and hygiene practices (e.g. washing hands between
contacts with the upper and lower body) that are not usually adhered to
or facilitated within the NHS (Larkin, 1998). Enclosed public places
where the majority of people can be presumed not to act according to
these beliefs, such as hospitals, public toilets, schools and offices,
are consequently sometimes

254

Samantha Cole

viewed as 'unclean' and potentially contaminating. This could be another
factor that may be influencing Janet's attendance history; perhaps Mary
needs to feel that it is an emergency before exposing Janet to such an
environment. It is also plausible that the concept of marime may
contribute to Janet's fear of public transport, which may be viewed as
best avoided as a potential source of disease, and to her refusing to
eat food prepared for her by Mary, which she may consider
'contaminating' in some way, perhaps because her mother is ill herself.
The empirical data to date suggests that, for the most part, the
development of children's concepts of health and illness is more similar
than not across cultures (Burochovitch and Mednick, 1997). Therefore, it
might be reasonable to assume that Janet is at a stage of cognitive
maturation that would incline her towards explanations of illness based
upon a theory of contamination. It is plausible that cultural ideas such
as marime would have particular salience for a child at this stage of
development and may be interpreted in quite a literal way, losing some
of the nuances. It would be important to explore with Janet how she
construes 'health' and 'illness' and what aspects of her environment and
behaviours are associated with each. The significance of eating and
dietary habits to these two states would also need to be understood in
Janet's own terms. Sharing food in Romany culture implies an
acknowledgement of each others' 'cleanliness' and so conveys respect and
trust; refusing to eat with someone expresses the opposite and would
usually be taken as an affront. Interviewees in a UK research study saw
providing food as 'an important nurturing role for mothers and an
important aspect of being a good parent' (DoH, 2004: 49). Greater
physical size is associated with greater health and wellbeing, which are
closely allied concepts to good fortune: someone who is overweight
compared to populations norms might be perceived as happier, healthier
and luckier than those who would be considered of 'ideal weight' by
doctors. Poor appetite in children is commonly perceived to be worrying
(DoH, 2004; Jesper et al., 2008). If these beliefs were shared by Mary
or her wider community, they would be likely to heighten her emotional
responsiveness to Janet's resistance to eating and increase the
likelihood that she would interpret it as a rejection. Interactional
patterns have been observed in mothers and daughters who show food
refusal whereby as perceived parental pressure to eat more increases, so
does the child's dietary restraint and distress, which tend to elicit
more verbal and physical control behaviours from the mother, and so on,
culminating in an aversive eating experience for both (Carper et al.,
2000; Lindberg et al., 1998). Formulation with Mary and Janet would need
to map out their particular pattern of reciprocal responses at mealtimes
to see what processes might be perpetuating Janet's reluctance to eat
certain meals. For Roma, illness is often seen as a concern for the
wider community and rallying around the ill person, often in relatively
large groups that NHS

Using integrative formulation in health settings

255

visiting policies are not designed to accommodate, is a common response
(Jesper et al., 2008). It would be important to find out what response
Janet's weight loss and/or presentations at the accident and emergency
department had elicited from their wider family and community. It may be
that these cultural norms operate to focus a lot of concerned attention
upon Janet and perhaps make available resources that would not be
offered otherwise. Given that Janet and Mary live in an area of social
deprivation and have become increasingly isolated due to Mary's limited
mobility, this could be welcomed by both of them. It may be particularly
gratifying to Janet who may feel that she receives less attention from
her mother than her siblings and their children do. Being 'ill' may
function as a way of achieving a comparable 'special' status to the
brother who became a schoolteacher whilst perhaps simultaneously
reducing any expectations that Janet should reach the same level of
educational attainment. She may also have observed that her mother's ill
health drew caring responses from those around them. If the 'sick role'
elicits attention that might otherwise be withheld, then Janet's eating
habits may be inadvertently reinforced by her mother and/or members of
her wider social network. Towards intervention It is possible, as
speculated earlier, that the involvement of a number of healthcare
professionals is reinforcing unhelpful or conflicting messages about
what constitutes the problem and who is responsible for finding a
solution. Given the apparent attachment issues and the possibility of
cultural distrust of healthcare professionals, it may be helpful to
avoid recruiting further 'experts' into the family's network that may
become interpolated between Mary and Janet. Being mindful of these
possibilities, as well as of the reality of resource and time
constraints for psychological services in healthcare, it would probably
be most appropriate for the psychologist to support the existing
healthcare team to formulate with Mary and Janet and to help them to
make any changes that are suggested by this process. For example, the
school nurse could perhaps be enlisted to explore what Mary and Janet
currently understand about each other's health and what meaning they
attribute to each other's behaviour in relation to that. The overall aim
of the exploration would be to support them to make sense of their
situation and concerns in ways that facilitate adapting to and managing
them within the context of their lives generally. Basic educational
information on, for example, child nutrition and paced activity, may be
offered if clear misconceptions are identified. The psychologist could
consult to the nurse in supporting Mary to find developmentally
appropriate ways of explaining her scheduled surgery to Janet so as to
minimise anxiety, and of communicating with Janet about her own somatic
experiences. The process of sharing their understandings fully with
someone who is respectful

256

Samantha Cole

and interested might be expected to provide emotional relief in itself
as well as developing potentially new perspectives as they examine their
concerns and clarify the issues they face. Assuming that the jointly
shared understanding to emerge from that process bore any resemblance to
that outlined above, then the school nurse might be ideally placed to
work with Mary on a plan for introducing target foods in small
quantities to Janet at home that she could also encourage consistency
with during school mealtimes. For example, she could perhaps help Mary
to develop a wider repertoire of strategies such as providing clear,
direct prompts; using verbal and physical praise and other rewards (e.g.
preferred foods, interactive games) for cooperating with eating; and
ignoring disruptive behaviours such as verbal refusals. Reflections
Reflecting upon this formulation for Janet, I am aware that some
difficulties that were persuasively accounted for in previous chapters
in terms of psychotherapeutic models have now been recast as
psychological consequences of her experience and understanding of
physical health difficulties (such as her fear of public transport). It
goes without saying that both might be valid in the sense of having a
good 'fit' for the service users, and indeed the health formulation has
made reference to some of the hypotheses in earlier chapters such as
attachment issues. In the many cases where a person is experiencing
physical as well as emotional problems, both specialties may benefit
from the other's perspective in order to create an effective and
comprehensive formulation. In this way we can attempt to bridge the
mind--body split that, as discussed at the start of the chapter, has
often limited our practice. However, usefulness, rather than satisfying
narrative coherence, should always guide the extent to which physical
and psychological experiences are linked into one formulation. I am also
reminded of the need, when formulating from a health perspective, to
remain aware of one's own thoughts, feelings and attitudes in relation
to illness and disability, and one's perception of one's own health
status, and how these may be impacting upon the process. We perhaps more
readily assume a continuum of physical health experience than we do
mental health experience; most people can access a memory of what it is
like to be in pain with greater cognitive ease than they might be able
to access an experience which appears to be on a continuum with hearing
voices. Whilst this may enable us to empathise and 'be alongside'
service users more easily, it may also leave us at greater risk of
extrapolating unhelpfully from our own experiences. For example, I have
experienced 'exhaustion' and so I may need to guard against assuming too
much understanding of how Mary's angina affects her and make a conscious
effort to remain curious.

Using integrative formulation in health settings

257

Moreover, the illness representations of people working in physical
health settings will inevitably be influenced and modified by their
exposure to their service users' experiences. Over time,
representativeness biases (Tversky and Kahneman, 1974) are likely to
affect our appraisals of how prevalent, severe, or threatening chronic
or acute illnesses and injuries are, depending on the particular
specialties we work in. It is therefore sometimes beneficial to
consciously 'recalibrate' our perspectives with people less
professionally familiar with those physical health areas and to
reconnect with the 'naive' experience of entering medical environments
with possibly minimal experience of the processes and systems we work
within. Key characteristics of formulation in health settings • • • • •

Will always, obviously, be a biopsychosocial formulation which includes
physical health problems as a core element. Can be pro-active and
preventative, that is, before events that might cause an increase in
psychological distress have occurred. Are generally, at some level, team
formulations seeking to incorporate the understandings of the wider
healthcare team as well as the service user's views and to communicate
each to the other. Do not usually fit the traditional 'stage' model of
the assessment-- formulation--intervention cycle and may be more
recursive and 'on-the-spot' as medical interventions proceed. Will
always be integrative in the sense that they address the impact of
disease and disability, and draw on theoretical constructs and ideas
from health psychology as well as psychotherapeutic models.

References Ajzen, I. and Fishbein, M. (1980) Understanding Attitudes and
Predicting Social Behavior. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Becker,
M.H. (ed.) (1974) The Health Belief Model and Personal Health Behavior.
Thorofare, NJ: Slack. Bibace, R. and Walsh, M.E. (1980) Development of
children's concepts of illness. Pediatrics, 66, 912--917. Boyle, M.
(2002) Schizophrenia: A Scientific Delusion? (2nd edn) Routledge:
London. Brewster, A.B. (1982) Chronically ill hospitalized children's
concepts of their illness. Pediatrics, 69 (3), 355--362. Brodie, B.
(1974) Views of healthy children toward illness. American Journal of
Public Health, 64, 1156--1159. Burochovitch, E. and Mednick, B.R. (1997)
Cross-cultural differences in children's concepts of health and illness.
Journal of Public Health, 31 (5), 448--456.

258

Samantha Cole

Carey, S. (1985) Conceptual Change in Childhood. Massachusetts, USA:
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Press. Carper, J.L., Orlet
Fisher, J. and Birch, L.L. (2000) Young girls' emerging dietary
restraint and disinhibition are related to parental control in child
feeding. Appetite, 352, 121--129. Department of Health (2004) The Health
Status of Gypsies and Travellers in England. London: Department of
Health Publications. Division of Clinical Psychology (2011) Good
Practice Guidelines on the Use of Psychological Formulation. Leicester:
British Psychological Society. Furze, G. and Lewin, B. (2000) Causal
attributions for angina: results of an interview study. Coronary Health
Care, 4 (3), 130--134. Horne, R., Weinman, J. and Hankins, M. (1999) The
beliefs about medicines questionnaire: the development and evaluation of
a new method for assessing the cognitive representation of medication.
Psychology and Health, 14 (1), 1--24. Jesper, E., Griffiths, F. and
Smith, L. (2008) A qualitative study of the health experience of Gypsy
Travellers in the UK with a focus on terminal illness. Primary Health
Care Research and Development, 9 (2), 157--165. Larkin, J. (1998) The
embodiment of marime: living Romany Gypsy pollution taboo. Electronic
Doctoral Dissertations for UMass Amherst. Available:
http://scholarworks. umass.edu/dissertations/AAI9909179 (accessed 4
September 2012). Lau, R.R. and Hartman, K.A. (1983) Common sense
representations of common illnesses. Health Psychology, 2, 185--197.
Lazarus, R.S. and Folkman, S. (1984) Stress, Appraisal, and Coping. New
York: Springer. Leventhal, H., Benyamini, Y., Brownlee, S., Diefenbach,
M., Leventhal, E., PatrickMiller, L. et al. (1997) Illness
representations: theoretical foundations. In K.J. Petrie and J.A.
Weinman (eds), Perceptions of Health and Illness, pp.19--46. Singapore:
Harwood Academic Publishers. Lindberg, L., Bohlin, G., Hagekull, B. and
Palmérus, K. (1998) Interactions between mothers and infants showing
food refusal. Infant Mental Health Journal, 17 (4), 334--347. Mladovsky,
P. (2007) Research Note: To what extent are Roma disadvantaged in terms
of health and access to health care? What policies have been introduced
to foster health and social inclusion? The London School of Economics
and Political Science \[Electronic\]. Available:
http://academos.ro/sites/default/files/biblio-docs/ 112/mladrom.pdf
(accessed 4 September 2012). Moos R.H. and Schaefer, J.A. (1984) The
crisis of physical illness: an overview and conceptual approach. In R.
Moos (ed.) Coping with Physical Illness: New Perspectives, vol. 2, New
York: Plenum Press. Moss-Morris, R., Weinman, J., Petrie, K.J., Horne,
R., Cameron, L.D. and Buick, D. (2002) The revised illness perception
questionnaire (IPQ-R). Psychology and Health, 17, 1--16. Rozin, P.,
Fallon, A. and Augustoni-Ziskind, M. (1985) The child's conception of
food: the development of contamination sensitivity to 'disgusting'
substances. Developmental Psychology, 21, 1075--1079.

Using integrative formulation in health settings

259

Salmon, P. (2000) Psychology of Medicine and Surgery: A Guide for
Psychologists, Counsellors, Nurses and Doctors. Chichester, UK: John
Wiley & Sons Ltd. Sontag, S. (1978) Illness as Metaphor. New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. (1974) Judgment
under uncertainty: heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 1124--1131.
Weinman, J., Petrie, K., Moss-Morris, R. and Horne, R. (1996) The
illness perception questionnaire: a new method for assessing the
cognitive representation of illness. Psychology and Health, 11,
431--445. Wilkinson, R. and Marmot, M. (2003) The Solid Facts.
Copenhagen: World Health Organization.

Chapter 12

Controversies and debates about formulation Lucy Johnstone

Jack and Janet: the formulations The reader who has reached this point
may well be feeling overwhelmed by the numerous ways of understanding
Jack's and Janet's difficulties. There are certainly striking
differences between the formulations: some are based on individual work
with Jack and Janet, others on seeing the family; the formulation may be
built primarily about their thoughts, or their feelings, or their
relationships, or their social contexts, or the narratives they have
woven about their lives; it may be constructed largely by the therapist,
or jointly with the individual or family, or perhaps not exist in a
traditional form at all; it may co-exist with a psychiatric diagnosis,
or be seen as an alternative to a diagnosis, or else both the concepts
of diagnosis and formulation may be regarded with suspicion; it may be
an absolutely central or a very peripheral part of the underlying
theoretical approach; and it may lead to very different kinds of
intervention, or perhaps none at all. In all cases, our authors have
emphasised the need to work as collaboratively as possible and to be
open to re-formulation as necessary. The two chapters on Integration
have, we hope, given the reader some pointers towards putting together
the ideas from different models, and have also highlighted the need to
work sensitively and reflectively in real-life settings. We are now in a
position to return to the themes outlined in the very first chapter and
explore some of the issues, debates and controversies in more detail,
before coming to some tentative conclusions and finding out about how
the real Jack and Janet have fared. Formulations: are they
evidence-based? As we saw in chapter 1, the location of formulation
within a scientific, experimental framework as 'a central process in the
role of the scientific practitioner' (Tarrier and Calam, 2002: 311) has
been widely accepted by psychiatrists and clinical psychologists,
especially those of a cognitivebehavioural orientation. The earlier
chapters show that such assumptions are

Controversies and debates about formulation

261

by no means universal, and the application of a positivist model of
scientific enquiry to human problems and relationships is problematic in
itself. However, if one does start from this position then as Bieling
and Kuyken (2003) have pointed out, formulation ought to stand up to
scientific investigation into its reliability, validity and outcome. In
other words, we ought to be able to point to evidence that case
conceptualisation (as it is increasingly referred to in CBT circles),
hailed as the 'heart of evidence-based practice' (Bieling and Kuyken,
2003: 53), is itself supported by the evidence. Unfortunately 'current
evidence for the reliability of the cognitive case formulation method is
modest, at best' while 'there is a striking paucity of research
examining the validity of cognitive case formulations or the impact of
cognitive case formulation on therapy outcome' (Bieling and Kuyken,
2003: 52). While the effectiveness of cognitive therapy as a whole has
received support from the evidence, the same cannot be said for the
individualised case formulation. For example, although clinicians show
reasonable levels of agreement when asked about the descriptive elements
of a formulation, this breaks down as more inference is introduced
(Bieling and Kuyken, 2000; Tarrier and Calam, 2002; Kuyken et al.,
2009). There is very little research looking at the question of
validity, or whether case formulations are meaningfully related to a
client's presenting problems, for which reliability is a pre-requisite.
Nor is there any clear link between case formulation and improved
outcome. This has mainly been tested by comparing manualised CBT
treatment packages with individualised ones; worryingly, and perhaps
surprisingly, the latter do not seem to be any more effective than the
former (Kuyken et al., 2009). Investigations into psychodynamic
formulations have been a little more productive (see summaries in Eells,
2010; Bieling and Kuyken, 2003; Messer, 1996; Weerasekera, 1995),
although early attempts were unpromising (Malan, 1976). One of the most
extensively researched methods is the Core Conflictual Relationship
Theme, in which key themes are inferred from clients' descriptions of
their relationships and used to develop a formulation expressed in a
standardised format (Luborsky and Crits-Christoph, 1990). Interestingly,
there is reasonable evidence of reliability between trained judges.
There is also some limited evidence that interpretations which are in
line with the CCRT themes are positively related to therapeutic alliance
and to outcome. In a frank appraisal of the evidence, Kuyken et
al. (2009) have argued that a more rigorous and principle-based approach
to CBT case conceptualisation, similar to the work on CCRT themes, is
needed as a basis for further evaluation. For example, they suggest that
we need a psychometrically robust measure of the quality of case
conceptualisations which might include such aspects as
comprehensiveness, coherence, parsimony, explanatory power and so on
(2009: 320). This debate raises some interesting questions. It will be
apparent that the above studies are based on a view of
'formulation-as-an-event' -- an object or

262

Lucy Johnstone

'thing' that can be disentangled from the therapy and assessed
independently. As we have seen in earlier chapters this assumption fits
some therapeutic approaches, including CBT, better than others. However,
it is hard to see how any mainstream therapy could proceed without the
therapist having some hypothesis, explicit or not, about the reasons for
the problem. Divested of all such speculations, the therapy would be
reduced to a series of nods and basic reflections. On the other hand, if
it is more accurate to see formulation as a shared activity which is
embedded within the whole process of the therapeutic relationship, in
other words 'formulation-as-a-process' (as in systemic formulation,
chapter 4), the question of how to assess it as a specific entity
becomes extremely complicated. Interestingly, team formulation offers
one way out of this dilemma, since in this the formulation is, by
definition, separate from the therapy -- indeed, therapy may not be part
of the intervention at all. Other questions arising from the debate
about research into formulation include: whose judgements should we use
in order to assess a formulation's quality, reliability or validity? All
the studies to date seem to assume that these decisions fall to the
therapist -- as if the client's views are irrelevant (although Kuyken et
al., 2009 have recently argued that therapist--client agreement is the
key test). Presumably this is related to another unstated assumption,
that the formulation is something produced and owned by the therapist,
rather than co-created with the client (or team) -- which sits oddly
with the strong claims for the collaborative nature of CBT. And what is
'validity' as applied to a formulation, and how, if at all, could it be
measured? (See Barber and Crits-Christoph, 1993 and Messer, 1991 for a
discussion of this complex issue.) Could both CBT and psychodynamic
formulations, for example, be shown to be reliable and valid in a given
case? If so, which would be the 'correct' or 'true' one? Or are we
actually talking about usefulness, not truth (as systemic, narrative and
personal construct formulations emphasise, chapters 4, 5 and 7), in
which case there could be a number of equally effective routes to
solving the same problem? In summary, the gap between the claims made
for formulation and the evidence to back up those claims is only
partially filled. The Division of Clinical Psychology 'Guidelines on the
use of psychological formulation' list 19 hypothesised benefits of
formulation ranging from 'Minimising decisionmaking biases' to
'Strengthening the therapeutic alliance' (DCP, 2011: 8). An additional
17 benefits, including 'Achieving a consistent team approach to
intervention' and 'Raising staff morale' are claimed for team
formulation (2011: 9). As discussed in chapter 10, emerging evidence
about the effectiveness of team formulation is cautiously promising,
although this has yet to be corroborated in terms of impact on the
service user and specific measures such as improved outcomes, reduced
admissions and so on. Clearly, practitioners are firmly convinced of the
value of formulation. However, evidence to support this conviction is
lacking. Moreover, there are numerous conceptual and methodological
obstacles to gathering it.

Controversies and debates about formulation

263

Before discussing these issues further, it is important to note that
there is considerable empirical evidence in support of many of the
theories and psychological principles that formulations draw upon; for
example attachment theory, developmental psychology, and the therapeutic
relationship, as well as specific bodies of knowledge about the effects
of trauma, bereavement, poverty, discrimination, domestic abuse and so
on. Thus, while a specific formulation may or may not be accurate or
useful for a particular individual, its inferences can still be solidly
evidence-based. Secondly, evidence of the potent healing effects of
creating narratives lends indirect support for employing the particular
kind of narrative that we call 'formulation'. For example, adults who
are able to give a coherent and consistent account of their childhood
relationships with their parents, even if these were difficult, are more
able to attune themselves sensitively to their own children (Hesse,
2008). An intervention called Narrative Exposure Therapy has been found
to reduce severe post-traumatic stress in adults and children who have
experienced torture and other atrocities in war-torn countries
(e.g. Neuner et al., 2008). Formulations: truth versus usefulness
Butler, a clinical psychologist and author of a thoughtful overview of
the subject, starts from the premise that formulation is 'the lynch pin
that holds theory and practice together' (Butler, 1998: 1), a broad
definition that allows her to claim agreement from 'proponents of most
major therapeutic traditions' including behaviour therapy, family
therapy, cognitive therapy, cognitive analytic therapy and interpersonal
therapy. She appears to be a little ambivalent on the question of
whether formulations can be said to be 'correct' or 'true'. On the one
hand she asserts that 'formulations can never be shown to be right as
they are hypotheses not statements of facts ... Like other scientific
hypotheses, formulations can only be shown, conclusively, to be wrong'
(Butler, 1998: 20). This appears to locate the process of formulation
alongside other scientific investigations which do assume that there are
'facts' and 'truths' about the way the world is, even if we can never
reach a final account of them. On the other hand, she later says: 'it is
not necessary to believe that there is such a thing as a "correct"
formulation', and quotes Messer: 'There is no one version of the truth
because we largely construct our realities, which inevitably leads to
multiple perspectives on that reality' (Messer, 1996 in Butler 1998:
21). For example, different family members are likely to have their own
individual understandings, or formulations, of their difficulties. This
view leans more towards a social constructionist perspective such as
that expressed in chapters 4 (systemic formulation) and 5 (narrative
formulation). Indeed, it is hard to see how any given formulation can be
said to be the 'correct' one given that it is possible to formulate the
same case from any number of different models -- unless one assumes that
some therapeutic models are 'truer' than others.

264

Lucy Johnstone

The chapters in this book represent different positions along this
continuum, from those that see the notion of a 'correct', 'true' or
'accurate' formulation as relatively unproblematic in principle (which
as above usually leads to attempts to research and validate it along
traditional scientific lines), to those which reject any such
assumptions. The latter position would lead to a very different kind of
research, more likely to be qualitative in nature and to focus on the
client's perspective (one that is notably lacking from the
investigations described above). Although the tension between these two
very different perspectives is not resolved in Butler's article, it does
lead her to suggest that 'a formulation does not have to be correct, but
it does have to be useful' (Butler, 1998: 21). This allows us to take a
step back from the debates about reliability, validity and so on
outlined above. Usefulness itself has to be evaluated, of course, though
perhaps according to less stringent criteria than truth, and Butler
suggests that a 'useful' formulation will help to organise and clarify
the information, develop an internal supervisor, and communicate with
the client. She also puts forward a list of 'Ten tests of a formulation'
(Butler, 1998: 21): 1 Does it make theoretical sense? 2 Does it fit with
the evidence? (symptoms, problems, reactions to experiences) 3 Does it
account for predisposing, precipitating and perpetuating factors? 4 Do
others think it fits? (the patient, supervisor, colleagues) 5 Can it be
used to make predictions? (about difficulties, aspects of the
therapeutic relationship, etc.) 6 Can you work out how to test these
predictions? (to select interventions, to anticipate responses and
reactions to therapy) 7 Does the past history fit? (with respect to the
person's strengths as well as weaknesses) 8 Does treatment based on the
formulation progress as would be expected theoretically? 9 Can it be
used to identify future sources of risk or difficulties for the person?
10 Are there important factors that are left unexplained? Similar
checklists of the usefulness of a formulation have been suggested by
others including Persons (1989). Formulations: useful to whom? Useful to
the client?

To argue that a formulation should be useful immediately raises the
question: 'Useful to whom?'

Controversies and debates about formulation

265

Ideally, of course, one would hope that formulations would be useful to
the client, although clients do not generally come to see us asking
explicitly for formulations. Arguably, though, they do come to us asking
for help in making sense of their experiences, which amounts to much the
same thing. I will return to this point later. As we have seen, there is
little evidence that formulations in general have a beneficial effect on
outcome, which could be taken as a broad indication of whether they are
useful to clients. Indeed, there is virtually no research at all on
clients' views of formulations. One exception is Chadwick, et
al. (2003), who assessed the impact of case formulation on symptoms of
anxiety and depression and found no significant effect. Semistructured
interviews revealed that nine clients found the formulation helpful by
enhancing their understanding of their problems, and six felt reassured
and encouraged. Six others reported that they found the formulation
saddening, upsetting and worrying, for example: 'My problems seemed so
longstanding, I didn't realise they went back to my childhood'. As the
authors note, it is not possible to draw any longer-term conclusions
from this; perhaps initial dismay was followed by a greater commitment
to the therapeutic process, for example. Such an interpretation is
supported by Evans and Parry (1996) who looked at the impact of
re-formulation, a central feature of Cognitive Analytic Therapy, on four
'difficult to help' clients. Re-formulation did not seem to have any
immediate effect on the client's perceived helpfulness of the sessions,
on the therapeutic alliance, or on individual problems, and in interview
clients used words like 'frightening' and 'overwhelming' to describe its
impact. However, this seemed to be related to a recognition that they
had been faced with painful material that they had tried to block off,
and they also commented that they now believed that the therapist had
really listened to and understood them. Similar findings emerged from
Redhead (2010) in which participants made statements such as: 'I knew
that it upset me, realising that it was all about having that abortion,
but you do have to process it, and you do have to talk about it, and,
you know, find some sort of outlet'. Two studies have found more
positive client reactions. Team formulation was endorsed by the clients
in one project, with participants reporting that they felt 'normal' and
had a new understanding of their problems (Kennedy et al., 2003).
Individual formulation, in Redhead's (2010) interviews with 10 clients
who had been referred for CBT for anxiety and depression, was described
overall as increasing understanding and trust, and enabling clients to
move forward. Participants made comments such as: 'It all just made
sense. I got it, because it was true.' 'It was bang on, so I trusted
that she understood.' 'She just got where I was coming from, and to have
someone else understand, well, I just thought, I can't be a complete
freak.' 'I just felt empowered that I could do something about them (the
problems).'

266

Lucy Johnstone

However, some clients had experienced lasting distress from facing the
origins of their difficulties and the associated painful feelings. This
research, limited as it is, does highlight the important point that to
give a formulation to a client, perhaps particularly if it is done in an
expertderived way, is a powerful action which for this very reason may
be experienced as distressing and damaging. 'It raises the possibility
that CF might be a point of unrecognised therapist--client distance for
those clients with negative emotional reactions' (Chadwick et al., 2003:
675). Attention to the process of formulation (collaboration,
reflectiveness, sensitivity and so on) is a central theme of systemic
and narrative approaches, among others, and one might imagine that a
gradual shared evolving story is much less likely to be experienced as
upsetting or damaging. The DCP Guidelines (2011: 30) include a checklist
of good practice in formulating (as distinct from formulation). Harmful
to the client?

The possibility of negative emotional reactions is even more relevant in
situations where the formulation is -- in the client's view -- simply
wrong. For example, an anonymous client reported, 'My therapist simply
ignored what did not fit into her theory ... Worst of all, she dismissed
abusive elements from my past ... It's as if she has plundered my very
being and soul and rewritten my life history according to what she
thinks has affected me' (Anon quoted in Castillo, 2000: 42). Some
particularly disturbing examples come from Jeffrey Masson's book Final
Analysis: I was fascinated by the fact that in less than one hour, a
person's life was being summed up ... And when Dr Garbin read us his
summary, in the somber tone he gave it, it sounded more like a
judgement, a final judgement, than an interpretation, and I could just
imagine how stunned, or stupefied, or mortified that patient would be to
hear it: 'The "truth" which dominated this patient's life', he said,
'was her discovery that she did not possess a penis and so had nothing
to feel important about or to show off.' (Masson commented) 'I pity that
woman ... her truth has been boxed in, sealed tight, unalterable
forever.' (Masson, 1990a: 67, 70) A service user who interviewed other
service users for her research made a similar point, describing 'a man
who was insulted to have been referred for any kind of psychiatric help
as the disasters in his life of the last few years were quite sufficient
to explain his somatic symptoms ... Another person went for
psychological problems, by his definition, and was given a social worker
to work with him. He was insulted by the fact that what he had said
about

Controversies and debates about formulation

267

himself, and his idea of what the trouble was, had been ignored'
(Lindow, personal communication, April 2002). While it is not clear
whether these clients had explicitly been offered a formulation as per
the standard definitions, there was evidently a damaging clash between
their and the professionals' broad understanding of the nature of their
problems. Proctor (2002: 119) has vividly described how her therapist's
consistent unwillingness to revise her interpretations 'had the effect
of completely trapping me as someone unable to trust her own knowledge'.
A mismatch between the psychosocial understandings that service users
often have of their problems, and the medical model of standard
psychiatric treatment that is offered to them, has been widely
documented (Rogers et al., 1993; Barham and Hayward, 1995; Mental Health
Foundation, 1997). This can happen in reverse too -- for example,
individuals or families may hold strong 'illness' beliefs that
contradict the professional viewpoint (as discussed in chapter 4).
Disagreements between service users and professionals about
psychological models and formulations have been much less discussed or
explored. An exception is Madill et al.'s (2001) conversation analysis
of a case in which client and therapist disagreed about their
psychological understanding of the core problem, with the therapy
ultimately having an unsuccessful outcome. This suggests that even if we
cannot demonstrate that 'correct' formulations lead to good therapy
outcomes, we may at least be able to show that 'not-useful' formulations
lead to poor outcomes. Formulation should be an on-going process rather
than a one-off expert pronouncement (see chapter 7), and therefore one
would hope that re-formulation based on the client's feedback would
ensure that unhelpful formulations are revised or abandoned.
Unfortunately, this does not always happen. Dumont (1993) provides an
early example of Freud's refusal to give up a general formulation that,
as he himself acknowledged, met with considerable disagreement from his
patients. When 3-year-old Hans's mother threatened that the family
doctor would cut off his penis if he touched it again, Freud noted that
he was 'obliged to infer' a castration complex, although his patients
'one and all struggle violently against recognising it' (Freud in
Dumont, 1993: 198). In the same vein, Masson (1990b) provides a tragic
re-reading of the famous case of Dora, who determinedly resisted Freud's
interpretation that she was secretly in love with Herr K., a friend of
her father. In fact, as Masson shows, Dora was repelled by Herr K.'s
advances, and legitimately furious that her father had tried to promote
this liaison as a pay-off for his own affair with Frau K. She ended up
being betrayed not only by her father but also by Freud, who was
determined to impose his own view of reality on her. Such travesties are
not confined to dead psychoanalysts. Dumont (1993: 197) argues that
theories are

268

Lucy Johnstone

mindsets that not only dispose us to select and configure the
innumerable data that clients proffer over several sessions, but in
subtle ways tendentiously elicit those data in the first place ...
Rogerians, rational emotive therapist, Horneyans, behaviourists,
existential therapists, Freudians, Gestaltists, among many others,
rather consistently formulate ... the same kinds of problems for the
most diverse clients and disorders. Having done this, they are all
likely to make 'the fundamental error in problem solving ... thinking
that the "givens" of the problem are facts when indeed they are more or
less fallible inferences' (Dumont, 1993: 196). We tend to be extremely
resistant to revising our initial explanations of phenomena, even in the
face of contradictory evidence. In systemic therapy this reluctance to
give up on a formulation has been termed 'marrying one's hypothesis'.
While a little dating and courtship is permitted, the general advice is
to be as promiscuous as possible with one's hypotheses (Dallos and
Draper, 2000). Social psychology research has established that our
judgements are characteristically distorted by a whole range of
attributions that operate largely outside our awareness. Kuyken (2006)
has summarised the biases that may affect the process of case
formulation, especially at times of uncertainty and time pressure: the
tendency to interpret new information as an example of something else
that we already know about (representativeness bias); the tendency to
draw on information that is more easily available to us (availability
bias); and the tendency to assimilate new information into a core
initial hypothesis (anchoring and adjustment bias). The general point
seems to be that professionals need to maintain a difficult balance
between the theory and formulations that their work is based on, and the
suspension of these ideas that allows them to listen properly to their
clients. They must also find a balance between applying the evidence and
maintaining reflective awareness about the influence of their own views,
feelings and experiences. Without this, there is the danger of 'a
diagnostic style of formulation which is just a list of problems ... an
inflexible and concrete bunch of ideas' (Ray, 2008). Butler notes:
'Being on the receiving end of a formulation can feel like being weighed
up, evaluated, or judged -- like being "seen through" or "rumbled"
rather than understood' (Butler, 1998: 2). The examples cited above
suggest that if the therapist insists on imposing a formulation that is
actually wrong, or that is strongly rejected by the client, the
consequences can be even more devastating. Masson notes that 'We know
that even torture victims often find the fact of not being believed as
painful as the torture itself' (Masson, 1990b: 96). The fundamental
issue here is power, and specifically, the power of one person, in an
expert position, to impose their viewpoint on another. In her
introduction to Masson's Against Therapy, Rowe says: 'In the final
analysis, power is the right to have your definition of reality prevail
over other people's definition of reality' (Rowe in Masson, 1990b: 16).

Controversies and debates about formulation

269

There is no space to repeat or explore the wider debates about power in
psychotherapy here, although they are obviously relevant to formulation
since it is a central process in most therapies. Viewpoints range from
Masson's assertion that all therapy is inevitably abusive because it
always involves an imbalance of power (Masson, 1990b), to Proctor's
(2002) more sophisticated analysis of the different kinds of power, both
positive and negative, that may form part of the therapeutic
relationship. For the purposes of this book, we can note that
formulation is less likely to be damaging if it 'is presented
questioningly and collaboratively ... It should be presented as a
hypothesis, not as fact ... Formulation thus goes hand-in-hand with
re-formulation' (Butler, 1998: 22). In other words, the tentative and
provisional nature of the formulation must always be borne in mind, and
it should be a joint exercise. Rosenbaum (1996) is also aware of the
dangers: 'Formulation can slide too easily into "fitting something to a
known formula"'. His 'manifesto for avoiding formulation' describes how:
Whenever I see a client, my first step towards formulation is to take
the walk from waiting room to office one relaxed step at a time. Once I
get back to the office, I have the client precede me into the room while
I stand outside and try to let go of everything I have ever heard, hoped
for, expected or wanted -- what Bion (1967) calls entering the session
'without memory and without desire'. I pause and make an active effort
to cultivate compassion, kindness, acceptance, and joy for the client.
(Rosenbaum, 1996: 110) Attaining Rosenbaum's Zen-like position of
detachment, although a worthy aim, is likely to be difficult or
impossible for most of us. We cannot separate ourselves completely from
our own assumptions and judgements and those of the culture we are part
of, and it may be naive to tell ourselves that we can. This brings us
onto the question of formulations and culture. Clearly, cultural
misunderstandings are one possible source of mistaken or unhelpful
formulations. The DCP Guidelines note that 'Western models of psychology
and psychological therapy, and, therefore, the formulations that are
based on them, often privilege ideas of independence and
self-actualisation ... and focus on the individual as the basic unit of
therapy ... Formulations may, therefore, need adaptation for use in a
culturally appropriate way'. The Guidelines also note that 'the concept
of formulation itself, especially one that prioritises internal causal
factors, is itself culturally-based' (2011: 18). These are complex and
unresolved issues. Perhaps it is worth remembering that our own
culturally sanctioned explanatory constructs are not necessarily more
'true' or more 'useful'; and that we need to respect a variety of ways
of conceptualising and coping with distress even if we do not fully
share them. We will need to inform ourselves about the cultural meanings
of certain beliefs in order to do this effectively, and there may be a
need for quite a bit

270

Lucy Johnstone

of 'negotiating for shared ... meanings' (Butler 1998: 20). A parallel
can be drawn with the case of Jack. We may not understand or agree with
the highly unusual ideas expressed by someone like Jack, but we can at
least respect them as personally meaningful (see May, 2011 for an
example of working in this way). Sometimes this means searching for a
symbolic rather than literal meaning. This applies within as well as
across cultures. The Hearing Voices Network is a self-help campaigning
organisation that challenges the view of voice-hearing as pathological
and promotes various non-medical ways of coping with them. It uses
'constructs', which are very similar to formulations, to co-create an
individual understanding of the meaning and origins of a person's
voices. The HVN takes an interesting perspective on these issues, with
its willingness to step right outside conventional psychiatric and
psychological explanations and acknowledge entirely different frameworks
that may be held by voice-hearers such as mystical, religious,
metaphysical and paranormal beliefs. A conviction that voices are, for
example, due to telepathy or reincarnation or gods or ghosts is treated
with as much respect as any other belief system, and valued for its
importance and usefulness to the voice-hearer. 'Accepting the experience
and the belief system is a prerequisite of effective therapy' (Romme and
Escher, 2000: 108). Useful to the therapist?

Most of Butler's (1998) 'Ten tests of a formulation' seem to apply more
directly to the therapist than to the client. He/she will be enabled to
organise material, make predictions, identify risks, select
interventions and so on. Her 'Summary of the purposes of formulation'
(see chapter 1) is also mainly therapist-focused, covering factors such
as clarifying hypotheses and questions, planning treatment strategies
and predicting responses to strategies and interventions. One would
hope, of course, that what is beneficial to the therapist would also be
beneficial to the client. Once again, there is little experimental
evidence to support this. Chadwick, et al.'s (2003) study found that it
was powerful and validating for therapists to have clients endorse a
case formulation; that it made the therapists feel more hopeful about
therapy and increased their sense of alliance and collaboration; and
that it increased their confidence in the choice of therapy. However, as
noted above, there was no identifiable change in the clients' distress
or alliance scores. The authors note the possibility that 'at least some
of the faith therapists have in the potency of CF might be due to the
impact it has for them personally' (Chadwick et al., 2003: 675). Any
practitioner can appreciate the feeling of relief at arriving at a
formula that seems to offer an explanation and a possible way forward,
in the face of the overwhelming pain and confusion that clients bring to
us. In Yalom's words, our theories are 'self-created, wafer-thin
barriers against the pain of uncertainty' (Yalom in Dumont, 1993: 203).
However, there is a danger that

Controversies and debates about formulation

271

this is meeting our emotional or intellectual needs and not those of the
client. There may be less risk of this in approaches such as systemic
where, as we saw in chapter 4, the team may generate multiple
formulations, which are offered to the family and judged in terms of
their usefulness to them. Useful to professions?

There is another important way in which formulations may primarily serve
the interests of the therapist rather than the client, and that is via
the benefits that may accrue to the therapist's profession by adopting a
formulation-based approach. As discussed in chapter 1, formulation does
not originate with, and is not used exclusively by, any single
profession, and it is listed as a skill in the regulations for health,
educational, forensic, counselling and sports and exercise psychologists
as well as clinical psychologists and psychiatrists. This does not fit
with a statement about formulation from the Division of Clinical
Psychology's 'The core purpose and philosophy of the profession' (DCP,
2010: 6): 'What makes this activity unique to clinical psychologists is
the information on which they draw. The ability to access, review,
critically evaluate, analyse and synthesise psychological data and
knowledge from a psychological perspective is one that is unique to
psychologists.' These rather grandiose claims have been greeted with
scepticism by other clinical psychologists (Harper and Moss, 2003;
Crellin, 1998). Harper and Moss feel that formulation 'had a minimal
influence on our development as clinical psychologists and it is perhaps
testament to our profession's ability to regularly reconstruct its
identity that formulation, barely heard of a decade ago, is now seen as
a central defining characteristic' (Harper and Moss, 2003: 6). Crellin
argues that claims about formulation have served the key political
purposes of, in the early years, achieving professional independence
from psychiatry, and more recently justifying increases in grading and
training places. The DCP statement appears to rest on clinical
psychologists' claim to be drawing on research and evidence as a basis
for formulation -- an 'elegant application of science' as Kinderman
(2001: 9) puts it. According to the DCP, clinical psychologists are
'more than psychological therapists; they are scientist-practitioners'
because they are 'rooted in the science of psychology' (DCP, 2010:
2--3). Detailed discussion of these claims is beyond the scope of this
chapter (but see Bem and de Jong, 1997, and Jones and Elcock, 2001 for
debates on the status of psychology as a science). The DCP 'Good
practice guidelines' (DCP, 2011: 13, 15) take a somewhat different
perspective on the characteristic features of formulation in clinical
psychology. They state that 'the fullest use of clinical psychologists'
professional skills implies a broad-based, integrated and multi-model
perspective which locates personal meaning within its wider systemic,
organisational and societal contexts'. In other words, 'A narrower or

272

Lucy Johnstone

single-model formulation needs to be a conscious and justifiable choice
from a wider field of possible models and causal influences'. The key
terms here are multi-model, integrated, and personal meaning. While this
implies the ability to evaluate and apply the evidence, there is an
equally strong emphasis on reflexivity, or the recognition that 'the
subject nature of our discipline, human beings and human distress ...
requires a kind of artistry that also involves intuition, flexibility
and critical evaluation of one's experience' (2011: 7). Boyle (2001) has
some interesting arguments to make about the possible role of
formulation as an alternative to psychiatric diagnosis (see below); a
less self-interested, though not unproblematic, way for clinical
psychologists to make political use of the concept of formulation.
Psychiatrists are also showing increased interest in formulation in
parallel with the international controversy about the proposals for the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 5, in which psychiatric diagnosis has
come under sustained criticism. As one author has noted: 'These
limitations to ... diagnosis, if true, are serious. Consequently
clinicians and professional training standards have argued that case
formulation is a better way to guide selection of the most effective
treatment' (Sturmey, 2009: 6). While this is in some ways a welcome
development, it also has potential drawbacks, depending on how
formulation is defined. Formulation versus psychiatric diagnosis The
various therapeutic approaches have taken different views on whether
formulation is a replacement for, or an addition to, psychiatric
diagnostic systems such as DSM. As we saw in chapter 1, early behaviour
therapists, as part of establishing their credibility in relation to
psychiatrists and their right to work independently from them, promoted
functional analysis (subsequently developed into case formulation) as a
more useful alternative to diagnosis, since it did not rely on
unobservable mental entities and had clear implications for intervention
(Eells, 2010). Contemporary CBT therapists are more likely to see the
two systems as able to co-exist (see chapter 2). Turkat, an influential
figure in the development of case formulation, argued that 'diagnosis
and formulation complement each other' (Bruch and Bond, 1998: 3).
Tarrier and Calam, clinical psychologists and CBT therapists, argue that
'it is feasible to use case formulations within a disorder-based
classification system' (Tarrier and Calam, 2002: 315). Early
psychoanalysts did not include psychiatric diagnosis as part of their
understanding of their patients (Eells, 2010: chapter 1) although
contemporary psychoanalytic and psychodynamic clinicians may well do so
(Malan, 1995). According to one psychodynamic therapist, 'diagnosis and
formulation have different and complementary functions'; both are said
to be useful, especially in neurosis and 'personality disorders'
(Aveline, 1999: 199).

Controversies and debates about formulation

273

Some CBT therapists have reached a kind of halfway house on this issue,
using psychiatric diagnostic terms such as histrionic or narcissistic
personality disorder as a short-hand general formulation for certain
groups of individuals who express their problems in characteristic ways.
In a similar way, psychoanalytically oriented clinicians may refer to
'psychoanalytic character diagnosis', which uses diagnostic terms such
as 'paranoid personality', 'depressive personality' and 'manic
personality' to describe certain character structures and the typical
defences and transference reactions that accompany them (Weston, 1990).
The intention here, again, is to provide a general formulation of
certain types of psychological difficulty together with indications for
therapeutic intervention. This would be supplemented with a formulation
constructed to fit the particular individual. This is a somewhat
confusing use of language. All therapists are likely to have at their
disposal certain broad-level formulations that describe common patterns
of difficulty (for example, 'bereavement reaction' or 'trauma
reaction'). These help therapists to look out for typical responses
(denial, shock, flashbacks and so on) and to suggest therapeutic
interventions that are often found useful in such cases. However, it
introduces an extra layer of confusion to use medical/ psychiatric
concepts in order to describe something that is actually being
conceptualised in psychological terms. As discussed below, the two
models, medical and psychological, have very different assumptions and
implications. Systemic therapists have always seen families in social
and relational, as opposed to medical, terms. They start, by definition,
from the fundamental assumption that difficulties never reside within
one individual, as is implied by a psychiatric diagnosis. And, as
described in earlier chapters, social inequalities and narrative
therapists, along with some family therapists, are sceptical not only
about diagnosis but about some versions of formulation as well,
particularly in its more concrete sense. Their focus is not 'the
problem' (or 'the formulation') as such; rather, it is the views of 'the
problem' held by the identified client, his/her family, and by the
systems in which both client and therapist live and work. Some of the
best-known writers on formulation take the view that combining
psychological formulation with psychiatric diagnosis is unproblematic.
Eells, for example, suggests that 'a case formulation provides a
pragmatic tool to supplement and apply a diagnosis to the specifics of
an individual's life. It also serves as a vehicle for converting a
diagnosis into a plan for treatment' (Eells, 2010: 25). Weerasekera's
grid in which formulations from various models can be combined with
psychiatric diagnosis to produce a comprehensive treatment plan, has
been described in chapter 8. Thus, for example, in the case of an
individual suffering from depressive and anxiety symptoms in the
presence of chronic, severe marital distress may benefit from individual
(medication plus cognitive behavioural therapy) and systemic (marital)

274

Lucy Johnstone

therapy ... A pharmacological treatment of depression can be integrated
with marital therapy, whereby the same therapist administers the
medication and conducts the marital therapy. (Weerasekera, 1995: 357)
These suggestions have much in common with the multi-axial
classification of DSM, whereby information about personal and social
context is added on to the main psychiatric diagnosis. However, as we
have seen, such views are not unique to psychiatrists. A debate on the
subject in The Psychologist (Pilgrim, 2000; Letters to the Editor, 2000)
drew supporters from both sides. It is worth noting that formulation is
strongly emphasised as a skill in current psychiatric training, in both
written work and presentations. In evaluating these developments, we
need to be clear what is meant by 'formulation'. The DCP Guidelines draw
a distinction between psychiatric formulation and psychological
formulation. Whereas trainee psychiatrists are required to 'demonstrate
the ability to construct formulations of patients' problems that include
appropriate differential diagnoses' (Royal College of Psychiatrists,
2010: 25), the Guidelines define psychological formulations in clinical
psychology as 'not premised on a functional psychiatric diagnosis' (DCP,
2011: 29). For example, while a psychiatric formulation might take the
form of: 'Schizophrenia, probably with a genetic component as indicated
by the family history, triggered by the stress of bereavement', the
equivalent psychological formulation might be: 'Hearing the voice of
your abuser, as a result of unprocessed feelings and memories stirred up
by his death'. While psychiatric formulation acknowledges the impact of
psychosocial factors to some extent, it is seen as an addition to, not a
replacement for, the diagnosis. Rather like the currently popular
biopsychosocial model of mental distress, a psychiatric formulation
retains a primary role for (unevidenced) biological causal factors,
while reducing other life events to the status of 'triggers' of a
disease process. In political terms, it puts psychiatrists in the strong
position of claiming expertise in both these essential skills, diagnosis
and formulation. However, there are serious disadvantages to this
conceptually incoherent position. In chapters 4 (systemic formulation),
8 (integrative formulation) and 10 (team formulation), it was pointed
out that professionals and institutions are likely to be working from
fundamentally medical assumptions and thinking in terms of diagnosis,
medication and so on, and that in Jack's case this may have both
benefits and costs. For example, Jack's medication may help both him and
his family to cope at present -- but on the other hand, it may reinforce
the message that he is inadequate and a failure. A 'formulation fight'
between professionals is not going to help anyone, least of all the
client, and the authors give some useful ideas about how to avoid this.
The disadvantages of combining the two systems will now be explored in a
little more detail.

Controversies and debates about formulation

275

For a start, there are the many documented shortcomings of psychiatric
diagnosis as a form of classification: low reliability, lack of validity
of diagnostic concepts, overlap between categories, and unclear links
with aetiology, prognosis and treatment. It can also have a number of
other undesirable consequences such as the obscuring of personal, social
and cultural contexts; the individualising of problems; stigma and
disempowerment; removal of responsibility; omission of the client's
viewpoint; objectification of the client; and most worrying of all, the
loss of personal meaning (Boyle, 2002; Follette and Houts, 1996;
Johnstone, 2000, Johnstone, 2008; Kirk and Kutchins, 1992; Pilgrim,
2000; Honos-Webb and Leitner, 2001; Mehta and Farina, 1997). These
criticisms have recently re-surfaced in heated debates about the latest
edition of DSM (see www. dxrevisionwatch.wordpress.com). Formulation
could, at least in principle, be seen as a possible way of
re-introducing personal meaning, personal and social contexts and mutual
collaboration into mental health work. If the meta-messages of
psychiatric diagnosis are that the service user's difficulties have no
personal significance, are not within his/her control, and may last a
lifetime, psychological formulation can restore a sense of meaning,
agency and hope, for both service users and staff (Johnstone, 2008).
Arguing against the use of both systems concurrently, Boyle (2001)
points out that if psychiatric diagnosis did what it aims and claims to
do, and provided a valid, coherent and reasonably complete account of
someone's difficulties with clear indications about effective treatment,
then psychological formulation would be redundant. The same is also true
the other way round. If a convincing formulation can be developed,
meeting Butler's (1998) criteria for accounting for the facts,
indicating the intervention and so on, then an extra explanation that
says, in effect, 'Oh and by the way, they have a mental illness too'
becomes redundant. As argued in the DCP Guidelines, a psychological
explanation of 'symptoms' such as hearing voices, low mood and so on
eliminates the need for concepts such as 'schizophrenia' or 'bipolar
disorder'. With a dual system, we are being offered incompatible
explanations from conflicting models: 'You have a medical disease with
primarily biological causes' versus 'Your problems are an understandable
emotional response to your life circumstances'. In essence, a
formulation says that the nature and content of your distress is
personally meaningful, while a psychiatric diagnosis says that it is
meaningless. These assumptions cannot both be true. Moreover, the
adoption of both models at the same time leads to damaging
contradictions in clinical practice, as discussed in chapter 10 (team
formulation). With Weerasekera's anxious and depressed client, for
example, the medication, unless carefully explained, carries the message
that 'the problem is a biological one lying within you as an individual,
and the pill will rectify it'. On the other hand, the marital therapy
will not make progress unless the couple are able to accept that 'the
problem is a function of the relationship you have with each other, and
you both need to accept

276

Lucy Johnstone

responsibility for working on it'. This is a recipe for stalemate
(Johnstone, 2000). Thus formulation can, Boyle argues, be offered as a
genuine alternative to diagnosis and its many shortcomings. Pilgrim
agrees, asking: Do we not have a professional responsibility to
challenge and expose the shortcomings of a diagnostic approach? ...
Surely our main duty is ... not to shore up medical reifications, but to
demonstrate why formulations about specific presenting problems in
specific contexts are more useful and compelling. He attributes the
failure to do this to clinical psychology's 'ambivalent position towards
psychiatry -- wanting full professional independence but, at times of
selective convenience, co-opting a medical knowledge base' (Pilgrim,
2000: 304). In a recent and radical shift, the profession has answered
this call by issuing a Position Statement calling for the abandonment of
functional psychiatric diagnosis ('schizophrenia', 'bipolar disorder',
'personality disorder' and so on) and the development of
formulation-based systems instead (DCP, 2013). However, it is not a
simple matter of jettisoning one system for the other. For a start, 'the
issue is that "problem" is not an objectively identifiable natural
category, and it is often not possible to see any particular behaviour
or experience as inherently problematic' (Boyle, 2001: 2). This is an
issue that has been explored most thoroughly within systemic, social
constructionist and social inequality approaches, with their willingness
to ask, 'Who has the problem?' and to deconstruct some of the current
discourses around what is viewed as problematic behaviour (being a lone
parent, being a working mother, and so on). Another danger is that
formulations can be open to some of the same criticisms as diagnosis --
for example, that by uncritically accepting the view of the service user
or client as the site of the problem, formulations individualise
distress and ignore social context. And, as we have already seen, there
is no guarantee that formulations will not be used in a stigmatising,
objectifying, un-collaborative way as well. Moreover, service users may
find formulation a more complex way of accounting for their difficulties
to others, in contrast to the apparently stronger justification provided
by diagnosis, which thus represents both 'salvation and damnation'
(Leeming et al., 2009). Perhaps the best that can be said is that these
dangers are not intrinsic to the process of formulation (and the earlier
chapters have discussed a number of ways of trying to avoid these
risks), whereas they are, arguably, an almost unavoidable consequence of
psychiatric diagnosis. Even if we accept psychological formulation as a
valid alternative to psychiatric diagnosis at an individual or family
level, there is still the problem of replacing the various functions
that diagnosis serves -- or seems to serve -- at

Controversies and debates about formulation

277

a broader clustering level. In general medicine, a diagnosis is used to
indicate which category the patient's complaints fall into and hence to
give indications about aetiology, prognosis and treatment and provide a
basis for communication and research. The fact that psychiatric
diagnosis does all of these very poorly, or not at all, does not
eliminate the need for some kind of clustering system so that we do not
have to treat every individual service user as a 'first instance'.
Psychiatric diagnosis also retains its central position because it
performs, or seems to perform, a variety of administrative functions
such as deciding who should be offered a service, who should be held
responsible for their actions (e.g. in the criminal justice system), and
who should receive benefits. It may be useful to discuss these issues in
more depth. Are formulations individualising? It is certainly true that
formulations can be individualising, ignoring personal and social
contexts and replicating the damage that has been attributed to
psychiatric diagnosis. The early women's movement abounded with accounts
of women whose despair at being trapped within traditional roles had
been met with mystifying psychoanalytic formulations from their (male)
psychotherapists: The loss of her father when she was six was assumed to
be the cause of Mrs O's depression, and her unresolved Oedipal conflict
was thought to underlie her husband's complaints of her frigidity. Mrs O
... was totally responsible for the 24 hour a day, 7 day a week care of
three pre-school children. Her husband's demanding job as an air traffic
controller ... precluded any help from him. Mrs O felt trapped, tired,
overwhelmed, resentful and seething with anger towards her husband.
Because of her socialisation she thought she should be happy, could not
acknowledge her feelings as expectable in the situation, and agreed with
her doctor that she was depressed, neurotic and had sexual problems.
(Penfold and Walker, 1983: 179) Davis's (1986) in-depth qualitative
analysis shows how the task of re-formulating a female client's initial
version of her problems as stemming from her role as full-time housewife
and mother, into an individual deficit (she is not good at expressing
her feelings), is achieved via the therapeutic conversation. A central
claim of David Smail's extensive critiques of therapy is that
psychotherapies are concerned with individual internal psychological
states viewed in isolation from their social and political context
(Smail, 1993, 1996). Another noted critic of psychotherapy, Jeffrey
Masson, contends that by focusing on the individual, 'every therapy I
have examined displays a lack of interest in social justice' (Masson,
1990b: 285). The result of formulating

278

Lucy Johnstone

social and political problems as individual pathology is mystification
about the true origins of one's distress (Smail, 1993, 1996) and 'an
implicit acceptance of the political status quo' (Masson, 1990b: 285),
which, for some people, betrays the true purpose of the therapy
industry: 'The rise of a purely psychological view of human difficulties
is a handy way of mystifying social reality' (Kovel, 1981: 73). The DCP
Guidelines on formulation remind us that 'service users are almost
always survivors of immensely difficult personal and social
circumstances. Interventions will be ineffective if wider causal factors
are located at an individual level, thus pathologising the service user
and increasing their sense of hopelessness' (2011: 20). The key question
is whether formulations are inevitably individualising. A number of
attempts have been made to reduce this risk. Systemic therapists, by
definition, seek to formulate problems from a broader than individual
perspective, including as appropriate the couple, family, school,
workplace and so on. They are likely to be aware of competing views
about whether there is a problem and what the problem is, from the
individual, the family, agencies such as the police and social services,
the school, the legal system, professionals and the wider culture
(Dallos and Draper, 2000). This may lead to a complex, multi-layered
intervention of the type described in chapter 4. Community psychology is
a movement within clinical psychology which, as we saw in chapter 6,
aims to develop an understanding of people within their social worlds
and to use this to reduce mental distress through social action. A
well-known example of this comes from community psychologist Sue
Holland, who has developed an approach that she calls Social Action
Psychotherapy (Holland, 1992). In this, women move, as and when they are
ready, from 'Step one: Patients on pills' through the various stages of
person-to-person psychotherapy, talking in groups and taking action in
their community. The formulation or understanding of their difficulties
thus proceeds in layers, with the second step most closely resembling
traditional psychotherapy and the last two adding in the social and
political dimension. Holland calls this 'a progression from private
symptom to public action' (Holland, 1992: 5). There have, then, been a
number of attempts to integrate wider relational, social and political
factors into the understanding of people's problems, although it should
be noted that simply asking the family along does not in itself
guarantee such a formulation. (See, for example, the Family Management
approach to psychosis which is based on the philosophy that 'we do not
view the family as being in need of treatment ... our aim is to help the
family to cope better with the sick member who is suffering from a
defined disease', Kuipers et al., 1992: 4). Nor, as Sue Holland
observes, does working in the community necessarily indicate a
willingness to acknowledge the role of inequality and injustice in the
people's difficulties: 'The present trend towards "hospitalising the
community" ... using new means but old models ... is a backward step'
(Holland, 1992: 7).

Controversies and debates about formulation

279

Equally, it has been argued that individual therapy need not necessarily
imply an individualising formulation of the client's difficulties.
RoyChowdhury contends that Smail draws a false dichotomy between the
practice of individual psychotherapy and the acknowledgement of the
social world. While 'the socio-cultural constraints of poverty and
disadvantage ... should not be psychologised away' (Roy-Chowdhury, 2003:
8), there is still the possibility (although it is certainly
under-developed in many mainstream therapies) of using the
psychotherapeutic conversation to make the links between the individual
and the society of which they are a part (for examples, see McNamee and
Gergen, 1992). This is a position that Smail also appears to acknowledge
at times when he talks of the role of individual psychotherapy as 'to
side with the person rather than the social world, helping to drag out
his or her internalised norms ... At the very least this gives people
the freedom to think and feel what they like, to examine their
experience for its significance rather than simply for its
"abnormality"' (Smail, 1987: 401). The implication is that even within
one-to-one therapy, it is possible both to challenge assumptions about
the nature of the 'problem' and to construct formulations which link the
person and their social context. The starting point must be 'a critical
awareness of the wider societal context within which formulating takes
place, even if this dimension is not explicitly included in every
individual formulation' (DCP, 2011: 20). This is even more crucial in
the light of recent compelling evidence that a society's level of social
inequality is causally related to (among many other undesirable
outcomes) its rates of 'mental illness'. 'If Britain became as equal as
the four most equal societies ... mental illness might be almost halved'
(Wilkinson and Pickett, 2009: 261). Clearly, the implications of these
findings go well beyond formulation. Some of them are drawn out below.
What would a formulation-based system look like? We can see that the use
of formulation as an alternative to psychiatric diagnosis is far from
straightforward if we want to avoid simply reproducing some of the
latter's more damaging aspects. It is, however, perfectly possible to
work with individual clients without using diagnosis at all, as many
clinical psychologists have done for years. The issue becomes very much
more complex if we move from individual work to a broader clustering
level. What general terms could be used to replace diagnoses such as
'schizophrenia', 'psychosis', 'bipolar disorder', 'ADHD', 'personality
disorder' and so on, and the functions that they serve, or seem to
serve? In another sign of the inadequacy of the existing system, various
alternatives such as 'traumatic psychosis' (Callcott and Turkington,
2006) and 'dissociative' subtype (Ross, 2008) have been suggested for
'schizophrenia', while 'complex PTSD' has been put forward as a
replacement for 'personality

280

Lucy Johnstone

disorder' (Herman, 2001). These terms can perhaps be understood as
occupying a halfway position between formulation and diagnosis,
incorporating some acknowledgement of psychosocial causal factors while
retaining the concept of 'disorder'. In this respect they are similar to
some existing DSM diagnoses such as bereavement reaction, adjustment
disorder and dissociative disorder. While these proposals do indicate a
paradigm under threat, it is important to note that they stop well short
of challenging its core assumptions. They still imply some kind of
dysfunction located within an individual rather than, say, a desperate
attempt to employ survival mechanisms to cope with traumatic
relationships and situations. They also imply a cut-off point between
'well' and 'ill', 'normal' and 'abnormal', rather than a spectrum. More
specifically, they still make the bizarre assumption that human
emotional distress -- which is what we are talking about -- can be
divided into the neat categories associated with classification in the
natural sciences. One of the reasons that it is so difficult to think
outside the 'DSM mindset' is that its assumptions (which, as noted, can
tarnish formulation as well) are deeply embedded in Western culture as a
whole, with its emphasis on the separation of thought from feeling, the
individual from the community, the mind from the body, and humankind
from the natural world. Stepping back from all this implies the very
different philosophical position that human beings are not (potentially
faulty) machines carving an individual path through their lives, but are
fundamentally meaning-making creatures, whose subjective experiences are
'a way of being in the world ... relationally, societally and materially
co-constituted' (Cromby and Harper, 2009: 335--336, italics in the
original). Although this may be an unfamiliar way of thinking, it is in
fact much better supported by the evidence than the traditional
psychiatric one (see, for example, Brown and Moran, 1997; Warner, 2004;
Fernando, 2003; Wilkinson and Pickett, 2009 for some of the
well-established links between subjective meanings, emotional distress,
and relational and social/material circumstances). Rather than causes,
as in the medical model of distress, we need to look for grounds or
reasons for human behaviour. Human beings are agents and their actions
are intentional and functional, albeit mediated by biological processes
(Ingleby, 1981; Cromby and Harper, 2009). The painstaking and painful
process of re-discovering these connections and patterns (as in the
large body of recent research on trauma and abuse, Read and Bentall,
2012) is the best hope for providing us with a body of knowledge to
support the co-construction of individual formulations. It is too soon
to say what kind of general patterns might emerge from this project. It
is possible that the majority of psychiatric diagnoses could be replaced
with something similar to the broad-level terms that, as already noted,
most therapists already draw on implicitly in their work -- perhaps
'unresolved trauma in the context of social isolation and unemployment'
and so on. In philosophical terms these would be 'fuzzy concepts'
without exact boundaries,

Controversies and debates about formulation

281

cutting across traditional psychiatric diagnoses, but precise enough to
fulfil one of the core purposes of categorisation, i.e. to reduce
complexity by grouping similar types of experience together. This would
provide a basis for carrying out further research, as has happened very
successfully with the term 'hearing voices' as used by the Hearing
Voices Network. These terms could then be used to indicate the relevant
evidence and resources that specific individual formulations should draw
upon. They would not on their own answer administrative questions about
responsibility, eligibility for benefits and so on, but psychiatric
diagnosis does not do this in any satisfactory way either. These issues
and debates will increasingly come to the fore as psychiatry is forced
to deal with the fall-out from the DSM-5 disaster. Can anyone construct
formulations? Do we need them at all? Despite the many claims made for
formulation, it is not seen as essential by everyone; indeed some would
dispute that it constitutes a special skill at all. 'Every time you
cross a road you are formulating. It is hardly a higher skill ... Why a
person in their mid-twenties with a postgraduate psychology
qualification would be better at this than, say, a journalist, a
reasonably well-read union member, a social historian or my mum, is
beyond me', in the view of one clinical psychologist (Newnes, personal
communication, April 2002). The understanding and creation of meaning is
certainly not unique to therapists; indeed it is central to what it is
to be human. Personal construct therapy (chapter 7) argues that we are
essentially meaning-creating creatures; we are engaged in a constant
process of hypothesising about the world around us, and creating and
elaborating a personal system of meanings which will enable us to
survive in it. We are, in this sense, 'formulating' our experiences all
the time. Thus it is not surprising if we can find examples of what
could loosely be called 'formulations' in all aspects of our daily lives
-- including, perhaps, crossing the road -- and anywhere that is
concerned with exploring what it is to be human, such as novels. The
construction of stories, or narratives, also seems to be 'a ubiquitous
and fundamental characteristic of human nature ... essential for
psychological survival, enabling us to arrive at a coherent sense of
identity through providing a vehicle by which we can understand the
past, explain the present and prepare for the future', (Corrie and Lane,
2010: 106--107; and see chapter 5). Some therapeutic approaches
explicitly reject the use of formulation in its usually understood
sense, as we have seen in the chapters on narrative and social
inequalities approaches. Carl Rogers saw formulation, or as he referred
to it 'psychological diagnosis', as unnecessary and even damaging, since
it implied the use of power and expertise by the therapist with the
consequent

282

Lucy Johnstone

danger of the client relinquishing responsibility for themselves
(Rogers, 1951 in Eells, 2010). However, his writings make it clear that
something rather similar, that is, finding the meanings of the client's
experience, is a central aspect of being empathic, albeit with a very
person-centred emphasis on caution, sensitivity and non-judgementalism:
It (being empathic) involves being sensitive, moment to moment, to the
changing felt meanings which flow in this other person ... By pointing
to the possible meanings in the flow of his/her experiencing you help
the person to focus on this useful type of referent, to experience the
meanings more fully, and to move forward in the experiencing. (Rogers,
1975: 4) The Hearing Voices Network, as we have seen, talks in terms of
creating 'constructs' rather than formulations, but does not see this as
a task that necessarily involves a professional; it can also be
facilitated by a friend, partner or another voice-hearer. However, it
does believe that making links between voices and life experiences,
whether those links are historical, psychodynamic or metaphorical, can
relieve distress (Romme and Escher, 2000). It could be argued, then,
that even those constructionist, humanistic or self-help approaches
which reject the use of formulation as such, and object to the idea of a
professional producing this kind of summary, are in fact using
techniques or strategies which have the aim of helping clients reach a
psychological understanding, or formulation, of their distress. The key
difference seems to be an over-riding emphasis on respecting the
client's own views -- a welcome antidote to some of the abuses described
earlier in the chapter. So what are formulations then? As noted earlier,
clients do not typically come to us requesting a 'formulation' of their
problems. In the sense suggested above, though, it can be argued that
they do approach us asking for explanations, and for help in
constructing meaning and making sense of their distress. Butler (1998:
2) suggests that the key assumption underlying all formulations is that
'at some level it all makes sense'. Towards the end of her review she
describes formulation as 'a way of summarising meanings, and of
negotiating for shared ways of understanding and communicating about
them'. This may be a flag under which therapists of different
persuasions, and their clients, can all unite -- despite the other
differences outlined in this chapter. Harper and Moss make a similar
point when they describe formulation as, in essence, 'a process of
ongoing collaborative sense -- making' (2003: 8). Although it may draw
on theory -- as well as on numerous other sources -- this

Controversies and debates about formulation

283

construction of what might be called a shared story does not fit
comfortably within the traditional rhetoric of the
scientist-practitioner and evidence-based practice. It does, however,
allow for reflexivity and an awareness of all the potential pitfalls
discussed above. Is formulation, on this definition, a special skill?
Could our mothers do just as well? The answer is both yes and no. We are
all constantly engaged in a process of creating theories about the world
and the people in it, and a great many non-professionals (as well as
novelists, poets, philosophers, priests and others whose subject matter
is human nature and human suffering) are extremely good at this. On the
other hand, as Roy-Chowdhury (2003) has argued, we can acknowledge this
without falling back into the 'therapy/ formulation is no more than a
chat with a friend' camp. Like the authors quoted above, he sees the
core aim of therapy of all brands as 'to seek to understand and make
sense of another's experience and to offer these provisional and
tentative understandings to the other for consideration' (Roy-Chowdhury,
2003: 8). However, his discourse analysis of therapy conversations
suggests that this is a highly skilled procedure. While drawing on basic
human warmth, the therapist must also 'listen not only to what is
ostensibly signified in the therapee's speech but also to the hidden and
disguised significations'. The therapist who is not 'tuned into the
nuances of the talk, the multiplicity of discourses evoked in each
sentence, who does not seek to enter the lifeworld of the client and to
communicate an understanding of that lifeworld using a language
congruent with the expectations of the client' (Roy-Chowdhury, 2003: 9)
will risk losing the client. We might add that the therapist must also
be reflective about his or her own assumptions and feelings, aware of
the developing relationship with the client, and sensitive to
differences in each other's formulations. He or she will bring to the
relationship a body of knowledge and theory as well as accumulated
'practice-based evidence' from clinical experience, and these need to be
woven into the therapeutic process in ways that respect the client's own
feelings and meanings. This book has presented the argument that there
are significant benefits -- along with some risks -- to employing the
particular kind of narrative that has come to be referred to as a
formulation. In a broader sense, making stories and sense out of our
experiences is a fundamental characteristic of what it is to be human.
Summary The potential criticisms and limitations of formulation echo the
potential criticisms and limitations of therapy itself. This is hardly
surprising if formulation is conceived, at least by most schools of
therapy, as central to the process of therapeutic intervention. Both
pose enormous problems for evaluation; both raise questions of truth
versus usefulness; both can be damaging; both can be used for
professional and political ends; both contain

284

Lucy Johnstone

implicit assumptions and value judgements; both have a problematic
relationship to psychiatric diagnosis; both can be individualising,
ignoring social and cultural contexts; both are open to analogies about
the emperor's clothes. On the bright side, both are requested and
(often) found helpful by service users (if we use formulation in its
'meaning-seeking' sense); both can offer an alternative to psychiatric
diagnosis and intervention with all its welldocumented damage; and both,
arguably, demand a high level of skill, though not one that is unique to
any particular profession or indeed any particular group of human
beings. If we wish to maximise the benefits of formulations for clients,
teams and services and minimise the potential damage, the lessons seem
to be that we must: • • • • • • • • • • • •

Be reflexive about our own role in the formulation and the values and
assumptions we bring to it. Offer formulations tentatively, to
individuals and teams. Construct formulations collaboratively, with
individuals and teams. Use personal meaning as a central integrating
factor. Be constantly open to re-formulating. Express formulations in
ordinary language. Ensure that formulations are culturally sensitive.
Always consider the possible role of trauma and abuse. Respect client
and team views about the accuracy and usefulness of the formulation. Be
aware of stakeholder interests. Be willing to acknowledge the possible
role of services in compounding the difficulties. Take systemic and
wider social/political factors into account.

(NB: see also the checklist for best practice formulations in the DCP
Guidelines, 2011: 29.) If we wish to promote the use of formulation more
widely as a route to understanding and intervening in mental distress,
and perhaps as a basis for a whole different paradigm that is not
premised on psychiatric diagnosis, we must: • • •

Be cautious about entering debates on the reliability and validity
('correctness' or 'truth') of formulations. Carry out more and different
types of research, including qualitative methodologies and collaboration
with service users, into the effects of formulation on the client, the
team, the therapist and the therapy. Collect hard data on outcome
measures such as cost, admissions, use of medication, staff morale,
recovery rates and so on, in relation to individual and team
formulation.

Controversies and debates about formulation

• • • •

285

Abandon unsupportable claims about the uniqueness of formulation to any
one profession, and (particularly as clinical psychologists) be willing
to share these skills as widely as possible. Be willing to speak out
about the short-comings of psychiatric diagnosis (while 'highlighting
the social and moral issues which diagnosis has helped to obscure',
Boyle, 2001: 5). Develop coherent formulation-based alternatives to the
use of psychiatric diagnosis as a clustering and administrative tool. Be
realistic, but confident, about the usefulness of formulation.

Jack and Janet: an update Jack was discharged from hospital in a
slightly more settled state after a few weeks. He never really engaged
in individual therapy, due to his erratic timekeeping and tendency to
disappear into fantasy. A family meeting appeared to help all parties to
appreciate each others' positions a bit better. Jack received a lot of
practical support from a male community psychiatric nurse, with whom he
had a good relationship, and later from an occupational therapist. A
year on, he was very proud of the flat that had been found for him, and
had made contacts in the local community. After numerous relapses into
drinking, he had finally committed himself to an access course to higher
education, and intended to take a degree in marketing in the future with
the aim of going into the music business. He was still quite
pre-occupied with Robbie Williams but seemed to have decided that 'If he
was going to get me he would have done so by now', and was mostly able
to put these worries out of his head. Jack was in friendly contact with
his mother and sisters. Janet is doing reasonably well. She is attending
school and getting on better with her mother. Although she still has
anxieties about public transport, her mother is less concerned about
this and believes that Janet will eventually overcome her worries.
Family work seems to have helped Mary to feel more confident as a mother
and less to blame for Janet's difficulties. The fact that Andrew,
Janet's brother, is continuing to do well at school is a further boost
to Mary's confidence as a parent. Janet has not resumed contact with her
father. Acknowledgements Many thanks to Rudi Dallos for his thoughtful
comments on this chapter. References Aveline, M. (1999) The advantages
of formulation over categorical diagnosis in explorative psychotherapy
and psychodynamic management, The European Journal of Psychotherapy,
Counselling and Health, 2, 2, 199--216.

286

Lucy Johnstone

Barber, J.P. and Crits-Christoph, P. (1993) Advances in measures of
psychodynamic formulations, Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 61, 4, 574--585. Barham, P, and Hayward, R. (1995)
Relocating Madness: From the Mental Patient to the Person, London: Free
Association Books. Bem, S. and de Jong, H.B. (1997) Theoretical Issues
in Psychology: An Introduction, London: Sage. Bieling, P.J. and Kuyken,
W. (2003) Is cognitive case formulation science or science fiction?
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 10, 1, 52--69. Boyle, M.
(2001) Abandoning diagnosis and (cautiously) adopting formulation, Paper
presented at British Psychological Society Centenary Conference,
Glasgow. ------(2002) Schizophrenia: A Scientific Delusion? (2nd edn),
London: BrunnerRoutledge. Brown, G.W. and Moran, P. (1997) Single
mothers, poverty and depression. Psychological Medicine, 27, 21--33.
Bruch M. and Bond F.W. (1998) Beyond Diagnosis: Case Formulation
Approaches in Cognitive--Behavioural Therapy, London: Wiley. Butler, G.
(1998) Clinical formulation in A.S. Bellack and M. Hersen (eds)
Comprehensive Clinical Psychology, Oxford: Pergamon. Callcott, P. and
Turkington, D. (2006) CBT for traumatic psychosis in W. Larkin and A.P.
Morrison (eds), Trauma and Psychosis: New Directions for Theory and
Therapy. London: Routledge, pp. 222--238. Castillo, H. (2000) 'You don't
know what it's like', Mental Health Care 41, 2, 42--58. Chadwick, P.,
Williams, C. and Mackenzie, J. (2003) Impact of case formulation in
cognitive behaviour therapy for psychosis, Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 14, 6, 671--680. Corrie, S. and Lane, D. (2010) Constructing
Stories, Telling Tales: A Guide to Formulation in Applied Psychology,
London: Karnac. Crellin, C. (1998) Origins and social contexts of the
term 'formulation' in psychological case -- reports, Clinical Psychology
Forum, 112, 18--28. Cromby, J. and Harper, D. (2009) Paranoia: a social
account, Theory and Psychology, 19, 335--361. Dallos, R. and Draper, R.
(2000) Introduction to Family Therapy: Systemic Theory and Practice,
Oxford: Oxford University Press. Davis, K. (1986) The process of problem
(re) formulation in psychotherapy, Sociology of Health and Illness, 8,
44--74. Division of Clinical Psychology (2010) The Core Purpose and
Philosophy of the Profession, Leicester: The British Psychological
Society. ------(2011) Good Practice Guidelines for the Use of
Psychological Formulation, Leicester: The British Psychological Society.
------(2013) Position Statement on the Classification of Behaviour and
Experience in Relation to Functional Psychiatric Diagnoses: Time for a
Paradigm Shift. Leicester: The British Psychological Society.

Controversies and debates about formulation

287

Dumont, F. (1993) Inferential heuristics in clinical problem
formulation; selective review of their strengths and weaknesses,
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 24, 2, 196--205. Eells,
T.D. (ed.) (2010) Handbook of Psychotherapy Case Formulation (2nd edn),
New York, London: The Guilford Press. Evans, G. and Parry, J. (1996) The
impact of reformulation in cognitive-analytic therapy with
difficult-to-help clients, Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 3 (2),
109--117. Fernando, S. (2003) Cultural Diversity, Mental Health and
Psychiatry: The Struggle Against Racism, Hove, New York:
Brunner-Routledge. Follette, W.C. and Houts, A.C. (1996) Models of
scientific progress and the role of theory in taxonomy development: a
case study of the DSM, Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
64, 6, 1120--1132. Harper, D. and Moss, D. (2003) A different kind of
chemistry? Reformulating formulation, Clinical Psychology, 25, 6--10.
Herman, J. (2001) Trauma And Recovery, New York: Basic Books. Hesse, E.
(2008) The adult attachment interview: protocol, method of analysis and
empirical studies in J. Cassidy and P.R. Shaver (eds) Handbook of
Attachment: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications, London, New
York: The Guilford Press, pp. 552--598. Holland, S. (1992) From social
abuse to social action: a neighbourhood psychotherapy and social action
project for women in J. Ussher and P. Nicholson (eds), Gender Issues in
Clinical Psychology, London: Routledge. Honos-Webb, L. and Leitner, L.M.
(2001) How using the DSM causes damage: a client's report, Journal of
Humanistic Psychology, 41, 4, 36--56. Ingleby, D. (1981) Understanding
'mental illness', in D. Ingleby (ed.) Critical Psychiatry: The Politics
of Mental Health, Harmondsworth: Penguin, pp. 23--71. Johnstone, L.
(2000) Users and Abusers of Psychiatry: A Critical Look at Psychiatric
Practice (2nd edn), Philadelphia, London: Brunner-Routledge.
------(2008) Psychiatric diagnosis, in R. Tummey and T. Turner (eds),
Critical Issues in Mental Health, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan,
pp. 5--22. Jones, D. and Elcock, J. (2001) History and Theories of
Psychology: A Critical Perspective, London: Arnold. Kennedy, F.,
Smalley, M. and Harris, T. (2003) Clinical psychology for in-patient
settings: principles for development and practice, Clinical Psychology
Forum, 30, 21--24. Kinderman, P. (2001) The future of clinical
psychology training, Clinical Psychology, 8, 6--10. Kirk, S.A. and
Kutchins, H. (1992) The Selling of DSM: The Rhetoric of Science in
Psychiatry, New York: Aldine de Gruyter. Kovel, J. (1981) The American
mental health industry in D. Ingleby (ed.) Critical Psychiatry: The
Politics of Mental Health, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Kuipers, E., Leff, J.
and Lam, D. (1992) Family Work for Schizophrenia: A Practical Guide,
London: Gaskell.

288

Lucy Johnstone

Kuyken, W. (2006) Evidence-based case formulation: is the emperor
clothed? in N. Tarrier (ed.) Case Formulation in Cognitive Behaviour
Therapy: The Treatment of Challenging and Complex Cases, London:
Brunner-Routledge. Kuyken, W., Padesky, C.A. and Dudley, R. (2009)
Collaborative Case Conceptualization: Working Effectively with Clients
in Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy, New York, London: The Guilford Press.
Leeming, D., Boyle, M. and Macdonald, J. (2009) Accounting for
psychological problems: how user-friendly are psychosocial formulations?
Clinical Psychology Forum, 200, 12--17. Letters to the Editor (2000) The
Psychologist, 13, 8, 390--392. Luborsky, L. and Crits-Christoph, P.
(1990) Understanding Transference: The Core Conflictual Relationship
Theme Method, New York: Basic Books. Madill, A., Widdicombe, S. and
Barkham, M. (2001) The potential of conversation analysis for
psychotherapy research, The Counseling Psychologist, 29, 3, 413--434.
Malan. D.M. (1976) Toward the Validation of Dynamic Psychotherapy, New
York: Plenum Press. ------(1995) Individual Psychotherapy and the
Science of Psychodynamics (2nd edn), London: Hodder Arnold. Masson, J.
(1990a) Final Analysis: The Making and Unmaking of a Psychoanalyst,
London: HarperCollins. ------(1990b) Against Therapy, London: Fontana.
May, R. (2011) Relating to alternative realities in M. Romme and S.
Escher (eds), Psychosis as a Personal Crisis: An Experience-Based
Approach, London, New York: Routledge, pp. 140--152. McNamee, S. and
Gergen, K. (1992) Therapy as Social Construction, London: Sage. Mehta,
S. and Farina, A. (1997) Is being 'sick' really better? Effect of the
disease model of mental disorder on stigma, Journal of Social and
Clinical Psychology, 16, 4, 405--419. Mental Health Foundation (1997)
Knowing Our Own Minds, London: Mental Health Foundation. Messer, S.B.
(1991) The case formulation approach: issues of reliability and
validity, American Psychologist, December, 1348--1350. ------(1996)
Concluding comments. Special section: Case formulation, Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 6, 135--137. Neuner, F., Catani, C., Ruf, M.,
Schauer, E., Schauer, M. and Elbert, T. (2008) Narrative exposure
therapy for the treatment of traumatized children and adolescents
(KidNET): from neurocognitive theory to field intervention, Child and
Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 17 (3), 641--664.
Penfold, P.S. and Walker, G.A. (1983) Women and the Psychiatric Paradox,
Montreal, London: Eden Press. Persons, J.B. (1989) Cognitive Therapy in
Practice: A Case Formulation Approach, New York: W.W. Norton. Pilgrim,
D. (2000) Psychiatric diagnosis: more questions than answers, The
Psychologist, 13, 6, 302--305.

Controversies and debates about formulation

289

Proctor, G. (2002) The Dynamics of Power in Counselling and
Psychotherapy, Rosson-Wye: PCCS Books. Ray, A. (2008) Understanding
reflective practice as part of the process of formulation, unpublished
doctoral thesis, Bristol Clinical Psychology Doctorate. Read, J. and
Bentall, R.B. (2012) Negative childhood experiences and mental health:
theoretical, clinical and primary prevention implications, British
Journal of Psychiatry, 200, 89--91. Redhead, S. (2010) Clients'
experiences of formulation in cognitive behaviour therapy, unpublished
doctoral thesis, Bristol Clinical Psychology Doctorate. Rogers, A.,
Pilgrim, R. and Lacey, R. (1993) Experiencing Psychiatry, London:
Macmillan/MIND. Rogers, C. (1975) Empathic: an unappreciated way of
being, The Counseling Psychologist, 5, 2, 2--10. Romme, M. and Escher,
S. (2000) Making Sense of Voices, London: MIND Publications. Rosenbaum,
R. (1996) Form, formlessness and formulation, Journal of Psychotherapy
Integration, 6, 2, 107--117. Ross, C. (2008) Dissociative schizophrenia
in A. Moskowitz, I. Schäfer and M. Dorahy (eds), Psychosis, Trauma and
Dissociation: Emerging Perspectives on Severe Psychopathology, Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 281--295. Roy-Chowdhury, S. (2003) What is this
thing called psychotherapy? Clinical Psychology 29, 7--11. Royal College
of Psychiatrists (2010) A competency-based curriculum for specialist
core training in psychiatry. Retrieved 5 October 2011 from
www.rcpsych.ac.uk/training/ curriculum2010.aspx. Smail, D. (1987)
Psychotherapy as subversion in a make-believe world, Changes, 4 (5),
398--402. ------(1993) The Origins of Unhappiness: A New Understanding
of Personal Distress, London: Secker and Warburg. ------(1996) How to
Survive without Psychotherapy, London: Constable. Sturmey, P. (ed.)
(2009) Clinical Case Formulation: Varieties of Approaches, Chichester:
Wiley-Blackwell. Tarrier, N. and Calam, R. (2002) New developments in
cognitive--behavioural case formulation, Behavioural and Cognitive
Psychotherapy, 30, 311--328. Warner, R. (2004) Recovery from
Schizophrenia: Psychiatry and Political Economy (3rd edn), Hove and New
York: Brunner-Routledge. Weerasekera, P. (1995) Multiperspective Case
Formulation: A Step Towards Treatment Integration, Malabar, Florida:
Krieger Publishing Company. Weston, D. (1990) Psychoanalytic approaches
to personality in L. Pervin (ed.) Handbook of Personality: Theory and
Research, New York: Guilford Press. Wilkinson, R. and Pickett, K. (2009)
The Spirit Level: Why More Equal Societies Almost Always Do Better,
London: Allen Lane.

Index

Figures are shown with an italic page number and tables are shown with a
bold page number. abuse, 89, 135--8, 231--2, 280, 284;
re-traumatisation, 233; see also sexual abuse adaptive perspective,
54--7 ADHD, 230 Adult Mental Health settings, 230 aggression, 150 AIDS,
109 alcohol use, 130, 207--8 Almeida, R., 129 anger, 103 angina, 252
anthropology, 96--7 anxiety: attachment theory, 204--5; Personal
Construct approach, 150, 164; psychodynamic approach, 47; usefulness of
formulation, 265--6 assessment methods, 21, 153--5 Assimilation Model,
175 attachment, 10, 200, 203--6; insecure, 207; Janet, 61--2, 89; within
mental health settings, 229--30; secure, 204, 212; systemic theory,
208--9; see also Attachment Narrative Therapy (ANT)

Attachment Narrative Therapy (ANT), 177, 199--204; cultural context,
212--13; for Jack, 204--12 audits, 220 avoidance, 25, 53, 204, 206 Beck,
Aaron, 10 beliefs: ANT formulation, 204--5; belief systems, 270; Jack,
77--8, 103--4, 132--3; Janet's family, 87--8; link to abuse, 232;
regarding health, 248--9; of the therapist, 191--2; see also personal
meaning best practice, 12--13; see also DCP Guidelines biases, 268
biomedical model of psychiatry, 230 bipolar disorder, 238 Bowlby, John,
199--200, 203--4 bowtie diagram, 166 British Psychological Society, 216
Butler, Gillian, 41, 263--4 cancer, 250 capitalism, 121 Care Plan
Approach, 227 case conceptualisation, 261

Index

case formulation, 10--11, 18--43 CBT (Cognitive Behavioural Therapy)
formulation, 7, 10--11, 18--43, 265; characteristics, 42; collaborative
empiricism, 41; criticism, 178; evidence base, 260--2; five 'Ps,'
20--32, 21; in a health setting, 247; Jack, 20--32; Janet, 37--40;
relationship with psychiatric diagnosis, 272--3; therapists, 33--4; for
young children, 38 celebrations, 109 change: challenges of illness, 249;
cultural change, 236--8; therapeutic change, 54 children: infant needs,
54; longitudinal formulation, 38; medication, 230; narrative therapy,
112--16; understanding of illness, 250--1; see also developmental
perspective child services, 228, 232 clients: see service users clinical
approach, 64, 176 clinical psychology: development of formulation, 11;
professional development, 271--2; team working, 221--2, 223; see also
DCP Guidelines 'club of life,' 108 Cognitive Analytic Therapy, 176--7,
265 cognitive behavioural therapy: see CBT (Cognitive Behavioural
Therapy) formulation cognitive model, 23 collaboration, 2, 33--4, 262,
284; barriers to, 246--7; narrative therapy, 100--1, 112--14;
Weerasekera's framework, 183; see also family therapy; team formulation
approach

291

collaborative empiricism, 31, 33--4, 38, 41 collaborative formulation,
129--31 communication, 178 community psychology, 123--4, 278 compulsive
defences, 49 conceptualisation, 33--4, 37--8, 261 conceptual synthesis,
174, 176--7, 183 conflict, 47--8, 49 constriction, 149--50 constructive
alternatism, 146 constructivism: see Personal Construct Theory; social
constructionist perspective constructs, 148--51; Jack's experience,
156--7; relational extension, 152--3 contemplation stage, 175--6
contextual factors, 3, 82, 89--90, 213; see also cultural context
control, 150 conversations, 110, 193--8, 283; see also narrative therapy
coping strategies, 34, 181, 252 coping theory, 249 Core Conflictual
Relationship Theme, 261 counter-transference, 59; psychodynamic
approach, 62--4; team formulation approach, 229 critical community
psychology, 123--4 critical formulation: Jack, 128--31; Janet, 134--8
critical race approaches, 127--8 critical-social approach, 126--7
cross-sectional formulations, 26 cultural context, 3, 136--8, 284;
cultural change, 236--8; diagnostic mindset, 279--80; dominant stories,
114; harmful formulation, 269--70; health formulation, 249--50;
narratives,

292

Index

209--10; narrative therapy, 99; in systemic therapy, 74; values, 35;
Weerasekera's framework, 183; see also socio-cultural context Cultural
Context Model (CCM), 128 DCP (Divison of Clinical Psychology), 5, 276
DCP Guidelines, 12--13, 187, 228--9, 266; benefits of formulation, 262;
clinical psychology, 271--2; cultural context, 269; personal meaning,
230; team working, 216, 220--1; view of psychiatric diagnosis, 237, 274,
275 defensive strategies, 48--9, 58--9 delusions, 34, 132--4, 157, 158
dependency, 90, 151 depression, 245, 265--6 developmental perspective,
49--50, 53--4, 59; choice of therapy, 175; concepts of illness, 250--1;
Janet, 254 diagnosis, 147--8, 175, 231, 238; in Personal Construct
Theory, 147--8; replaced by formulation, 279--80; see also psychiatric
diagnosis diagnostic constructs, 148--51 diagnostic system, 175
diagnostic terminology, 202, 279--80 dialogues: see narrative therapy
dilation, 149--50 discrimination, 104 disorder, personal construct
formulation, 151--2 dissociation, 53, 238 distress, 136 domestic
violence, 135 DSM (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual), 184, 272, 274,
279--80 dyadic construing, 164--7, 166

dynamic perspective, 46--9 dysfunctions: developmental stages, 50;
families, 11, 88 eating disorders, 175, 252, 254; interventions, 255--6
eclecticism, 175--6 economic recession, 125--6 ecopsychology, 124
'ego-strength,' 53, 54 emotions, 129, 150--1; dynamics, 88--9;
emotion-focussed coping, 249; pain, 46 empathy, 282 empirical evidence:
see evidence base empiricism, 33--4, 41 empowerment, 124, 133--4 Epston,
David, 96--100 Erikson, E, 50 ethical practice, 2, 138, 174; see also
social inequalities approach evidence base, 3, 260--3; integrative
approach, 184--5; narrative therapy, 100; social inequalities approach,
124--6 exceptions, 106--7, 113--14; systemic formulation, 75
expectations, 128, 131, 204--5, 209 Experience Cycle, 148 expert status,
11; harmful formulation, 268--9; in health settings, 246--7; within
narrative therapy, 100--1; see also therapists exploratory approaches,
175 externalising, 102--4, 114 facilitation: culture change, 236--8;
team working, 109, 217--18, 234--6 factitious disorder by proxy, 136,
253 families, 79--80, 204, 205--6; Jack, 76--7, 76, 83--5; Janet, 37,
86; see also family therapy

Index

Family Management approach, 278 family therapy, 11--12, 83--5, 93--4,
231; Attachment Narrative Therapy (ANT), 205--6, 211--12; family-based
CBT, 38, 40; patterns of behaviour, 208--9; reflecting teams, 83; social
constructionist perspective, 72--3; systemic family therapy, 67--9 fear,
103 femininity, 134--5 feminist theories, 127 formulation: defined,
4--13; as harmful, 266--70; as a process or event, 4, 184--6, 192,
261--2; relationship with psychiatric diagnosis, 272--81; usefulness of,
263--72 Foucault, Michel, 97 France, 125 Frankfurt School, 121 Freud,
Sigmund, 9--10, 45, 46--7, 53, 267 Geertz, Clifford, 96 gender: in
clinical discourse, 135--6; femininity, 134--5; integrative approach,
209--10; see also masculine identity genograms, 75, 76, 137 Gergen,
Kenneth, 97 group facilitation, 109, 217--18, 234--6 group therapy, 159;
see also family therapy; team formulation approach guilt, 103, 150 Gypsy
community: see Traveller community harmful formulation, 266--70 health:
beliefs, 248--9; Janet, 251--5; and mental health, 243--7; recession,
125--6

293

Health Professions Council, 1, 216 health settings, 229--30, 243--57
hearing voices, 232 Hearing Voices Network, 270, 281, 282 historical
formulation: see longitudinal formulation Holland, Sue, 278 hospital
system, 81 humanistic therapy, 12 hypothesising, 71--2, 100--1, 281
identity, 99--100, 104, 281--2; 'document of identity,' 108--9; illness
identity, 79, 82, 248--9 idiosyncratic integration, 177 illness, 238,
256--7; children's understanding, 250--1; coping theory, 249; illness
identity, 79, 82, 248--9; physical versus psychosomatic, 245 individual
beliefs, 204; see also personal meaning individualising, 277--9
individual psychotherapy, 279 inequality, 137, 247, 278, 279; see also
social inequalities approach infant needs, 54 insecure attachment, 207
integrative approach, 2, 8--9, 12, 185; attachment theory, 203--4;
characteristics, 214--15; common factors, 177; contextual factors, 213;
in health settings, 243--57; Jack, 193--9, 210--11; models of
formulation, 176--7; in practice, 191--215; team working, 218--19; in
theory, 173--88; Weerasekera's framework, 179--80, 181--4; see also team
formulation approach internalising distress, 136 interventions, 6, 8--9,
26, 36, 233; Attachment Narrative Therapy

294

Index

(ANT), 211--12; Jack, 59--60, 158--9, 224--8; Janet, 255--6;
Weerasekera's framework, 183 interviews, 153--4; see also conversations
invalidation, 163 Jack: adaptive perspective, 55--6; ANT formulation,
204--12; background information, 13--15; CBT formulation, 20--3, 24,
27--32; conversation, 193--8; critical formulation, 128--31; delusions,
133--4; family relationships, 76--7; integrative approach, 180--1,
193--9; interventions, 59--60, 158--9, 224--5; longitudinal formulation,
32; map of family system, 76; narrative therapy, 102--12; Personal
Construct approach, 156--60; psychodynamic approach, 53, 57--9; sexual
abuse, 103, 132, 157--8; social inequalities approach, 129--31;
strengths, 34--5, 35; systemic formulation, 74--85; team formulation
approach, 222--7; unique outcomes, 106--7; update, 285; Weerasekera's
grid, 182 Janet: background information, 15--16; CBT formulation,
37--40; collaborative empiricism, 38; family, 37, 86; health context,
251--5; interventions, 255--6; narrative therapy, 112--16; perceiver
element grid (PEG), 162; Personal Construct approach, 161--7;
psychodynamic formulation, 61--2; sexual abuse, 91, 92; strengths,
38--40; systemic formulation, 85--92; update, 285 judgements, 268

Kahn, Michael, 177 Kelly, George, 145, 148--51, 153 labels, 93, 100, 210
language, 279--80, 284; in narrative therapy, 202--3, 210--11; social
inequalities approach, 127, 132--3; in systemic therapy, 72, 74; of
therapists, 178 liberation, 124 longitudinal formulation, 27, 28--9, 32,
38 maintenance formulations, 26 map of family system: Jack, 76; Janet,
86 marime, Romany culture, 253--4 marital therapy, 273--4 Marmot Review,
125 Mary: attachment issues, 61--2; dependency cycle, 90; health
context, 251--5; motherhood, 135--6; perpetuating factors, 40; postnatal
depression, 39; problem deconstruction, 85--6; relationship to Janet,
165--6 masculine identity: Jack, 55--9; narrative therapy, 106; role
models, 133--4; social inequalities approach, 131--2 Masson, Jeffrey,
266, 268, 277 Maudsley Hospital, 10 meaning, 281--3; see also personal
meaning media: stereotyping, 125; use in narrative therapy, 106 medical
construing, 163 medicalisation, 202; of abuse symptoms, 231--2; of
Jack's difficulties, 227; mental health, 210, 231, 243--7 medical model,
221, 230, 273; criticism, 267, 280

Index

medical settings, 246; see also health settings medication, 230, 273--4,
275; compulsory, 232; use with formulation, 238 men, 126; see also
masculine identity mental health: medicalisation, 210, 231, 243--7;
recession, 125--6; social inequalities, 122--4 mental health services,
127, 130, 135; child services, 228, 232 mental health settings, 229--30
Mental Research Institute, 70 Milan team, 71--2, 178 MIND (Young Voices
Project), 134 minority groups, 136--8 models of formulation, integrative
approach, 173--4 monadic construing, 161--4 mothers, 134--6; see also
Mary multi-cultural approaches, 127--8 Munchausen's by proxy, 136 music,
134, 159 Myerhoff, Barbara, 96--7 Narrative Exposure Therapy, 263
narratives, 102, 209--10, 281; Jack's skills, 207, 210--11 narrative
therapy, 96--117, 281; alternative stories, 106--7; characteristics,
116; criticism, 201--2; Jack, 102--12; Janet, 112--16 Negative Automatic
Thoughts, 22 NICE guidelines, 125 nursing profession, 246, 255--6; see
also staff Objects Relations Theory, 10, 47, 176--7 outcomes, 184--5,
283--4; harmful formulation, 266--70; unique

295

outcomes, 106--7, 113--14; usefulness of formulation, 264--6 outsider
witnesses, 99, 110 pain, 46, 47, 247--8 paranoia, 31, 34, 133, 238; link
to discrimination, 104 patterns of behaviour, 56--7; developmental
stages, 50--1, 52; in families, 80--1, 208--9; psychodynamic approach,
48--9 perceiver dyad grid (PDG), 165, 166 perceiver element grid (PEG),
161--2, 162 perpetuating factors, 21; Jack, 23--7, 25, 26; Mary, 40
persecutory beliefs, 22 Personal Construct approach, 147--8, 281; Jack,
156--60; Janet, 161--7 Personal Construct Psychology (PCP), 145--6
Personal Construct Theory, 3, 167--8; assessment methods, 153--5;
characteristics, 168--9; Cognitive Analytic Therapy, 176--7;
constructivism, 145--6; relational extension, 152--3 personal
integration, 187 personal meaning, 6, 186--7, 281--2, 284; DCP
Guidelines, 230; distinction between psychiatry and psychology, 275;
individual beliefs, 204; respect for, 270; team formulation approach,
239; Weerasekera's framework, 183--4 personal therapy, 63--4
personification of problem, 104 politics: social inequality, 125;
systemic formulation, 93--4 postnatal depression, 39 post-Structuralism:
see social constructionist perspective post-traumatic stress disorder,
31, 263

296

Index

poverty, 230--1 power: harmful formulation, 268--9; inequality, 126--7;
influence on identity, 99--100; social inequalities approach, 132--3,
135--6 precipitating factors, 21, 27--30 predisposing factors, 21, 30--2
presenting issues, 20--3, 21, 24 problem deconstruction, 85--7, 127,
276; narrative therapy, 99, 105--6; systemic formulation, 74--5
problem-focussed coping, 249 problem identification, 102--4, 174
problem-maintaining patterns, 76--7, 87 professions: nursing profession,
246; psychiatry and psychology, 271--7 progressive hypothesising, 71--2,
100--1 protective factors, 21 psychiatric diagnosis, 2, 228, 230, 274;
alternatives, 237--8, 239, 279--80; in health settings, 245;
interventions, 233; relationship with psychological model, 272--7
psychic pain, 47 psychoanalysis, 9--10, 45 psychoanalytic therapy, 178,
272--3 psychodynamic approach, 7, 9--10, 46; criticism, 121--4;
developmental perspective, 49--52; dynamic perspective, 46--9; evidence
base, 261--2; relationship with psychiatric diagnosis, 272 psychodynamic
formulation, 45--65; characteristics, 64--5; Jack, 57--9; Janet, 61--2
psychological model, 6, 121--2, 273 psychologists: in health settings,
243--5; and medication, 230

psychosis, 36; link to abuse, 231--2; link to stress, 30 psychosocial
difficulties, 238 psychosomatic illness, 245--6 psychotherapy, 185, 277,
278 qualitative grids, 155 questioning, 78, 154 race, 127--8 reference
group, 129--31 referral, 112 referrer's contruing, 163 reflecting teams,
83 reflective practice, 2, 9, 127, 192, 283 reflexivity, 138, 183, 272,
284 re-formulation, 265, 267, 269, 284 relationships, 28, 158; adaptive
perspective, 54--7; dyadic construing, 164--7; in narrative therapy,
113; Personal Construct view, 152, 153; psychodynamic approach, 47;
secure attachment, 212; triadic in families, 68--9, 153, 167; see also
attachment; families; therapeutic relationship repertory grid technique,
154--5, 159, 160 repression, 53 research, 184--5, 260--3, 284; see also
evidence base resilience, 36, 38--40 re-traumatisation, 233 rituals, 109
Rogers, Carl, 281--2 Romany culture: see Traveller community Rosenbaum,
R., 269 rumination, 27, 34, 35, 150 safety-seeking behaviour, 34
scaffolding, 202 scaling questions, 78

Index

schizophrenia, 238 school nurse, 255--6 sculpts, 79--80, 88--9 secure
attachment, 204, 212 secure base, 199--200, 213; see also attachment
self-characterisation, 154 self psychology, 10, 27, 30 self-reflective
therapy, 73 service users, 5, 9, 65, 264--6; control, 150, 247;
distinction between psychiatry and psychology, 276; harmful formulation,
266--70; in health settings, 243--7; re-traumatisation, 233; see also
collaboration; therapeutic relationship sexual abuse: Jack, 103, 132,
157--8; Janet, 91, 92; link to psychosis, 231--2; reference group, 130;
victims, 133--4 sexuality, 31 single-model formulation, 179 skills: for
formulating, 281--3; integrative approach, 176; of language, 202--3
Social Action Psychotherapy, 278 social constructionist perspective,
11--12, 93--4, 97--8, 263; family therapy, 72--3 social inequalities
approach, 121--39, 279; characteristics, 139; compared to psychology,
121--2; Jack, 129--31 socialisation of men, 131--2 sociality, 152 social
justice, 124, 133--4, 277 social support, 137 socio-cultural context,
136--8, 205, 230--1, 284; attachment theory, 204; beliefs, 205;
critical-social approach, 126--7; health formulation, 249--50;

297

individualising formulation, 277--9; inequality, 137, 247, 278, 279;
influence on identity, 99--100; Jack, 209--10; Janet, 88; women,
99--100; see also cultural context Sontag, Susan, 250 Speed, Bebe, 101
staff: in health settings, 243--7; re-traumatisation trap, 233; team
formulation approach, 219--21; team meetings, 234--6; transference trap,
229; traumainformed, 232 stereotyping, 125 stories: see narrative
therapy strategies: of construing, 149--50; technical eclecticism, 176
strengths, 36, 38--40; adaptive perspective, 56; narrative therapy, 98
strengths-focussed approach, 34, 35 stressors, 27--9, 30 structural
perspective, 52--4, 97 survivor movement, 134 synthesis, 74, 174,
176--7, 183 systemic approaches, 11--12, 67, 69--70; and attachment
theory, 208--9 systemic formulation, 11, 67--94, 278; harmful
formulation, 268; Jack, 74--85; Janet, 85--92; politics of formulation,
93--4 systemic therapy, 7, 73--4; ANT formulation, 211--12; criticism,
201; families, 67--9 team formulation approach, 5, 217--19, 222--4, 234,
262; benefits of, 219--22; characteristics, 228--33; culture change,
236--8; example, 218--19; meetings, 217--18, 234--6; in

298

Index

practice, 233--6; usefulness of formulation, 265 team working, 109,
216--39 technical eclecticism, 176 Tees Esk and Wear Valleys NHS
Foundation Trust, 218--19 terminology: see language therapeutic
alliance, 177, 184--5, 265, 283; see also therapeutic relationship
therapeutic conversations: see narrative therapy therapeutic documents,
108--9 therapeutic formulation, 214 therapeutic letters, 109; for Jack,
110--12; to Janet and Mary, 115--16 therapeutic relationship, 2, 183,
193--8, 213, 262; existing integration, 178--9; integrative
formulations, 186--7, 191--2; see also therapeutic alliance therapists,
71, 270--2, 281--3; CBT (Cognitive Behavioural Therapy), 33--4;
integrative approach, 210--11; psychodynamic approach, 62--4; systemic
family therapy, 67--9; see also therapeutic relationship therapy
outcomes, 184--5, 283--4 Trailblazer Project, Hackney, 109 transference,
51, 52, 229 trauma, 31, 231--2, 280, 284; posttraumatic stress disorder,
31, 263; re-traumatisation, 233

Traveller community, 134, 161; view of illness, 253, 254--5 'Tree of
Life,' 109 triadic relationships, 68--9, 153, 167 'triangle of
conflict,' 47, 48 Triangle of Person, 10, 51 triggers, 30--1 unconscious
processes, 45, 46, 47, 52--4 unique outcomes, 106--7, 113--14 usefulness
of formulation, 263--72 validation, 156, 163 validity of approaches,
260--3 values, 35; see also beliefs vicious cycle, 23, 68 vigilance, 34
Weerasekera's framework, 179--84, 182, 273--4, 275 wellbeing, 125 White,
Michael, 96--100, 105, 108--9 witnessing, 129--31 women: feminist
theories, 127; health context, 252; individualising formulation, 277;
mothers, 134--5; society and beauty, 99--100 working-class communities,
125 young people, 126

Taylor & Francis

eBooks FOR

liBRARIES

Over 23,000 eBook titles in the Humanities, Social Sciences, STM and Law
from some of the world's leading imprints.

Choose from a range of subject packages or create your own!
:   Free MARC records
:   COUNTER-compliant usage statistics
:   Flexible purchase and pricing options
:   Off-site, anytime access via Athens or referring URL
:   Print or copy pages or chapters
:   Full content search
:   Bookmark, highlight and annotate text
:   Access to thousands of pages of quality research

at the click of a button For more information, pricing enquiries or to
order a free trial, contact your local online sales team. UK and Rest of
World: online.sales@tandf.co.uk US, Canada and Latin America:
e-reference@taYlorandfrancis.com,...,."

www.ebOOksubscriPtions./


